House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 124, 1981 Thursday, 10 September 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--THIRD PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-THIRD PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the
Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House "Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry "Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas AnthQny
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.c.
Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee - The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.c.
The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senatonhe Honourable Anthon~ John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, K.e.M.G., QC. Chairman a/Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deput)' Chairmen a/Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Dona.ld Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader a/the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader a/the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden DeplIl)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader oJthe Liberal Party oJ Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. Deput), Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAllstralia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G. Leodera/the Nalional Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony DepulJ' uaderofthe NatiollalCountry Par/yofAustra(ia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Lobor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor PartJ'-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony, Rt Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewell. Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.e. Brown, Robert James Bungey, Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Hon. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest
Child,Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Han. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley
Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, e.H. Free, Ross Vincent Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey Q'Halioran Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John
Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.e. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles
Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allen Clyde Howard, Han. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunnet Hurford, Christopher John Hyde, John Martin Innes, Utquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher,Qld
Richmond, N.S.W. Chiftey, N.S.W. Macatthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. Bonython, SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith, N.S. W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qld Parramatla, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic.
Hunter, N.S. W. Canning, WA. Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden, Qld
Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
Henty, Vic. Robertson, N.S. W.
Wentwotth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne,N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld McMillan, Vic.
Lilley, Qld Fremantle, WA. Herbert, Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. ,
Holt,Vic. Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Faner, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S.w. Fraser, A.e.T. Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas. Braddon, Tas. Boothby, SA Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qld. Riverina, N.S. W.
Petrie,Qld Denison, Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Griffith,Qld Gwydir, N.S.W.
Adelaide, SA Moore,WA. Melbourne, Vic.

NCP
NCP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP LP
ALP LP LP LP LP LP
NCP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP ALP ALP LP
LP NCP ALP
ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP
ALP LP ALP
Ll' LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP
LP LP ALP ALP NCP LP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP NCP
ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles Killen, Hon. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
K.e.M.G. MacKellar, Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., e.H.
McVeigh, Hon. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Han. William Lawrence Mounlford,John Graham Newman, Han. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Han. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Han. Andrew Sharp Parler, James Robert Robinson, Han. Ian Louis Rocher, Allen Charles Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scoll, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden, Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., Q.e. Spender, John Michael, Q.e. Street. Han. Anthony Austin TJlmbling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.e.
Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Han. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George West, Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.e.
Willis,Ralph Wilson, Han. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker,S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle, N.s.W. Bowman,Qld Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S. W. Canberra, A.e.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Watringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S. W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S. W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld La Trobe, Vic. Ryan,Qld Shorlland, N.S.W. St George, N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid, N.S.w. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S. W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. Sturt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP' LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Counlry Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins (to 8 September), Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Scott (from 8 September), Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY -Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Oonald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATloNs-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERs-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges,Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKs-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman (from 25 August), Senator Kilgariffand Senator Martyr (from 25 August), and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston (from 9 September), Senator Georges, Senator Hamer (from 8 September), and Senator Robertson (to 9 September), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman (from 20 August), Mr Dean (t020 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen (from 23 September), Senator Elstob, Senator Hill (from 23 September), Senator Kilgariff (to 23 September), Senator McIntosh, Senator Martin (to 23 September), Senator Martyr (from 23 September), Senator Sibraa, Senator Teague (from 23 September), and Senator Young (to 23 September) and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOusE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Mi~ister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin (from 25 August), Senator Missen, Senator Sibra. and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE A: Parliament-Mr Speaker, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Hurford, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Barry Jones, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister assisting the Prime Minister), Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Holding, Mr Hurford, Mrs Kelly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Foreign Affairs-Mr Street (Minister for Foreign Affairs), Mr Beazley, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Fry, Mr Jacobi, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Defence-Mr Killen (Minister for Defence), Mr Burr, Mr Campbell, Mr Connolly, Mr Kerin, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Morrison, Mr Peacock, Mr Scholes, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE B: Department of Social SecuritY-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport and Minister representing the Minister for Social Security), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Harris, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mildren, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.

Department of Health-Mr MacKellar (Minister for Health), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Cunningham, Mr Harris, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Veterans' Affairs-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology and Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mrs Darling, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Mr Macphee (Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs), Mr Adennann, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs), Mr Adermann, Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Milton, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE C: Department of the Capital Territory-Mr Hodgman (Minister for the Capital Territory), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Dr Cass, Mr Coleman, Mr Fry, Mr Harris, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lusher and Mr Scholes.
Department of Home Affairs and Environment-Mr Wilson (Minister for Home Affairs and Environment), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Howe, Mr Lusher, Mr Uren and MrWest.
Department of Science and Technology-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mrs Darling, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Mildren.
Department of Communications-Mr Sinclair (Minister for Communications), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Wallis.
Department of Administrative Services-Mr Newman (Minister for Administrative Services), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Humphreys, Mr Lusher, Mr Milton and Mr Scholes.
Attorney-Genera!'s Department-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister representing the Attorney General), Mr Birney, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Coleman, Mr Dean, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Holding and Mr Lusher.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE D: Department of the Treasury-Mr Howard (Treasurer). Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Mr Willis.
Department of Finance-Mr Howard (Treasurer and Minister representing the Minister for Finance), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Hurford, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Mr Shack and Mr Tambling.
Department of Transport-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Jull, Mr Morris, Mr Scott, Mr Shack, Mr Tamblingand Mr Wallis.
Department of Primary Industry-Mr Nixon (Minister for Primary Industry), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Kerin, Mr Mildren, Mr Tambling and Mr Wallis.
ESTIMA TES COMMITTEE E: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs-Mr N. A. Brown (Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Mildren and Mr Peacock.
Department of Industrial Relations-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations), Mr Burr, Mr Charles, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Dr Theophanous.
Department of Education-Mr Fife (Minister for Education), Mr Beazley, Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Dawkins, Mr Fisher, Mr Free, Mr Barry Jones, Mr McLean and Mr Peacock.
Department of Housing and Construction-Mr McVeigh (Minister for Housing and Construction), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Howe, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Mr Uren.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE F: Department oflndustry and Commerce-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs acting for the Minister for Industry and Commerce), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hicks, Mrs Kelly, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Trade and Resources-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of National Development and Energy-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources representing the Minister for National Development and Energy), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Howe, Mr Keating, Mr Milton, Mr O'Keefe, Mr Porter and Mr Uren.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. O. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (TableJ-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (ProceduraIJ-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk Assistant-A. R. Browning Clerk Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-I. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-I. C. Cochran Procedure Office-J. K. Porter
Table Office (ProgrammingJ-B. C. Wright (Acting) Table Office (Bills and PapersJ-J. W. Pender (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaJJ(HouseofRepresimtativesJ-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaJJ(SenateJ-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. de S. C. MacLean (Acting)
JOINT HOUSE
Secrelary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 123 of 1981)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Apple and Pear Export Charge Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 147 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Export Ch~rge Act 1976.
Apple and Pear Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1460f 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Levy Act 1976.
Appropriation Act (No.1) 1981-82 (Act No. 1640f 1981)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 165 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year endingon 30June 1981.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 145 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 124 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 126 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 125 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 130 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (lnsurance Bus;ness) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Life Insurance Business) Act 1981 (Act No. 128 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of certain life insurance business having a connection with the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981 (Act No. 129 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of the registration of certain vehicles in the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian CapitalTerritory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 127 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 150 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 50 of the Austrillian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1977.
Australian National University Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1660f 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Natiollal University Act 1946.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 168 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 177 of 1981)An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905, and for related purposes.
Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 151 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act 1905 in relation to the exportation of food.
Commonwealth Grants Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 173 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973.
Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 153 of 1981)- An Act to amend laws relating to companies and securities and for related purposes.
Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 182 of 1981)An Act to amend the Continental Shelf(Living Natural Resources) Act 1968 to facilitate the collection of levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and of amounts payable under certain agreements, and for certain other purposes.
Crimes (Currency) Aat 1981 (Act No. 1220f 1981)An Act to make provision with respect to offences connected with the counterfeiting of money or certain kinds of securities and other activities injurious to Australian currency, and for related purposes.
Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 152 of 1981)- An Act ~to amend the Cllstoms Act 1901 in relation to the exportation of food.
Customs (Valuations) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 157 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.
Defence Acts Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 178 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relat,ing to defence.

Derence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 144 or 1981)- An Act relating to retirement and death benefits in respect or members or the Derence Force.
Departure Tax Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 131 or 1981)An Act to amend the Departure Tax Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Departure Tax Collection Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 132 or 1981) An Act to amend the Departure Tax Collection Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981 (Act No. 148 or 1981)An Act to provide ror confidentiality in relation to certain epidemiological studies.
Export Grants Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 119 or 1981)- An Act relating to export grants.
Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1800r 1981)- An Act relating to payments under certain fisheries agreements.
Fisheries Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 181 00981)An Act to amend the Fisheries Act 1952 to racilitate the collection or levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and or amounts payable under certain agreements, and ror certain other purposes.
Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 (Act No. 179 or 1981)An Act to impose a levy on the grant or certain licences in respect or roreign fishing boats.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1750r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1981 (Act No. 156 or 1981)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes or companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation runds.
Income Tax (Indi dduals) Act 1981 (Act No. 15500981)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes or companies, or corporate unit trusts and or superannuation runds.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 143 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Internationa! Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act(No. 3) 1981 (Act No. 1540r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Judges' Pensions Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 158 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Judges' Pensions Act 1968.
Meat Export (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 149 or 1981)An Act to provide penalties ror certain offences against the Exports (Meat) Regulations.
National Health Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 163 or 1981)- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953.
Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 174 or 1981)- An Act to amend section 3 or the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966.
Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 161 or 1981)An Act to amend the Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1977, and ror related purposes.
Norrolk Island Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12000981)- An Act to amend the Norfolk Island Act 1979.
Queensland Grant (Special Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 172 or 1981)- An Act to grant financial assistance to Queensland.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 198i (Act No. 121 00981)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16000981)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.1) 1981 (Act No. 1330r 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 13400981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1981 (Act No. 13500981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1981 (Act No. 13600981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1981 (Act No. 137 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1981 (Act No. 138 or 1981)-
An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.

Sales Tax Amendme~t Act (No.7) 1981 (Act No. 1390f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1981 (Act No. 1400f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1981 (Act No. 141 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1420f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Services Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 159 of 1981)An Act to amend the Social Services Act 1947, and for related purposes.
Social Services Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 170 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 105A of the Social Services Act 1947.
States Grants (Capital Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 171 ofl981)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure of a capital nature and to authorize the borrowing of certain moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 1620f 1981)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act(No. 2) 1981 (Act No. 167 of 1981')- An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1760f 1981)An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 169 of 1981)An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Crimes Amendment Bill 1981__ )nitiated in the Senate. First Reading.
-Domicile Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Domicile (Consequential Amendments) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Dried Sultana Production Underwriting Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Read...g.
Freedom of Information Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. IA-9A) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.

Petitions

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1151

Thursday, 10 September 1981

Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 10 a.m., and read prayers.

DEATH OF SIR ROBERT ASKIN, G.C.M.G.

Mr SPEAKER-I inform the House of the death yesterday of the Honourable Sir Robert Askin, G.C.M.G., a former Premier of New South Wales. As a mark of respect to the memory of Sir Robert Askin, I invite honourable members to rise in their places.

Honourable members having stood in their

piaces-

.

Mr SPEAKER-I thank the House.

PETITIONS
The Deputy Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:

Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned ~itizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the Seven Hills Community Youth Support Scheme Project (Positive Action Centre) has functioned successfully over a period of three years, fulfilling the needs Of unemployed young people in the local community.
Due to the efforts of the management Committee, Project Officers and participants much that is worthwhile and beneficial has been realised and a strong rapport with the local community has developed.
Your petitioners humbly pray that your Honourable House will: Consider the concern felt by the local community in respect to the probable repercussions of the recent decision to discontinue funding of Community Youth Support Scheme Projects and the lack on any suitable alternative government programmes, and subsequently, reverse the decision.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Armitage.
Petition received.

Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That a need exists within the community for the Community Youth Support Scheme.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government not remove any funds for the Community Youth Support Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bpund will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Coleman, Mrs Darling, Dr Everingham, Mr Hurford, Dr Klugman, Mr

Millar, Mr Milton, Mr Morrison, Dr Theophanous, Mr Uren and Mr Wallis.
Petitions received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
We, the undersigned, strongly object to the termination of the Community Youth Support Schemes, and ask that you do all in your power to reverse the decision.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives Assembled. The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the closing down of CYSS could cause many problems in the home and on the streets. As the unemployed youth of Australia will have nowhere else to go. CYSS has played a valuable role in our community and ably assisted our youth.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Community Youth Support Schemes be reinstated so as to help the unemployed youth of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable, the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully showeth; that the serious youth unemployment problem is a direct result of the community's failure to create sufficient jobs.
In these circumstances the decision to abolish Community Youth Support Schemes (CYSS) is a socially retrogressive step. The CYSS Projects provide valuable support services and work training for many young unemployed.
We the undersigned are concerned that the closure of CYSS Projects may lead young unemployed to become involved in anti-social behaviour such as crime, vandalism, prostitution, rebellious behaviour and mob action. There is the even more frightening prospect that many more young people will give up hope of obtaining a job, become idle and even contemplate suicide.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government reverse its decision to abolish CYSS Projects and provide sufficient funds to enable the various CYSS Centres to continue their valuable work with the young unemployed in the future.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Duffy, Mr Kent and Mr Shipton.
Petitions received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the decision of the Federal Government to discontinue the Community Youth SupporLScheme (CYSS) will

1152 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Petitions

further reduce the prospects of young Australians for employment, and place additional undue hardship on the unemployed.
Your Petitioners therefore pray that the Government continue the CYSS program and support the voluntary Community Management Committees in their valuable work to assist the unemployed.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia, respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely~ concerned at the Federal Government's decision to abolish the .Community Youth Support Scheme (CYSS). There is no other agency to give the support and care which the participants of the Community Youth Support Scheme require. Transitional Education schemes are suitable for only a small number of the unemployed.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament allocate the necessary funds to enable the continuation of the Community Youth Support Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrKerin.
Petition received.

Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade postal and mail services throughout Australia will place in jeopardy the existing services and the security of the mails by:
Downgrading a large number of official post offices Reducing the number of Post Offices open for business during the lunch period Reducing the number of street posting boxes Delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices Downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified staff Using private contractors for mail cartage.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will downgrade the postal and mail services of the citizens of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Scholes.
Petition received.

Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Re-presentatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Creswick post office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham, Mrs Darling, Mr Jacobi and MrMiidren.
Petitions received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Stratford post office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrNixon.

Trans Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in-
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Kent, Mr Scott and Dr Theophanous.
Petitions received.
Diabetics: Insulin
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That in view of the recent standardisation of insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect of increasing the cost of both items to the Diabetic in general, and as every insulindependent Diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily according to medication.

Petitions

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1153

Your petitioners thereFore humbly pray that syringes be made available on the N.H.S. and that insulin prescriptions -revert to 10 bottles as previously supplied.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley and Mr Barry Jones.
Petitions received.
Taxation: Pet Foods
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members oFthe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth-
Because of the Federal Budget imposition of 17t% sales tax on all manuFactured pet Food, the higher cost to the consumer will certainly affect sales to a very considerable degree, thus jeopardising many jobs in the pet Food industry and destroying any hope of Future growth which might have occurred within the industry.
Your petitioners, thereFore, humbly pray that the Federal Government withdraw the proposed sales tax to protect the jobs of those citizens employed in the pet Food industry and thus alleviate what might become an added burden to the already strained unemployment situation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Chapman.
Petition received.
Taxation: Pet Foods
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members oFthe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. The Government proposes to impose a Sales Tax of 17t% on manuFactured pet Foods which were previously exempt.
2. That this new tax will impose an unreasonable burden on pet owners, many of whom are pensioners and citizens in receipt of a small income.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will withdraw or repeal its Sales Tax Legislation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrCross.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Right Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This humble petition of citizens of Australia showeth that:
Citizens of this country are concerned with increased house interest rates and that this Government has not taken action to peg increases in such rates. We ask that the Government establish a maximum fixed interest rate on the First Mortgage that would cover the entire period of time For which the loan is taken out. The rate of interest to be set at the time of signing the contract.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.
Copyright
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth that:

The Copyright Act' as amended by the Copyright Amendment Act, 1980, places unnecessary restrictions on the education system.
All photocopying and videorecording used exclusively For education purposes should be exempted From the provisions of the Copyright Act.
Any amendments to the copyright law which affect the education system should not be made operative during an academicyear.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Carlton.
Petition received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth:
I. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology and environment of the Island.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the Register of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act, 1975 take into consideration the prot~ction of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has given approval to the sandmining of Moreton Island despite the advice of conservationists and despite the opposition of the majority of electors in the Moreton Region.
Your petitioners thereFore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will request the Government to refuse export permits covering mineral sands mined on Moreton Island.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cross.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Government and Telecom management have presided over the deliberate scaling down of Australia's telegram services, to the Disadvantage of those poorer people in the community who cannot afford telex or telephone Facilities and rely on the telegram service in time of emergency; that the Government and Telecom management have undermined the telegram service by increasing the unit cost of telegrams by over 130 per cent in Four years with the result that the use of telegrams as a form of communication has fallen by approximately 60 per cent in that time.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government and Telecom management retain the telegram service at a standard and-cost that will not disadvantage the ordinary citizen.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is increasing interest rates on home

1154 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Petitions

mortgage loans without due concern for its impact on the general community and ask that the Government re-consider its attitude to low and middle income earners.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert any further effects of increases in interest rates on home mortgage loans which cause financial, social and psychological pressures on families.
And your petitioners as in duty bpund will ever pray.
by MrDuffy.
Petition received.
Czechoslovakia
To the Right Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth that we wish Australia to exert all possible diplomatic influence in protest against any plan of the Soviet Union for the annexation of Czechoslovakia.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that diplomatic influence be exerted in the United Nations to prevent any plan of the Soviet Union for the annexation of Czechoslovakia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Good luck.
Petition received.
Family Allowances
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. Because of an anomaly in tax rates a single income family pays nearly $10 a week more tax than a dual income family earning the same total amount.
2. Family allowances established in 1976 have not been increased since then, yet over the same period living cOsts have increased by nearly 60 per cent.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that:
The Parliament should act:
1. To restore the lost value of family allowances and to index them for future price rises.
2. To increase the spouse rebate from $830 to $1,342 per year.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hodgman.
Petition received.
Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembed. We, the people who have signed this petition, ask all parties, Labor, Liberal, Democrats, and others, to stop the latest increase in taxes, and the forever increases in taxes which hit all people of the country of Australia in all goods and consumer goods and we call for a referendum on taxes and interest rates.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Jenkins.
Petition received.

Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(a) Present income tax laws are unfair to single income families.
(b) All marriages should be recognized as partnerships by allowing partners to divide their joint income for tax purposes.
(c) The family, which is the natural and fundamental group unit of society, should be an economic unit in tax laws.
(d) Children are Australia's future and their individual care by a parent at home should not be discouraged by extra tax.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament will:
Reform income tax laws to allow the joint income of husband and wife to be equally divided between them for taxation purposes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament Assembled. This Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) the financial situation of students enrolled at Australian postsecondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) the imposition of post-secondary tuition fees of comparable levels to those imposed prior to 1971 would force many currently enrolled students to discontinue their studies and deter many persons willing and able at present to undertake post-secondary study from doing so.
(iii) those students and potential students from .social groups currently under-represented and disadvantaged in the post-secondary education system would be most severely affected by the reintroduction of fees for post-secondary education.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
(I) post-secondary tuition fees not be re-introduced for any courses or for any category of students
(2) the visa charges upon private overseas students be removed immediately
(3) the Minister of Education immediately clarify the government's attitude to the re-introduction of postsecondary tuition fees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrKent.
Petition received.
Plant Variety Rights
To the Honourable The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament Assembled. We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth, do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
I. Note that legislation establishing plant breed;rs' rights in other countries has had ~erious adverse effects, namely:

Petitions

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1155

(a) Virtual monopoly control of seed production Has passed into the hands of a few large international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation.
(b) The varieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and will not grow without the aid of artificial fertilizers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers.
(c) The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, rendering them vulnerable to disease and other environmental threats.
2. Recognise that maintenance of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to prevent exclusive control over plant genetic materials from falling into private hands.
3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gardeners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden produce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment of plant breeders' rights in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Milton.
Petition received.
Human Rights in Korea
To the Honourable The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
We, the undersigned,
Being concerned citizens of Australia and of the world
Noting widespread violations of fundamental human rights in the Republic of Korea
Urge the Australian Government to exert its influence on the Government of the Republic of Korea to secure:-
the immediate and unconditional release of all Prisoners of Conscience a fair and open trial for all political prisoners commutation of all existing death sentences on humanitarian grounds.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.
Health Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits for the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test for free public hospital care;
That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programmes will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce a

system of health care based on ability to pay, and access to health care based on medical need.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Scott.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives, Federal Parliament, Canberra. The humble petition of the undersigned residents of Hindmarsh Division State of South Australia petition that:
Competition between banks and finance companies by giving ever increasing interest rates to obtain the investors' capital, is against the nation's best interest. It penetrates every form of activity by constant demands for higher wages to meet these explosive conditions.
It is an intolerable burden to the younger generation of family life, that by necessity are the recipients of these excessive interest rates that are catastrophic to house purchase and natural living.
We therefore respectfully petition for an urgent annual realistic controlled reduction right "across the board" on all existing and future interest rate agreements. With a maximum interest percentage ceiling on investors' capital, and a scale of interest charges for loans as appropriate.
Your petitioners therefore, humbly pray that your honourable House will give effect to our submissions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrScott.
Petition received.
NEWSPAPER ARTICLE
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas)-Mr Speaker, seek your indulgence to speak on a matter which is not strictly a matter of privilege but which is a related matter.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman may proceed.
Mr RUDDOCK-There is an editorial in today's Australian Financial Review, which honourable members may have seen, entitled 'privileged parliamentary boozers'. The article goes on to use such terms as:
Some members of . . . Parliament are drunks, some are lazy and some are political time servers. Some are all three.
I do not raise this as a matter of privilege to seek your ruling that a prima facie case has been established because quite frankly I see the editorial as a deliberate attempt to invoke action by the Parliament. It is a provocative editorial but a very carefully written one, and one that is quite different from the other article that I brought to the attention of the Parliament. The other article which I raised impugned a class of members in the Opposition who could not escape from the generality of its criticism, and a class of membersthose who hold blue ribbon seats-on this side of the Parliament. The Sydney Daily Mirror article

11 S6 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Questions Without Notice

seeks to say that there are people who fit a particular category. I believe that if newspapers think there are such people in the Parliament, they should name them and be prepared to suffer the undoubted defamation actions that would result. But because the article has been written in such a scurrilous form as to create the view that there are exceptions-even I am prepared to admit that from time to time there may be an isolated incident which one could not deny-I do not believe it invokes the specific condemnation that would have to arise if the matter were to be taken to a committee of privileges. I raise the matter at this time and make this explanation because I believe people are entitled to know why I have not brought this matter forward as a matter of privilege; but, if other members have a different view, they might like to raise the matter at this stage so that it will not go without comment.
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL RAILWAYS COMMISSION
Notice of Motion
Mr Wallis proceeding to give a notice of motion-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman is reciting his argument. He will resume his seat. The honourable gentleman is putting his argument and not a motion in a proposition form. He should redraft it.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
LOST INVESTMENT
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Acting Prime Minister whether he has seen reports on the case Daly v. Sydney Stock Exchange, in which a claim involving the failed stockbrokers Patrick Partners was discussed. Is he aware that Mr Justice Powell said he reached his decision with 'considerable regret' because the plaintiffs lost considerable amounts of money by investing in Patrick Partners 'in circumstances which cast not the slightest credit upon the integrity and commercial morality of the former members of the firm'. Is he aware that Mr Justice Powell suggested that Parliament might, therefore, look again at the Securities Industry Act to see 'whether some greater or other form of protection is now called for'? Will the Government pursue Mr Justice Powell's recommendation and not be, deflected by any pressure which might become immediately apparent to discourage it from doing so?
Mr ANTHONY-I have not seen this report, nor has it been directed to my attention. I will look at it to see what it involves.

BUILDERS LABOURERS FEDERATION
Mr ROCHER-Can the Minister for Industrial Reiations inform the House when the joint Commonwealth-Victorian royal commission into activities of the Builders Labourers Federation is due to commence? What is the relationship between the royal commission and the proposed deregistration proceedings?
Mr VINER-I am pleased to advise the honourable gentleman that the royal commissioner will hold his first hearings today in Melbourne. I expect that following that hearing other matters will take place, for example, the issue of subpoenas and the fixing of a date for the actual hearing of evidence from the first witnesses. The royal commission having been instituted on 20 August, the House will see that the commissioner has acted as the Commonwealth's letters patent asked him to; that is, expeditiously and as soon as possible. The royal commission and the deregistration proceedings are separate matters. An application for deregistration under the Conciliation and Arbitration Act would be made to the Federal Court.
I indicated to the Parliament recently that work on the deregistration proceedings had reached a point where the application was ready to be issued. I can also inform the House that arrangements had been finalised with the Victorian, South Australian and Western Australian governments for them to be co-applicants with the Commonwealth in that deregistration application. However, the Government has decided to defer the issue of the deregistration proceedings now because of the legal implications associated with the royal commission itself. The Government is acting on legal advice. The Attorney-General and I discussed the matter with senior counsel advising the Commonwealth, the advice indicating that having regard to the possibility of embarrassment to the Federal Court, to the royal commission or to the parties who may be involved in the proceedings, and to ensure that the royal commission can proceed uninhibited in its operation, the issue of the deregistration proceedings should be deferred at this time. I make it clear to the House that the time for the issue of the application will be reviewed at an appropriate stage and, as the House would expect, any conduct of the Builders Labourers Federation in the meantime will be very carefully watched and will be added to the mass of material already gathered where it will support the case for deregistration.

Questions Without Notice

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1157

AIR SERVICES BETWEEN AUSTRALIA AND AFRICA
Mr MORRIS-In the interests of consistency in the Government's policy towards South Africa, will the Minister for Transport initiate immediate action for the withdrawal of South African Airways' rights to operate services into Australia? Further, in view of the heavy losses being incurred by Qantas Airways Ltd in the depressed market for international travel and South African Airways' monopoly of the lucrative Indian Ocean airline traffic, will he also initiate immediate action to enable Qantas to operate services between Australia and Mauritius connecting with air services to the African continent?
Mr HUNT-Qantas is currently negotiating the possibility of operating a service between Australia and Mauritius. Indeed, with the approval of the Government, Qantas officials have just concluded discussions with Mauritian and other authorities. I expect them in the not too distant future to submit to the Government a report as a result of those discussions. The Government is not prepared to allow Qantas to recommence a service between Australia and South Africa, but no decision has been taken in regard to South African rights to fly between South Africa and Australia.
Mr Morris-Why not?
Mr HUNT-There has been no decision to stop it. Qantas will not be flying direct to South Africa, but I hope that Qantas will be able to develop a service across the Indian Ocean to Mauritius in the not too distant future.
SERVICE PENSIONS FOR MERCHANT SEAMEN
Mr CHARLES-I address my question to the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs. In the recent Budget.the Government granted service pensions to Australian merchant seamen. However, this excludes the many British and other allied mariners who now live in Australia and possibly Australians who served in other allied vessels during the war. Will the Minister give this House an assurance that the Government will include all Australians and allied merchant seamen when legislation is brought before this House granting service pensions to merchant seamen?
Mr THOMSON-The Government did make a decision to grant Australian merchant seamen eligibility for benefits from the Department of Veterans' Affairs. This does not include persons other than Australian merchant seamen. I will take up this matter with the Minister for Veterans' Affairs and see what can be done.

DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Good luck having addressed a question to the Minister for Administrative Services-
Mr Uren-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. The Minister is not responsible for that matter, even though he lives in Tasmania. Therefore, he has no right to answer the question.
Mr SPEAKER-I uphold the point of order.
PUBLIC HOUSING
Mr LES McMAHON-Is the Minister for Housing and Construction aware that at the Commonwealth and State Housing Ministers Conference in Sydney last Friday, after he had finished his attack on the States and left the conference, the State Ministers met and decided to ask the Commonwealth for an extra $313m in the form of grants to bring the total allocation this year for public housing to $575m? Does the Minister continue to assert that it is 'disgusting' for the States to ask for more funds for public housing? Will the Government now seriously consider the States' request?
Mr McVEIGH~The answer to the third and last part of the honourable member's question is no-definitely no. If I can take a few minutes of the time of the House to - -
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Honourable members on my left will remain silent while we hear the way in which the Minister is going to occupy those minutes.
Mr McVEIGH-There was a meeting of Commonwealth and State Housing Ministers last Friday in Sydney. I would have to express very serious disappointment at the attitude adopted by the majority of my State colleagues. They seemed to believe that the total responsibility for welfare housing in ,Australia rested with the Commonwealth. It is a shared responsibility. It is indicative of the criticism of State Housing Ministers that those States which are doing the least in the area of welfare housing were the most vocal in their criticism.
Mr Hunt-What about Mr Kennett?
Mr McVEIGH-As far as Victoria is concerned, that State contributes out of its funds the sum of $6 per head to welfare housing, easily the lowest in Australia. Not far ahead is New South Wales, which contributes $13 per head. What I tried to convey--
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-I ask honourable gentleman on my left to restrain themselves and be quiet.

1158 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr McVEIGH-Mr Speaker, a question of concern was asked by their colleague the honourable member for Sydney.
Mr SPEAKER-Yes, the honourable gentleman may proceed.
Mr McVEIGH-The point that the State Ministers are incapable of understanding is this: In this year's Budget the Commonwealth increased its general revenue grants to the States by 10 per cent to a total of $8,OOOm. I suggested to State Ministers that they use a bit of their energy to persuade their Premiers and Treasurers to allocate some of those funds to welfare housing rather than to adopt the attitude of the New South Wales Government which has reduced total funding for housing by 19 per cent to $173m this year.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Porter having addressed a question to the Minister for Foreign AJJairs-
Mr Jacobi-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. You will realise that I have had a long interest in this matter. I draw your attention to question on notice No. 2975 standing in my name.
Mr SPEAKER-The question on notice is sufficiently similar for me to rule the question without notice out of order.
FUNDING FOR HOUSING
Mr CUNNINGHAM-I direct my question to the Minister for Housing and Construction and refer to an article in the Melbourne Age this morning headed 'McVeigh deliberately misleading: Kennett'. Is it a fact that the Minister for Housing and Construction was deliberately misleading the public? Is it a fact that the Minister has included revenue related to other portfolios in his announcement to this House that the Government has increased money for housing? Is it a fact that the Minister is not prepared to be the sword bearer for people and families who are in desperate need of housing?
Mr SPEAKER-I call the Minister.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will resume his seat. I point out to honourable members on Opposition benches that an attacking question has been asked. The Minister is entitled to give his answer in silence.
Mr McVEIGH-The answer to the first part of the question is no. The answer to the second part of the question is that the Government is concerned about providing housing and accommodation for all Australians. I get concerned when I get a question such as this which seems to

imply that the asker believes that the pensioners of Australia are not entitled to a rental concession.. That benefit might come from the Department of Social Security but it is for housing for people. What is more disgusting than for anyone to suggest that Defence Force personnel are not entitled to a government contribution to provide housing for them? What is more disgusting than to suggest that the old people of Australia, who have made this country the great ti'ading nation it is, are not entitled to accommodation? These people talk about accommodation for Aborigines. Now they are suggesting that because we fund that under a different program--
Mr Uren-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. The reply is not relevant because the question concerned the responsibility of the Minister of Housing in Victoria, Mr Kennett. That Minister cannot be responsible for war service homes and he is not responsible for the other Federal housing funds that the Minister for Housing and Construction is talking about.
Mr SPEAKER-I do notuphold the point of order. I understood the question to relate to whether the Minister had included sums from other departments in the figures he cited. The honourable gentleman in his answer is referring to other estimates. I call the Minister.
Mr McVEIGH-I was making the point that the Government believes that the Aboriginals of this country are entitled, as are all Australians, to access to decent home ownership. We have provided for that. In answer to the final part of the question, I merely indicate to the honourable member that on Tuesday I tabled in this Parliament a document which gave the source for the Government's action in increasing total funding for housing and accommodation from $555m last year to $660m this year. That is an increase of 18.9 per cent on the allocation for housing and accommodation. I am proud to claim the title of sword bearer for bringing decent housing to all Australians.
DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr MacKenzie proceeding to address a question to the Minister for Health-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The question is out of order. The Minister is not responsible for advertisements placed by a political party.
Mr MacKenzie-Mr Speaker, I raise a point a order. I was asking whether the Minister for Health had seen such a leaflet. I was not asking him for any comment on it.

Questions Without Notice

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1159

Mr SPEAKER-Then the honourable gentleman was seeking information which is not relevant to the Minister's portfolio.
HOSPITAL INSURANCE: CONTRIBUTION RATES
Mr ROBERT BROWN-My question is directed to the Minister for Health. Will the Minister advise the House of the formula used by officers of his Department for determining whether rates of contribution for hospital insurance submitted by any registered health fund for approval will guarantee that the fund concerned will be able to meet its responsibilities to pay refunds for services rendered to members in public hospitals for both inpatient services and the full range of outpatient services? Will the Minister also inform the House whether, having forced State governments to introduce outpatient charges in public hospitals, it is now the intention of the Commonwealth to limit the range of outpatient services on which benefits will be payable to contributors?
Mr MacKELLAR-The actual formula-it is a complicated one-used by the registration committees which look at the rates put forward by various funds is based upon the actual reserves of the individual funds, also the membership of the funds and the age structure and drawing experience of members of the funds. It is a complicated formula and of course detailed actuarial studies have to be made fn relation to each of the submitted rates which come before that committee. In relation to the second part of the honourable gentleman's question, I can state that the rates which have been agreed to between the funds and the committee are based on the belief that the funds have sufficient reserves and experience to be able to cater for the range of services provided in the public hospitals throughout the various States.
At this stage I would say that various States, in particular New South Wales, seem to be doing what they can to stretch the hospital only insurance option to its very limit and to put great pressure on the funds by charging for a very wide range, and in a very detailed manner, of outpatient services. Obviously this has caused concern to some of the funds. One fund in particular is taking the matter up with the New South Wales Health Commission. At this stage I have had no discussions with any of the State governments in relation to the services provided in outpatient departments. Again I make the point in relation to hospital only insurance that the range of services provided in, say, the major metropolitan public hospitals is certainly not available in a wide range

of other hospitals, particularly in country areas. So people who are encouraged to take out hospital only insurance without a full explanation of the ramifications to them as individual patients should they accept that option-I acknowledge that that option is available to them-may quite easily find themselves, because of the geographic location in which they live, in a position whereby the range of services that they expected to be available to them is simply not available in the public hospitals within their orbit of interest.
Mr Robert Brown-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I appreciate that the Minister may not have been able to provide the formula off the cuff, but would it be possible for the formula to be provided and incorporated in Hansard?
Mr SPEAKER-It cannot be incorporated in Hansard until it is provided. I interpret that the honourable gentleman is making a request for the formula to be provided. It is for the Minister to take the matter into consideration and to make a decision whether he will do so.
Mr MacKELLAR-I am sorry if I did not deal with that particular matter. I will certainly make available to the honourable member the' details of the factors taken into consideration by the committee concerned.
ACQUISITION OF LAND IN TASMANIA
Mr GOODLUCK-Is the Minister for Administrative Services aware of an article in the Hobart Mercury which states that the Premier of Tasmania has requested that the Federal Government keep its nose out of the south-west? Has the Government given consideration to using its acquisition of land powers to acquire land in the south-west of Tasmania?
Mr NEWMAN-I am aware of comments made by the Premier of Tasmania along the lines that the honourable member has suggested. I also saw in reports that I received this morning that the Premier said that he does not want the Federal Parliament intervening in Tasmanian affairs. He stated:
They have no basis at all to start to intrude into this State's affairs.
The Government has no intention of acquiring the south-west or any part of the south-west under the Lands Acquisition Act. Further, our policy on the development of the south-west is very clear. We see it clearly as a State matter. We see it clearly as a matter for the people of Tasmania to decide whether they want power development of the sort that is now being debated in the State or whether they wish areas of the State to be declared for environmental purposes. That

1160 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Questions Without Notice

is in sharp contrast to the Opposition's position, although--
Mr West-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I listened to the rephrased question very carefully because it seemed to me that the honourable member for Franklin was simply trying to get around your previous ruling. If I heard the question correctly, it related to the acquisition ofland in Tasmania by the Department of Administrative Services. The Minister is trying to turn that question around to get back to the former position of discussing the environmental consequences of hydro-electricity projects in the south-west area of Tasmania and what the Premier may have said publicly, for which the Minister is not responsible. It is not a matter to be debated during Question Time this morning.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member's point of order is a good one. The question relates to whether the Government intends t.o acquire land. I ask the Minister to deal with the question in a relevant way.
Mr NEWMAN-Mr Speaker, with all due respect, I thought that I was dealing with the issue of land acquisition. I specifically dealt with that issue in answering the honourable member's question. I was going to conclude by saying that the Government has no intention of using its powers to acquire land in the south-west. In reiterating the Government's position, I must say that we have no intention at all of interfering with the way in which Tasmania decides to develop its energy needs. I might say that that attitude is in sharp contrast to the Opposition's position on this matter, although it is with some difficulty that we can understand what--
Mr Charles Jones-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. The Minister is not responsible for the policies of the Tasmanian Labor Government or the policies of the Australian Labor Party in the federal sphere. He was asked a question specificaJly dealing with the acquisition of land by the Federal Government. It is not a question of whether the Federal government's policies are one way or the Opposition's policies are the other.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Newcastle must understand that the Standing Orders make provisions about whether a question is in order. For the question to be in order it must be a question that relates to matters for which the Minister in this House is responsible. The question was put, but the same restriction does not under the Standing Orders apply to the answer. The requirement is that the answer be relevant. It is relevant to contrast the action of the Government

with another point of view. That is what the Minister is doing. He is contrasting his action with a differentpoint of view. Therefore it is relevant and therefore it is in order.
Mr NEWMAN-I was saying that it is in contrast to the Opposition's position on this matter, although I have no hesitation in complimenting the Leader of the Opposition on the very clear position that he put when he was visiting Devonport on the occasion of the last Australian Labor Party Federal Conference when I understand he clearly said that it was a State matter and that he would not interfere. But there seems to be confusion. Other spokesmen, for example the honourable member for Cunnigham, have made it very clear that in their normal centralist way they are determined to dictate to Tasmania what it will do.
Mr West-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. I think the Minister is taking up too ml.\ch of the time of the House. I draw your attention to your earlier ruling--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will make his point of order.
Mr West-My point of order is that the question related to the possible acquisition of land in Tasmania by the Department of Administrative Services. Within the context of what you have ruled in answer to the point raised by the honourable member for Newcastle--
Government supporters interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! Honourable gentlemen on my right will be silent. The honourable member for Cunningham is entitled to make his point of order.
Mr West-If it is legitimate for him in the context of that reply to compare what I mayor may not have said with what he mayor may not do surely he must relate his answer to what I mayor may not have said about the acquisition of land in Tasmania and not about the environmental questions involved. I suggest that in his reply the Minister must stick to questions relating to the acquisition of land in Tasmania and not draw in irrelevancies, as he is doing.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman has made hiSlpoint of order but he must understand that I must apply tests. The test is whether the acquisition of land was for the purpose of the Commonwealth having a role in this development. That is what the Minister was speaking about. The Minister is in order but I ask him to draw his answer to a conclusion.
Mr NEWMAN-It may satisfy the honourable member for Cunningham if I just conclude--

Questions Without Notice

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1161

Mr SPEAKER-The Minister will not refer to the honourable member for Cunningham. He will proceed with his answer.
Mr NEWMAN-Certainly, Mr Speaker. The Leader of the Opposition's position is clear. But I understand that the honourable member for Cunningham is to insist on impressing on Tasmania the Labor Party's views-whether by the environmental Act or the Lands Acquisition Act, I do not know. It is equally clear that the Labor Opposition intends to tell the Tasmanian Government and Tasmanian people what it will do about the south-west. I point out that my colleague, the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment has had close consultations with the Tasmanian Government on the south-west issue. For example, through his Department he had funded a very valuable study on the resources of the south-west. I know that once the matter is decided by the Tasmanian Government and the Tasmanian people he will gladly join in consultations with the Tasmanian Government about any way in which the Commonwealth Government can help the development of the south-west area.
INVASION OF ANGOLA BY SOUTH AFRICA
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I refer the Minister for Foreign Affairs to an answer the Minister gave last Tuesday relating to South Africa's invasion of Angola. I ask him whether he has been made aware of a French Foreign Ministry statement issued on Tuesday in the following terms:
The French Government has good reason to believe that despite urgent appeals from the international community, South African troops continue to operate on the territory of the People's Republic of Angola.
Is it further a fact that the French Government, I think on Tuesday, called for an immediate withdrawal of South African troops from Angolan territory? Given the Government's commitment to independence for Namibia and the fact that South Africa launched its invasion through Namibia, will the Government protest to the South African Government without further delay and call for the immediate withdrawal of its troops from both Namibia and Angola?
Mr STREET-I have not seen the French statement to which the honourable gentleman refers, or the details of the allegation that South African troops still are in Angola, but I shall see that I get the statement. If I find that the contents of it are confirmed from our own sources I shall consider what might be the appropriate action for the Government to take.

EDUCATION: FUNDING
Mr CARLTON-Is the Minister for Education satisfied that Commonwealth funds specifically earmarked for capital works in the education field are being applied correctly by the States?
Mr FIFE-For a number of years the Government has provided the States with some flexibility in relation to funds that are made available through the Schools Commission for both recurrent and capital purposes in the schools area. The Commonwealth has done this because it recognises that from time to time the States may wish to move some funds from the recurrent area to the capital area, or from the capital area to the recurrent area, to meet a particular circumstance that might apply in a given year. However, in answer to the question raised by the honourable member for Mackellar, I have become concerned in recent times about the practice that has developed in New South Wales. Indeed, I have to inform the House that I believe that over the past five years the New South Wales Government has abused the flexibility that has been provided by the Parliament in its legislation concerned with school funding.
Over the past five years, in estimated December 1980 prices, the New South Wales Government transferred no less than $30m from funds that have been provided for capital purposes for New South Wales schools, and during the whole of this period successive Ministers for Education in New South Wales have drawn attention to what they term the inadequacy of Commonwealth funding for schools. Of course, one does not have to give very much thought to the matter to realise that $30m builds a lot of schools. Therefore, all blame for the deficiencies in school accommodation in New South Wales can squarely be laid at the feet of the present New South Wales Government. Not only cim the New South Wales Government fairly be blamed for that situation but also it is guilty of draining off funds which the Government has provided for this important facility in the State education system.
The honourable member for Mackellar raised this matter today and it has been raised on a previous occasion by the member for Macarthur. I am pleased to be able to advise the House that the Government will introduce legislation into the Parliament before the end of the present sittings to prevent States moving funds from the capital area into the recurrent area. I am sorry that we have to take this action; I regret that we have to remove the flexibility in this legislation. It is being done because the system that presently applies is

1162 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Questions Without Notice

being abused by the New South Wales Governmen at the expense of school children in that State.
SOUTH-WEST TASMANIA
Dr JENKINS-Has the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment considered the report and recommendations of the Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation on south-west Tasmania? Is this report one of that group of reports on which the Government undertook to report to Parliament within six months? As more than six months have passed since the report was presented, when may the House expect the Minister's response to the report and recommendations?
Mr WILSON-That report is one of the reports to which the honourable member ~eferred. Some time ago it was made clear to thIs House that the response to that report would be considered in the light of the outcome of the resour~es study which this Parliament has been supportmg financially, a study towards which we have c.ontributed $350,000. That resources study has Just recently become available to the Gove~nment and is under active consideration. In the lIght of that study and of the report expected later this year from the committee known as the Ziedler Committee of Inquiry into Electricity Gener~ting ~nd the Sharing of Power Resources, consIderatIOn will be given to the recomme.ndations of. the House of Representatives CommIttee on EnvIronment and Conservation.

RADIO STATION LICENCES

Mr JULL-My question is directed to the Minister' for Communications. I refer to the alleged backlog of applications for commercial frequency modulation radio station licences around
Australia. How many applications have been made for these licences? When will hearings for and allocations of the licences begin?

Mr SINCLAIR-There has been a con-

siderable buildup of these applications. I under-

stand that at the moment about 550 are outstand-

ing. We are looking at the basis by which those

who are applying can undertake much of the de-

sign specifications in the technical area them-

selves and thereby reduce the time lag that is in-

volved in the engineers and other technicians

within the Department of Communications

processing applications. Of course, it is necessary

to lay down that technical area within which the

licence will be defined before a reference can be

made to the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal

and the actual licence application processed. The

basis by which the supplementary FM licences for

radio will be issued is still being developed. How-

esvtaetr~mIeanmt

hoping on the

it will be possible for a basis of the allocation

policy of the

spectrum to be made fairly shortly. As a result,

the other licences will then flow. I know that a

number of community groups which have had

trial public broadcasting terms allocated to them,

and others who have sought the processing of

their applications, have a real anxiety. I have

asked my Department to process the develop-

ment of the policy statement on the matter as

soon as possible so that their claims can be heard

at the earliest possible time.

One other factor to which my colleague referre'd, in response to an earlier questi~n, has to be
borne in mind in considering matters m regard to the question of south-west Tasmania. It is important for the Tasmanian Government and t.he Tasmanian Parliament to remove the uncertamties as to their intentions. When it is clear what
the intentions of the Tasmanian Parliament and Government are, it will be more appropriate for this Parliament then to consider what national re-
sponse there should be to the issues with re~ard to the development in south-west Tasmama. We
have acknowledged the great significance of th~t area. We have indicated quite clearly that we wIll assist the Tasmanian Government to establish a
national park of world significance in south-west Tasmania. In due course we will respond to the re-
port of the House of Representatives committee but only after we have examined in detail the mat-
ters to which I have referred.

SINAI PEACEKEEPING FORCE
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Acting Prime Minister: Is it a fact that it is now five months since the United States Secretary of State informally approached the Australian Government seeking Australian involvement in an American sponsored peacekeeping force in the Sinai? Is it als~ a fact that the Minister for Foreign AffaIrs responded to this approach by letter on 27 April seeking specific details and the United States S~c retary of State replied on 19 May? Is the Actmg Prime Minister aware of wide concern in the Australian community about this proposal, a concern which is reflected in the ranks of the Government's back bench? Finally, why, after more than five months, has the Government not been able to make up its mind on this matter? When can a decision be expected?
Mr SPEAKER-I call the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

Questions Without Notice

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1163

Mr Hayden-I asked the question of the Acting Prime Minister, not of the Acting Foreign Minister.

Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition

does not raise a point of order.

.

Mr STREET-I have made it clear in two statements to the Parliament that the Government has wish(;:d to provide the opportunity for a wide-ranging public debate into what, undoubtedly, is a matter of very great importance to Australia and, indeed, to the peace process in the Middle East. The Australian Government is still seeking further information on the composition and on other aspects of the force. We still have not made a-decision as to Australia's participation or non-participation in this force. There are valid and solid arguments on both sides. When the Government does have full information available to it a decision will be made in that light.

HEALTH CARE
Mr MacKENZIE-I direct my question to the Minister for Health. Is it a fact that free health treatment has ended in New South Wales for all with some exceptions?
Dr Klugman-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. Can you think of a more pointless question than asking whether something has ended except for those for which it did not end?
Mr MacKenzie-Speaking to the point of order, Mr Speaker, I am quoting directly from what was said by the New South Wales Minister for Health.
Mr SPEAKER-Fortunately, this House requires only that honourable members be understood, not that they speak perfect English.
Mr MacKELLAR-I am aware of the document from which the honourable member for Calare drew that statement. The question allows me the opportunity to say that some of the advertisements placed during this current election campaign in New South Wales by the Minister for Health in New South Wales and by Australian Labor Party candidates are misleading in the extreme. Let us get the record straight. There have been no cutbacks to health funds for New South Wales by the Federal Government. I have made that point clear on a number of occasions in this House. I make the point again that rather than there having been a cutback in health funds to New South Wales, there will be an additional $50m plus available to that Government for use, if it so wishes, in the health care field. I point out also that the conditions of funding of federal moneys to the States and, therefore, to New South Wales, of course, require that pensioner health

benefit card holders and their dependants be provided with free hospital and medical care. That will encompass about 600,000 people in New South Wales. If one adds the health benefit care card holders, obviously the number is increased. Therefore, the provision of free health care to people in New South Wales is a specific decision by the Federal Government and one, of course, for which the State.Government is trying to claim credit.

The State Government has, in fact, made free health care available to a small additional number of people, but again there is an element of mis" leading advertising in this because one of the groups that it claims credit for are ex-servicemen. Of course, ex-servicemen and ex-servicewomen have free health care available to them at Commonwealth-funded repatriation hospitals at present. I think the whole issue was best summed up in a moment of disarming candour by the
Premier of New South Wales which was reported in yesterday's Sydney Morning Herald. He was asked whether in fact the problems in New South Wales hospitals were due to cutbacks in funds. He replied no, that there was no lack of government funding. He said that the problem was administrative chaos. I think this was a rare display of candour by the New South Wales Premier. It does, in fact, give the lie to those suggestions that it is all because of alleged cutbacks in federal funding. As we have said-I have said this on a number of occasions-the amounts of money available to the New South Wales Government for health care have not been cut back; the New South Wales Government has available to it an increased amount of revenue. I am very pleased indeed that the Premier of New South Wales, Mr Wran, has finally come clean and agreed--

Mr Morris-What you are saying is a lie; you

know that. You are telling a lie.

.

Mr SPEAKER-The Minister will resume his seat. The honourable member for Shortland, who normally comports himself very we11 in the House, should not injure his reputation. I ask him to withdraw and not to repeat unparliamentary language.

Mr Morris-I withdraw, Mr Speaker, and seek to raise a point of order. My point of order is that the Minister is deliberately misleading the House in quoting what the Premier of New South Wales
has said. The Premier of New South Wales was referring to casualty services at a particular hospital.

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will cease speaking. I ask him to withdraw the term 'deliberately misleading' because

1164 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Questions Without Notice

that is only an alternative to an allegation of lying. The honourable gentleman will withdraw.
Mr Morris-I withdraw and substit,ute the words 'deliberately misstating the position'.

ASSENT TO BILLS Assent to the following Bills reported:
Export Grants Acts Amendment Bill 1981.

Mr MacKELLAR-Mr Speaker, obviously 1 Norfolk Island Amendment Bill 1981.

am not responsible for the statements of the Premier of New South Wales. 1 can only repeat to

Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Bill 1981.

the House what was reported in yesterday's Sydney Morning Herald, and that was that the

COMMITTEE OF PRIVILEGES

Premier said that the problems of New South Mr SPEAKER-I have received advice from

Wales hospitals were not due to funding cutbacks the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) that he has

but were due to administrative problems. That is nominated the Minister for the Capital Territory

exactly what 1 have been saying for a number <;>f (Mr Hodgman) to serve in his place as a member

months now. 1 repeat: 1 am very glad that the of the Committee of Privileges in its consideration

Premier of New South Wales has finally agreed of the matter referred to it on 8 September 1981. I

with me.

have also received advice from the Deputy Leader

SERVICES CANTEENS TRUST FUND

of the Opposition that he has nominated the honourable member for Holt (Mr Duffy) to be a

Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)- . member of that Committee during consideration

Pursuant to section 34 of the Services Trust Funds of the same matter.

Act 1947, 1 present the annual report 1980 of the

Services Canteens Trust Fund, together with audited accounts for the fund.

JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY

INSTITUTE OF FAMILY STUDIES Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Institute of Family Studies annual report 1980-81.

Mr SPEAKER-I have received advice from the Leader of the Government in the Senate that he has nominated Senator Hamer to be a member of the Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory.

REPATRIATION COMMISSION Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Techn9Iogy)-Pursuant to section 122 of the Repatriation Act 1920, I present the Repatriation Commission annual report 1980-81.
SNOWY MOUNTAINS ENGINEERING CORPORATION
Mr. McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction)-Pursuant to section 36 of the Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation Act 1970, I present the Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation annual report 1980-81.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOUSE Message received from the Senate acquainting the House that it has agreed to the following resolution:
That, for the purpose ofsub-section 8 (2) of the Parliament House Construction Authority Act 1979, the Senate !!uthorises the commencement of work on the following declared stage in the construction of Parliament House, namely, the construction and fitting out of the building that is to C()nstitute Parliament House, together with-
(a) the construction, on the site of Parliament House, of access roads, parking areas and other facilities to be provided on that site in connection with Parliament House; and .
(b) the landscaping of that site.

COMMITTEE OF PRIVILEGES Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the Houser-by leave-I move:
That the Committee of Privileges, when considering the matter referred to it on 8 September 1981, have power to send for persons, papers and records.
The Committee when undertaking its present inquiry may wish to have the power granted by the motion, and; in accordance with practice, the motion is proposed for the concurrence of the House.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (11.1)-1 move:
That leave of absence for three months be given to the honourable member for Hughes, on the grounds of public business overseas.
In his absence-he is the Opposition Whip-the honourable member for Griffith (Mr Humphreys) will act in that position.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

Grievance Debate

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1165

, GRIEVANCE DEBATE
Tendering in the Defence Area-Defence Force Salaries-Union Membership-Sales Tax on Publications-Foreign Rural InvestmentAustralian Public Service-Garden Settlement Home for the Aged, Queensland-New Australian Flag-Rural Industries: Budget Papers
Question proposed:
That grievances be noted.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (11.2)-1 want to raise a number of matters-given that time alLowswhich relate to tendering in the defence area for substantive contracts and the results of those tenders. It is a matter of concern that earlier this year an announcement was made that on technical merit a tender from CoIlins International Service Company was accepted for the Defence Integrated Secure Communications Network---:- DISCON. Subsequent to that announcement, It has been revealed that the major item of technical excellence which overrode price in that area was a switch supplied by Sperry Univac Computer Systems which other companies tendering for this contract had excluded from their proposals on the grounds that they found it was unlikely to be available for inclusion in the system. It is reasonable to assume that if the other tenderers had found this switching system to be-either impracticalor unlikely to be available the tenderer which included it, had it substantively carried out the necessary research which one would expect in this area would have known that it was not available. As the switching system was a key in the choice of the tenderer it would seem that the basis for the choice collapses on those grounds.
A second matter is equally of concern in this area, that is, the assessment by the departmental assessment team. If in fact other tenderers found the switch to be not capable of being reasonably included in a tender which they felt was able to be fulfilled, one has to ask why that was not discovered and taken into account when the recommendations were made. Whilst this may be classified as a major or a minor breach, very serious precedents are involved when a decision is made that a particular contract will be accepted and it is found very shortly afterwards that the contractor is not able to fulfil the specifications of the tender-in particular, the technical specifications-where those specifications are a matter of prime consideration in determining who should get the contract.
It seems that either a new evaluation is necessary or new tenders should be called. I tend to think that the former course is appropriate because it is unlikely that other tenderers would

enterthe field or be acceptable to the Department

in this matter. Assessment of the tenders in all

relativity, excluding the technical excellence

which was included in respect of the now doubtful

switching system, should take place again on the

basis of'the offer which is now being made by the

successful tenderer and not on the basis of the

tender which was initially accepted and which is,

to say the least, under a cloud. A matter of prin-

ciple is involved; that is, that persons who tender

for major contracts are entitled to expect that

their tender will be assessed on the basis that it is

expected to be met and will be met. If a tender is

made which offers materials which are unable to

be supplied, that tender should fail on that ground

alone.

.

Mr Killen-Forgive me for interrupting. I will be making a statement on this matter this afternoon. I will get a copy of it to you as soon as possible.

Mr SCHOLES-I thank the Minister for that information, because I wish to rai8e briefly \lflother matter which relates to his Department.
The Minister is well aware of the concern of International Harvester Australia Ltd over its exclusion over a long period from truck orders for
the Australian Army. It is alleged. by that company that the truck order specifications which were issued in 1977 have not been met by
those firms-which are in the final tender consider-
ations and that International Harvester, being the
only Australian manufacturer concerned, has
been prevented from subsequent tendering with a
vehicle which would now meet those specifications-I hasten to say that the company could not have met the specifications in 1977-
whilst changes in the tender arrangements have been made to suit firms which are still in the
tender areas.

The International Harvester company has alleged that the Mercedes vehicle is not in substan-
tial commercial marketing in Australia and that
the specification of availability of parts and com-
mercial sales cannot be met within Australia. The British Bedford vehicle is of a very old design and
is about to cease production as a prime product of
its manufacturer. At the time of delivery of Aus-
tralian defence orders in that direction the vehicle
would in fact be an obsolete vehicle on an extended manufacturing run to meet an Australian
order. That would seem to involve no great ad-
vance in technology and no benefit from advances which have been made since the truck was de-
signed and entered service in 1952. I also under-
stand that discussions are under way at the mo-
ment with regard to a naval helicopter which is in much the same category. Some time this year the

1166 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Grievance Debate

Minister will make a statement on this, I am certain. I have noted a report that we are involved in consideration of a British helicopter which entered service 17 years ago and which does not even have the advantage of radar. i hope that is an incorrect report and that the Minister will indi-' cate that when we buy helicopters-they have been delayed for some considerable time by the FFGS-they will not be Rolls Royces, as some people advocate, but will be adequate.

One other matter relating to the defence for~es has to be raised in this Parliament. Opportunities to do so are limited. During the last week of sitting the Minister made a statement-at the time the actual report was not available-in respect of De; fence Force pay and the decision which had been reached by the r,eview tribunal on that matter. The Minister indicated the granting of a 6.8 per cent across the board increase. Since then the Services have expressed great concern at the averaging and. across the board aspects of the increase. Certain areas of technical excellence in the Services, specifically the, electronics area, have clearly been treated badly in the light of ,work value increases granted to similar categories in
pri~ate indu~try.

I raise with the House the proposition-that even
if the report does reflect a reasonable result the defence forces, as opposed to all other sections of the Aljstralian community, are unable to have a case argued on their behalf and nor do they have any area on which they can app~al against a decision. The manner in which defence forces salaries are determined is by a reference from the Minister to a committee which reports to the Minister who has the,right to either endorse or reject that report. The Parliament has no say and nor is any appeal mechanism available. The Minister's signature makes' the report law as a' determination, His failure to sign' totally rejects the report:

I think it is appropriate that in cases where the

Minister rejects a report the Parliament should

have the right to pass a resolution reversing the

Minister's decision. That action would seem to be

reasonable. The Parliament does have the right to

reject an approved report. At the moment the

only thing the Parliament can do in respect of this

report-one would hardly be able to argue it be-

fore the Services-would be to reject granting the

raise because of its inadequacy, That would not

get the servicemen anywhere because they have

nowhere to go unless the Minister-and it de-

pends solely on the Minister-is prepared to make

another reference on defence forces pay. What I

am saying in this instance is that justice should be

seen to be done.

'

Mr DEPUTY. SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-

Order! The honQurable member's time has

expired,

'

Mr SPENDER (Nqrth Sydney) (11.12),,-1 wish to draw the Houe's attention to the' decision of the European Court of Human Rights in the case of Young, James ~lld' Webster which was given by the Court on 13 August 19'81. I hav.e, a copy of a Press release which was issued by the' Registrar of that Court. I do not have a copy of the judgment which apparently is not yet availabJe in the Parliamentary Library. However the issue raised is an important one and whilst it arose' under the European Convention of Human Rights it has general application beyond the parties, to that Convention, '

Very briefly, the facts are these. The three applicants were employees of. British Rail. During 1975 a closed shop agreement was concluded be~ tween their employers and three trade unions, providing that thenceforth membership of one of those unions was a condition of employment. The applicants declined to satisfy this condition and in 1976 were dismissed on that account. Each of them considered that individuals should enjoy freedom of choice as regards union membership, In addition, Mr Young and Mr Webster objected to trade union policies and activities and Mr Young to the political ,affiliations of the unions concerned,

The three dismissed employees brought proceedings before the European Commissioner of Human Rights and the matter went to Court. The Court came to the conclusion that the dismissal interfered-with certain freedoms which were conferred on these men by the European Convention, In that respect, I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard articles 9, 10, 11 and 13 of the European Convention and Articles 2,2, 2,3(a), and 18, 19, 21 and 22 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights which was ratified by' Australia on 13 August 1980.

Leave granted,

The Articles read as follows-

Article 9

1. Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience

and religion; this right inclil(:les freedom to change his religion

or belief and freedom, eith~r alone or in community with

others and in public or privat., to manifest his religion or be-

lief, in worship, teaching, prac~~~ jlnd observance,

.

2, Freedom to manifest one's religion or beliefs shall be subject only to such limitations as are. prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic socie~y in the interests of public safety, for the protection of public order, health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.

Article 10

Grievance Debate

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1167

1. Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right shall include freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas without interference by public authority and regardless of frontiers. This Article shall not prevent States from requiring the licensing of broadcasting, television or cinema enterprises.
2. The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law and an: necessary in a democratic society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public salety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing the disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary.
Article II I. Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and to freedom of association with others, including the right to form and to join trade unions for the protection of his interests.
2. No restrictions shall be placed on the exercise of these rights other than such as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security or public safety, for the p~evention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others. This Article shall not prevent the imposition of lawful restrictions on the exercise of these rights by members of the armed forces, of the police or of the administration of the State.
Article 13 Everyone whose rights and freedoms as set forth in this
Convention are violated shall have an effective remedy before a national authority notwithstanding that the violation has been committed by persons acting in an official capacity.
Article 2
2. Where not already provided for by existing legislative or other measures, each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes to take the necessary steps, in accordance with its constitutional processes and with the provisions of the p~esent Covenant, to adopt such legislative or other measures as may be necessary to give effect to the rights recognized in the present Covenant.
3. Each State Party to the present Covenant undertakes:
(a) to ensure that any person whose rights or freedoms as 'herein recognized are violated shall have an effective remedy, notwithstanding that the violation has been committed by persons acting in an official capacity;
Article 18
I. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion. This right shall include freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice, and freedom, either individually or in community with others and in public or in private, to manifest his religion or belief in worship, observance, practice and teaching.
2. No one shall be subject to coercion which would impair his freedom to have or to adopt a religion or belief of his choice.
3. Freedom to manifest one's religion or beliefs may be subject only to such limitations as are prescribed by law and are necessary to protect public safety, order, health, or morals or the fundamental rights and freedoms of others.
4. The States Parties to the present Covenant undertake to have respect for the liberty of parents and, when applicable, legal guardians to ensure the religious and moral education of their children in conformity with their own convictions.

Article 19
I: Everyone shall have the right to hold opinions without interference.
2. Everyone shall have'the right to freedom of expression; this right shall include freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or through any other media of his choice.
3. The exercise of the rights provided for in paragraph 2 of this article carries with it special duties and responsibilities. It may therefore be subject to certain restrictions, but these shall only be such as are provided by law and are necessary:
(a) For respect of the rights or reputations of others;
(b) For the protection of national security or of public order (ordre public), or of public health or morals.

Article 21
The right of peaceful assembly shall be recognized. No restrictions may be placed on the exercise of this right other than those imposed in comformity with the law and which are necessary in a democratic society in the intersts of national security or public safety, public order (ordre public), the protection of public health or morals or the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.

Article 22

I. Everyone shall have the right to freedom of association
with others, including the right to form and join trade unions for the protection of his interests.

2. No restrictions may be placed on the exercise of this right other than those which are prescribed by law and which are
necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security ot public safety, public order (ordre public), the protection of public health or morals or the protection of the
rights and freedoms of others. This article shall not prevent the imposition of lawful restrictions on members of the armed
forces and of the police in their exercise of this right.

3. N6thingin this article shall authorize States Parties to the

International Labour Organisation Convention of 1948 con-

cerning Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right

to Organize to take legislative measures which would preju-

dice, or to apply the law in such a manner as to prejudice the

guarantees provided for in that Convention.

-

Mr SPENDER-I thank the House. In order to shorten matters and in view of time constraints, I also seek leave to incorporate in Hansard page 3 of the Press release. It states the substance of the conclusions reached by the Court on the matter which was then before it.

LeIwe granted.

The document read as follows-

The court was of the opinion that, even if no general rule
against compulsory membership were contained in the Con-
vention, it did not follow that each and every compulsion to join a particular trade union was compatible with Article. 11, for this would strike at the very substance of the freedom the
Article was designed to guarantee. A threat of dismissal involving loss of livelihood was a most serious form of compulsion and, in the present case, had been directed against em-
ployees engaged before the introduction of any obligation to join a particular un.ion. In the circumstances, such a form of compulsion struck at the very substance of the freedom
guaranteed by Article 11 and, for that reason alone, there had been an interference with that freedom. Since Mr Young, Mr James and Mr Webster would anyway have been dismissed if
they had not become members of one of the specified unions,

1168 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Grievance Debate

the fact that they might have been able to form or to join an additional union of their choice (a point that was contested before the Court) in no way altered the compulsion to which they were subjected.
Moreover, Article II had, in the present case, also to be considered in the light of Articles 9 and 10. The protection of personal opinion afforded by the latter Articles in the shape of freedom of thought, conscience and religion and of freedom of expression was also one of the purposes of freedom of associ, ation as guaranteed by Article II. Accordingly, it struck at the very substance of that Article to exert pressure, of the kind applied to the applicants, in order to compel someone to join an association contrary to his convictions. In that further respect, there had been-in any event as regards Mr Young and Mr Webster-an interference with their Article I I rights.
The Government had expressly stated that they would not argue that any interference found by the Court was justified under paragraph 2 of Article II. The Court examined this issue of its own motion. The closed shop system as such not being under review, the Court did not comment on its alleged advantages; it concentrated on the question whether the treatment of the applicants in this particular case was "necessary in a democratic society . . . for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others". Having noted, amongst other things, that many closed shop arrangements did not require existing non-union employees to join a specified union, that there were statistics to the effect that a majority of union members dId not agree that persons refusing to join a union for strong reasons should be dismissed from employment and that in 1975 more than 95% of British Rail employees already belonged to one of the specified unions, the Court found that the railway unions would in no way have been prevented from striving for the protection of their members' interests even if the legislation in force had not made it permissible to compel non-union employees having objections like the applicants to join a specified union. Since the detriment suffered by Mr Young, Mr James and Mr Webster went further than wa,s required to achieve a proper balance between the conflicting interests of those involved and could not be regarded as proportionate to the aims being pursued, the Court concluded by eighteen votes to three that there had been a violation of Article I L
[paragraphs 50:65 of the judgment and item I of the operative
provisions 1
Mr SPENDER-In the case of Young and others the Court expressed no general view about the closed shop. It said, amongst other things, that a threat of dismissal involving loss of livelihood was a most serious form of compulsion and this, in effect, struck at the very substance of the freedom guaranteed by Article II. Article II deals with the freedom of peaceful assembly and the freedom of association, including the right to form and join trade unions. The Court also drew attention to Articles 9 and 10 of the European Convention. Articles 9 and 10 deal with freedom of thought, conscience and religion and freedom of expression. I quote now from the summary issued by the Registrar. The Court said:
The protection of personal opinion afforded by the latter Articles in the shape of freedom of thought, conscience and religion and of freedom of expression was also one of the purposes of freedom of association as guaranteed by Article II.

It will be apparent to anyone who examines the paragraphs or clauses of the European Convention and contrasts them with the paragraphs of the International Convention which was ratified by Australia and to which I referred earlier that the rights guaranteed by the one are in substance the same as the rights guaranteed by the other. That raises the question as to whether the existence of preference clauses,whtch are provided by section 47 of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act, is not incompatible with the Covenant which Australia has ratified.
Let me make the point that compulsion must necessarily be a negation of freedom. That is so whether the compulsion is exercised directly or indirectly. If a person is compelled to be a member of a church for the purpose of getting certain benefits, that is certainly an inhibition, a negation, -of certain fundamental freedoms-just as it is a negation of a fundamental freedom if a person has to be a member of a union or of a particular union before he can get a job, or if his non-membership will operate in some way to his detriment.
It is perfectly true that section 47 has a qualification written into it. In section 144A of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act provision is made for exemption from preference clauses for persons who hold conscientious beliefs, as defined by section 144A, and who satisfy the Registrar that they hold those beliefs. Whatever may be said of that qualification it is deficient in a number of respects if one looks at it purdy from the point of view of the right orthe individual to be viewed equally when he seeks employment. Let me point to the deficiencies. In the first place, the person who seeks to get the benefit of section 144A, and thereby to fall outside the operation of a preference provision, must put forward an objection which is based on conscientious beliefs. Whilst a wide definition is given by section 144A it is not hard to imagine cases which will fall outside that definition. One such case would be an objec~ tion by an individual to the membership of the executive of the union concerned.
In order to obtain the benefit of section 144A the person seeking its benefit must satisfy the Registrar that he holds conscientious beliefs. The Registrar, of course, may be right or may be wrong when he comes to make a decision. The point is, however, that it should be no function of the Registrar to be involved in that matter; it should be the right of the individual to say: 'I do not wish to join a union and I do not wish that to operate to my detriment when I come to get a job.' Next under section 144A the objection, if it is

Grievance Debate

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1169

to be sustainable and to be the basis of an exempThat is, Chief Justice Forbes-

tion, must be an objection to joining unions generrefused to certify the licence clauses of the first bill, but the

ally; a belief that would not allow the joining of a remainder was certified and became law. Forbes also refused

particular union or the joining of a union at a particular time would not be sufficient. Lastly,

to certify the second bill, although he emphasised that there was no objection in law to a moderate duty on newspapers;

even where an exemption is granted an employer is not required to treat the person, when seeking

In other words, he applied the test that it was not - against the law but it was against public policy.

employment, equally with union members.

The biography continues:

The point is that the existence of preference provisions can operate to the detriment of a. person seeking to sell his services upon the labour market. This is a negation of a fundamental right and that is the right to be treated equally when
seeking employment. I therefore ask that this House c<;msider whether the preference clauses as

it was passed by the Legisla!ive Council and the governor gave it his assent, but was later disallowed by the Crown.
In other words, the matter was referred to Great Britain and its practice was followed. The Bulletin, a journal that one does not invariably quote with approval, in an editorial in its issue of 1 September, stated:

they presently stand in the Conciliation and ArbiThe tax will bear heavily on publications with large circu-

tration Act should be taken out of that Act.

lations and marginal profitability. It will be even harder pro-

portionately on small publications which attract no advertis-

Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (l1.22)-Irise to ing and which eke out a hand-to-mouth existence. Many of

draw attention to the significance of imposing a 2t these stand for political principles which are far removed

per cent sales tax on books, magazines and journals in Australia. Australia is the first country

from those of The Bulletin, but the whole point of free speech is that if you do not support the principle on behalf of your political enemies, you do not support it at all.

in the English-speaking world to impose a direct

sales tax on all manifestations of the written word, Mr Deputy Speaker, the imposition of the 2t per

including newspapers and magazines as well as . cent sales tax on books, magazines, journals and

books. This is an appalling precedent and I think a significant measure of the antagonism that this G(lVernment expresses tow~rds all forms of intel-
lectual activity in this country.

newspapers in Australia is without precedent. It is a measure that has decisively been rejected in the United Kingdom and in a number of other countries. Firstly, it runs clearly counter to professed government aims of taking account of the special

. As far back as the eighteenth century there was problems of the dissemination of knowledge and

a fight in Great Britain over the notorious Stamp information in a country the size of Australia.

Act 1712, which was imposed in an attempt to curb the power of the printed word, which was then making itself felt through newspapers. The stamp tax was dubbed derisively a tax on knowledge, just as the Government's proposal is being dubbed today. It is extraordinary that the most recent Australian precedent that we can find for this attempt to impose a tax on knowledge, a tax on literacy, is back in the era of Governor Darling. Sir Ralph Darling, the seventh governor

Secondly, it runs contrary to the principle of government support of literature and of creative, analytical and informational writing, which has
been supported by all parties in this House for many years. Thirdly, it runs counter to government educational aims, that, whilst textbooks may be exempt, all teachers know that it is. the background and associated reading that is the most important part of anyone's education.

of New South Wales, attempted in 1827 to impose Australian bookselling is the most imperilled

a newspaper tax. At that time the Australian part of an imperilled industry. Hundreds of book-

newspaper-not, of course, Rupert Murdoch's sellers are going to the wall each year and there is

but W. C. Wentworth's-wrote:

little hope of survival unless they previously capi-

Restrictions on the liberty of the Press are restrictions on the natural liberty of man.
The Australian accused Darling of 'applying the grindstone of taxation to suffocate the liberty of writing'. Darling's tax on newspapers was vetoed by Chief Justice Forbes. The Australian Dictionary of Biography entry on Governor Sir Ralph Darling states: .

talised and/or they owned their own premises. The cost of rent, phones, labour and postage all have risen, but the effective cost of books has fallen in recent years by nearly 16 per cent. It is said that that is due to the paperback revolution, but the margin of profit has remained stationary. It is important that we avoid the risk of many of the minority or important cultural journals failing. If they are left to rely on market forces alone

Darling was convinced that 'nothing short of positive coercion' would curb the licentiousness of the press, . . . and in April 1827, on Bathurst's advice, he submitted to the Legislative Council a bill to regulate newspapers, and another to impose a newspaper stamp duty. Forbes-

they are likely to go under. For these journals and for booksellers and so on an extra cost in handling, bookkeeping and accounting is imposed which may drive many to the wall. Taxes on

1170 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Grievance Debate

knowledge, and in particular on books, traditionThe publishing industry is already under savage

ally have been repugnant to the English-speaking threat from the electronic media, including teie-

Western world and to many other cultures as vision and VTRs which are already edging their

well. The proposed tax represents a serious and way into traditional book outlets, as anyone who

direct restriction on the country's right to a free has visited bookshops recently will recognise.

flow of information, knowledge and culture.

Also, the dry copier makes every user his or her

own publisher. That threatens the whole econ-

In the critical situation in regard to authorship, publishing and bookselling, as in the education and general edification and understanding,of all citizens of the increasingly complex problems they face in the modern world, such a tax on the written word strikes a blow at the roots of a civilised society.

omic basis of the publishing industry. What concerns me is that the 2t per cent tax might well be the straw that breaks the camel's back. It might be said: 'Australia does not really need a publishing industry; we can buy all books off the shelf or import them'. If one pushes the logic of economic rationalism to its ultimate one might take that view, but it would be very destructive for this

It is estimated that the present median income of practising Australian authors is of the order of $3,000 a year. The position of booksellers has already been referred to. They probably are in a more serious position than any other retailers. One great danger is that the traditional bookshop purveying ideas and information to the people'
will survive only by becoming a supermarket for long run best sellers, anniversary cards, cook books and sex manuals. As far as publishers are concerned, the recent run of takeovers and heavy losses published in company accounts indicates quite clearly that this is an area in which no sen-
sible investor today would place his or her money with any hope of an adequate return. All this applies with even greater force to the most sensi-

country. In Great Britain value added tax does not attach to magazines, journals and newspapers. It is true that in the United States State tax is imposed at the point of sale on books. It is not imposed on magazines, newspapers and journals. 'In the Australian case, of course, the charge really will be incorporated in the cost of production for
practical purposes. That is a point at which it will be very difficult to grant exemptions even though there is some mechanism for granting epemptions. Adolf Hitler only burnt the books; here we are likely to destroy the whole basisoh which books will be produced. It confirms our view that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) is the greatest assailant of intellectual values of any figure in public life since Attila the Hun.

tive and vulnerable area of all-those of up and

coming writers whose chance of publication has been eroded seriously and progressively in recent years, the new and innovative bookshop offering new services to a new audience, and the new small publishing house tracing new issues and ideas for

Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (11.33)-Mr Deputy Speaker, there is little doubt that Australia has taken its place in the world economy. This move has brought great benefits but, as is invariably the case, also some difficulty. I wish

the enrichment of our society and seeking to place to raise one of these problem areas today and, as is

them before the public.

my personal policy, to suggest a solution. I refer to

the purchase by overseas interests of Australian

On the face of it, a tax on books might seem to be of concern only to a minority audience. In fact, a tax on books is a tax on new ideas, on the reassessment of old ideas, on insights into the past and, therefore, also on insights into the future. It is a tax as well on sheer basic knowledge of the kind needed for a developing society-how to build
and maintain better engines, how better to look after old people, how to use and adapt computers to new uses, how to build one's own home or to run one's car-in a situation in which it is becoming harder and harder to pay other people to do these things. A tax on books, in a,very real sense,

rural lands. Let me say at this stage that I am not opposed to foreign investment within Australia. I am aware of the need for this source of real money to maintain Australia's present rate of development and, consequently, the standard of living of its citizens. There appears to be no accurate statistics as to the quantity or value or rural land which has been sold to overseas investors. Recently, however, the National Times produced a comprehensive special report on this subject. In the issue for the week commencing 23 August the following statement was made in relation to foreign investors:

and perhaps more than in any other area is a tax

on Australia-not just the Australia of today but, more importantly, the Australia of the immediate future.

'. . . between April 1976 and December 1980 these investors spent almost $200m acquiring approximately \0 million hectares of Australian rural land.

Grievance Debate

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1171

The article points out that these figures represent only transactions approved by the Foreign Investment Review Board and infers that a large number of transactions could have occurred outside the guidelines. I do not wish to appear a Johnny-come-lately in what is now a well publicised issue. My first documented interest in this matter was on 18 December 1980, shortly after my election. I chose to write to the Treasurer (Mr Howard) putting the solutions I propose to the House today. My experience since then within my electorate, which encompasses the Great Southern and Esperance which are two of the major areas of interest in Western Australia, has confirmed my original concern and allows me to confirm that the article presented by the National Times is a clear summary of the circumstances and views that exist. Included in this article was the following statement:
Foreign investors spent $69 million on 750,000 hectares of land, mainly in the Queensland Darling Downs, on the north-western slopes of NSW, and in the 'Great Southern '-the fertile sQuth-west corner of WA;
West Germans were the biggest buyers last year, spending $17 million on 27 properties totalling 57,000 ha.
According to land agents, the typical foreign investor comes to Australia with between $300,000 and $1 million to spend.
Foreign investment in land can be divided into two broad areas: Firstly, land purchased by an intending migrant and, secondly, land purchased by an overseas resident for investment, probably of a speculative nature. The FIRB, in its 1980 report, had this to say:
Approximately 60 per cent of urban real estate and 35 per cent of rural property proposals considered during the year were approved subject to the foreign investors meeting certain conditions.
One of the conditions set out is:
. . '. and, in cases concerning investment by intending migrants, to resell the property to Australians or other eligible interests if the investors do not take up permanent residence in Australia by a specified date. ,The value of acquisitions of intending migrants approved subject to conditions for disposal of the real estate amounted to approximately 40 per cent of the total value of real estate For which foreign investment approvals were given in 1979-80.
That 40 per cent of all real estate went to intending migrants in 1980 must be a relief. These people bring their money, energy and expertise to Australia. Australian rural communities are well aware of the benefits that migrant families brought to many districts in past years. I am sure we all welcome these investors. In regard to the non-,?igrant, the Board had this to say: ,
The policy and the Board's examination of proposals rellect the Government's concern to ensure that Foreign interests do not engage in real estate investment that is of a speculative nature or is intended purely for capital gain or investment in~ come without accompanying benefits to Australia.

Although I accept the Board's intentions in that statement, practice proves how easily such policies are subverted. The National Times refers to lease back deals by foreign investors at 4t per cent of the purchase price per annum. This is hardly an interest rate relative to today's market or evidence of development. Nevertheless, this very fact raises an interesting side issue. If one happens to be a farmer with cash flow problems, why should one not benefit from such generous terms? Further, if an Australian farmer has given a lifetime to his property, gaining at best during that lifetime a modest living, why should he not realise the best possible return on the property which is the sole measure of his effort?
On pages 14 and 15 of the FIRB report it refers to government policy exempting real estate transactions below $250,000, and now extended to $350,000. It further states that rural land does not receive this exemption. However, experience proves that little, if any, serious effort is made to hinder transactions below $350,000. The Board also indicates it will require evidence that Australians have had ample opportunity to purchase the land involved ahead of overseas purchasers. Nevertheless, a greedy estate agent can easily provide an overseas purchaser with the names of willing Australians who will meet that requirement. Further, willing Australian purchasers are generally unable to meet the timetable in arranging finance compared with the overseas investor who must naturally bring the cash with him.
I personally successfully represented an Australian couple applying before the FIRB. The circumstances were that after a Sunday morning inspection of a property they expressed willingness and the ability to purchase the land involved. However, they refused to sign an irrevocable contract until they consulted with their bank manager on Monday. An overseas purchaser signed up that afternoon. Fortunately, these people had the good sense to contact their member of parliament and government policy was sustained.
Most of my farmer constituents do not believe that foreign investment alone is responsible for today's rural land prices. They are prepared to pay today's prices and know that they can profit from the land. Nevertheless, they object to the shortage of loan funds made available and the delays in obtaining the necessary long term finance that farming investment requires. Some also agree that developments such as the PIBAPrimary Industry Bank of Australia-have helped but say they may also have contributed to the present land price spiral. So unlimited credit provides its own problems. Nevertheless, whilst accepting the need for restraint of the money

1172 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Grievance Debate

supply, I consider every effort should be made to direct a greater proportion of the available loan funds to the productive rural sector and away from the consumer sector where money for knickknacks and overpriced motorcars appears unlimited. Should money supply targets set in this year's Budget appear to be untenable, I sincerely hope that the Government will see as an option at an early stage the granting of additional Reserve Bank credits at concessional rates to the Australian Wheat Board for its financing of the first wheat advance to our farming community.
How then do we reconcile the advantages and disadvantages of, foreign investment with the problems of the established Australian farming community and, in particular, the sons of farmers and other experienced aspirants to land ownership? Further in the FIRB report it states:
Moreover, the policy incorporates as guidelines minimum levels of Australian equity and control in new natural resource projects. These guidelines, in the case of ~atural.r~ source projects other than uranium, generally requIre a mInimum 50 per cent Australian equity together with at least. 50 per cent of the voting strength on the board or controllmg body held by Australian interests.
I believe that this statement holds the key. Australians tend to forget the huge natural resource of our farm lands and, more importantly, the human resource that exploits that land so successfully. Further, we have reached the stage where hundreds and thousands of millions of dollars is the accepted level of worthwhile investment. My view is that Australian investors would be better served by protection at the bottom end of the market. The amounts then considered are within the reach of Australians and their capital markets. The percentage return on capital is invariably higher. So why not strictly apply the fifty-fifty rule to all overseas participation in investment in Australian farm land even if it means relaxing the rules for major projects.
Further, why not require the Australian component to be provided by a resident farmer, the owner-driver. Such a situation would overcome the abuse of nominees to hide overseas equity. However, the benefits are greater. As a land agent today might carry a list of Australians who are prepared to refuse property to clear the way for foreign purchase, he might then carry a list of experienced young Australians who are willing to enter such partnerships. Presumably such Australians would be short of capital for their share. To achieve his aim, the overseas investor would have to provide loan moneys repa~able from future profits. Hopefully, the interest rate would be 4t per cent. In return, the investor would have the benefit of an experienced and interested Australian to run the property who, should it be the

investor's desire, may become the eventual source of his capital gain and thus return the property to total Australian ownership. The rural community would then retain the advantage of a family committed to the district as compared with the situation created by absentee owners.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (11.44)-1 address my comments this morning to the Australian Government's attitude towards public administration. Unless the present course of events is quickly reversed, the future prospects for Australian Government administration are bleak. Never before has morale been so low. Never before have so many competent, experienced and loyal public servants decided to leave the Public Service. Never before has the image of the Australian public servant been so bad. Who can blame young people for thinking twice before they commit themselves to a career in the service of the Australian Government? Who can blame ambitious and talented professionals and executives who, on seeing their future promotion opportunities reduced, decide that they should chance their aim somewhere else? Who can blame experienced and renowned public administrators, disillusioned after many years of hard work and personal sacrifice in public office, who call it a day and prefer to sit back ahd relax in the comfort of their homes rather than slog on, unappreciated by their employers? Just where does this Government think it will attract and retain the kind of people that it will need, not now, but tomorrow? They will have fled to other employers, vowing never to return, and never to subject themselves to the irresponsible and irrational treatment to which Australian Government employees are now subjected.
We have all heard the Government's explanation that big government is evil and has to be reduced. We have all heard, of course, of the comments by the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) about bureaucrats who have their snouts in the public trough. We have heard also, time and again in this Parliament, of the need that this Government sees to sell off our public enterprises to whoever wants to buy them and run them at a profit. I think this has allIed to the sorts of slogans that one sees on cars around Canberra such as 'fight inflation, kill a public servant'.
Let us look at what the Government has done in this area. First, let us look at the reduction of Australian Government and services. What

Grievance Debate

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1173

activities and what services? Are there any that help big business? No! Is anything done to reduce inequalities in this society? No! Is anything done to help the under privileged and poor in Australia? No! On the contrary, the services and activities that the Government is reducing are those which help the most unfortunate people in Australia, the deserted, the elderly, the sick, the handicapped, the illiterate, the newcomers and the very young. Why is this so? It is so because they are the weakest, the ~efenceless, the most exploitable who command no economic clout and no political pow~r. Is the Government ending its subsidies and protection for those who no longer need them? Is the Government pursuing, with zeal, tax dodgers and tax evaders? Is the Government returning to the community any bigger share from land speculation, consumer fraud and business and mining profits? Posing as the righteous protector of the Australian public, this Government is actually depriving it of necessary and useful activities and services while continuing much more expensive services which only benefit the already privileged and rich.
The whole thing is a fraud on the public, a confidence trick, a gross deception. Make no mistake about it; this Government has not made a careful objective, scientific study of the whole business of government to see what is no longer needed or what costs too much for the benefits derived or what could be done in a better, cheaper or more effective way. It has scorned such studies or ignored them. It has cast its eyes over activities and services that favour its traditional supporters, namely, big business, big money and big property, and has picked on those that helped people who do not vote at all or who usually vote against it. That is politics. But to dress it up as a public benefit or as something that will end inflation, big government, bureaucracy and high taxes is complete and utter nonsense. The Government is merely using its powers to reward its friends and to punish its enemies.
Another action that we see is the transfer of public enterprises into private hands. Why is this? Are they unprofitable? No! If they were, there would be no buyers. Are they unproductive? No! Are they uneconomic and inefficient? No, they are none of those things. They are highly competent enterprises. But as long as they exist, the community, represented by the Government, has an input into what we want those enterprises to do, how we want them to conduct their business and where their investments are to be made, not solely for the profits of the owners, as is the case in private enterprise. We know why we have public enterprises. We have them to do all those things

that we do not want private enterprise to do or that private enterprise is incapable of doing or does incompetently or does not want to do unless it makes sufficient profit. Yes, the size of government may be reduced, but the costs of those transferred activities and services to the community will be higher because now somebody will be making money out of them when they were not doing so before.
The third action that this Government has taken is to bash the Public Service. It says it is
bashing the Public Service in the name of economy and efficiency. It says it has the right to fire and hire at discretion. It has achieved the right to fire and it is doing away with tenure rights in effect. We all know what this really means. It is politicising the Public Service. Anybody who cannot go along with everything it wants isunder threat-probably intimidation is a betterdescription. This Government has made no secret of its intimidation of public servants. It has taken away their separate arbitration rights. It loses no opportunity to denigrate, degrade, blaspheme and blame public servants for all of the ills in the community, real and imaginary. It refuses to replace people who leave. It cuts everywhere, seemingly at random. What it does is a veritable orgy of senselessness. As a result, I believe this Government has started on a perilous path that can do democracy, the Australian Public Service and the public no good. It has left centres of privilege untouched while cutting down public services for the underprivileged and the unfortunate. It is giving public enterprises to private interests at great public expense in losing community control over the activities.
Surely the Government can do better than use public power to favour private interests over the public interest, widen the gap between the rich and the poor and decimate and demoralise the Australian Public Service. What needs to be done? The answers are fairly obvious. First, we must end government protection and favours for the privileged in our society and retain and expand government activities for the underprivileged. We must seek to reduce, not widen, the gap between rich and poor. Secondly, we must end the virtual giveaway of our public enterprises and keep those we have, and explore the possibilities of establishing new ones to compete with private monopolies and cartels. We must not sell Australia short but seek to retain control over our destiny. Thirdly, we must end this Government's wanton and irresponsible destruction of the public sector and restore public confidence in our public servants, who work diligently to protect and advance the public interests so as to make

1174 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Grievance Debate

Australia a better place for all of us and not just a privileged few.
Mr DEAN (Herbeit) (l1.50)-The Garden Settlement home for the aged in Townsville is situated along Cleveland Bay towards Cape Pallarenda. It caters for 90-odd aged persons. It is a nicely constructed, well planned home in a very pleasant settingjndeed, adjacent as it is to the long beach which is Cleveland Bay.
Nevertheless, the home has certain deficiencies which have been long known. I mention two of the main ones: Firstly, ,the dining area for people confined to the infirma,ry is nothing better than a fairly narrow hallway. Spme of the aged persons in the infirmary can move short distances. It is clear that they need to be able to move to a rather better dining area than simply a hallway. Secondly, it has been recognised that the home has-a need for a few additional .beds for the economic efficiency of its overall operation. As I said, those deficiencies have long been known.
Recently they were the subject of a further submission to the Government for approval for the purpose of subsidy, additional beds being items which attract additional subsidy. Regrettably, the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) has not seen fit to approve for subsidy purposes the projects needed to be carried out by the home.
In essence, the only reason given by the Minister, theadvice given by his Department for refusal, relates to the level of noise from the Townsville Airport, which is not very far away. However, I believe that that reason is an inadequate reason in this case to refuse approval for subsidy purposes. I believe that the advice the Minister has received overstatesthe so-called noise problem. It must be remembered that the home has been there now for 17 years or so, so all the people who have come to and gone out of that place have lived with aircraft noise for the whole of that time.
I have visited the home and have talked to many of the inmates there. All of them have said to me tliat whilst, to be sure, there is noise with the landing and take-off of aircraft that noise does not severely intrude into what is for them a very pleasant existence in a very pleasant place in which to live. On visiting the home and moving around the buildings one can see that it is indeed a very pleasant amenity for the people who live there. Even though there is aircraft noise at landing and take-off times, one of the benefits of the place is that it is very well situated by the sea and aged persons can stroll across to the beach and walk along it. It is a very long-sweeping and pretty beach.' The home is a desirable place to live.

Indeed, the fact that it is a desirable place to live is evidenced by its waiting list.

I have made the point to the Minister before that in this we are not talking about a new home or a great project; we are not talking about doubling the capacity, for example. What we are talking about is simply making good the deficiencies I have described. The Minister's response was simply: Why should we compound a noise problem which might already be there; in other words, why subject an additional 30 people to that sort of problem? In response to that I can only say that if
it were a new operation, by all means decide that that is not an appropriate place for it. But the home is there. There are deficiencies but it is a pleasant place. There seems to be no reason, just by virtue of the noise problem, to refuse to allow the rather modest extension program to go ahead.

The aircraft noise problem is something which I am still working on in my electorate. Fortunately, I have the assistance of the Engineering Department of the James Cook University of North Queensland which is to conduct its own studies of actual noise levels presently in existence by virtue of the fact that Townsville Airport is not very far away. At this preliminary stage, the Department
is confident that the estimates given to the Department of Social Security by the Department of Transport are probably overstated and exaggerated. I am hopeful that, once we can establish that the noise problem has been overstated, the Government will see fit to rethink its attitude towards Garden Settlement a~d will allow it to rank for a subsidy when future grants are available under the relevant program.

I conclude by saying again that the Garden

Settlement home for the aged is, indeed, a well

planned and very pleasant place. It is a desirable

place for aged people to go to and there are aged

people who want to go to it. I have described the

two major areas of deficiency, that is, the infir-

mary need

people having to eat for a few additional

biendl sa

hallway and to allow for

the the

overall economic efficiency of the home. Those

deficiencies are easily-demonstrated. I hope that

in due course we will see the Government allow-

ing the project to go ahead with subsidy.when

grants are available.

Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (11.55)-1 gr-ieve today for a better emblem of this country than our present national flag. In other words, I want a new flag and I want us to make the change in 1988, our Bicentenary year. I believe our present flag is worthy in only one respect.-it symbolises our national inferiority complex. I want the nation to

Grievance Debate

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1175

cgaertdriditsosfytmhabtoil;nfi~Iifimoryitvyiceowm, pdloeixnganthdealosnoetothdinisg-
will help the othe.f. Our present flag is an untidy
anachronism. with the Union Jack in one corner,
it is a stark reminder of our colonial heritage. It is indistinguishable~ abJ:oad-a nothing. It is confused with the N~w Z~aland flag or with that of anyone -of the few forrrier British colonies which have retained the.Union Jack as part of their flag. I think that Fiji and the Solomon Islands are the only other cou'nthes involved. Any Australians who have travelled overseas and who have thQught abot1.t the Australian national symbol-or the lack of it-must realise that our flag is totally unrecognisable by anyone else as belonging to us. The Qantas lapel kangaroo means so mucH more than does our flag. Therefore that kaQgai'op can be viewed and displayed by Aus-
trali4,ns with greater pride.
W~ n;iust not underrate the importance of a symbql/,lf nation1l60d. Heaven knows how much beiter"wQuld be ohr standard of living, how much lo,er Our level of unemployment, if we had more natiomil cohesiveness and more national prideindeed,lllore patriotism. Instead, we are being led into mo~e and more divisiveness and more and more coMrontation. A flag which stimulates more pride.cartbe a great aid to this greater patriotism.
Instead 01 the present anachronism we need a
proud sign.of a unique, multi-racial,independent nation bec~se that is what Australili is. Our flag can be-irideedit should be-a great national symbol whi~h is uniquely Australian and internationallyrecoWlisable. To express these sentiments is not to be aQ.\i-British and it certainly is not antimonarchist; iUis, I assert, to be pro-Australian. I support the lOilg term objective of our country being a republi~,such an objective, in my view, being necessaritoo if we are to nurture greater national pride; ')et my personal British ties are close ones. and '\t!y admiration for the British monarchy is very'real. I believe there is no hurry for any change. \
.Even less are tl\: sentiments I am expressing today anti-Comm,o~wealth or anti the Commonwealth of Nationsi-the Commonwealth will live more strongly if it j~'seen as a special link between equally independeriL~ationswhich share a common heritage. It will \ot live if, mistakenly, it is viewed as a club for /c.;mer colonial nations still tied to mother's aprcin.&\rings; In a divided world any group of natiomr~hich values that special link, which feels a speo.ii;l relationship, should be encouraged to increase t~ intensity of that relationship. This is particula1h so because of the multi-racial nature of the ~oI1lmonwealth, the partners of that Common+l:lth consisting of

black people and wijte people. For Australia to be seen to be more. independent, with its own more distinctive sym~ol in a new flag, yet to be valuing positively its Commonwealth links, is a step in progressive direction. I want Australia to take that step. Britain Changed its flag as its population changed in natule. Canada, as recently as 1965, changed its flag for the same reasons as I am advocating a change fOl: Australia. It is time we took the first positive steps for such a change.
I could have grieved t6day for o~r bi-centenary celebrations. We have impressive committees, both Federal and in all the States. They are, I am sure, toiling hard to find ideas'which will spark the imagination of the nation. :"So far as I can perceive only one significant natio~al event will mark our bicentenary year, 1988, an~ that is the opening of a new and permanent padiament house. Let us contemplate for a moment the imaginative and well received design of that new and permanent parliament house on Capital liill. Is not the focus of that design a flagpole from which should fly proudly a flag which is recognisable not only to Australians but also to all peoples oft,he world? Is it not a worthy aim for 1988, .our bicentenary year, that not only should we open a new parliament building with all that that symbolises for the nation but also we should launch a new meaningful, recognisable national flag as the focus of that building and so much more when it comes to the patriotism of this nation?

To precis what I have said to this point I assert that my case is not against the Union Jack but is instead for a new and distinctive design of flag. Let me summarise this by quoting from an article written by Ron Saw in the Bulletin nearly two years ago. He wrote:

What we need . . . is a flag that is recognisably Australian: one which, like the Canadian flag, will stand out on anything from a flag pole to an export package. . \

The essential thing about any flag is, and always has been, that it be recognisable. Whole ba~talions of infantry-two-thirds of all Australiahs, for all I care-can gallop about bravely, waving their flag and bursting their hearts with love
of England, home and beauty, and a fat lot of good it will do anybody if people can't pick an Australian flag from a New Zealander.

Make no mistake: there are thousands of Australians who

think the New Zealand flag IS Australian. There are tens of

millions in other countries who wouldn't know either from

their Aunt Polly's parlor curtairis.

.

A few years ago, flying th~ blue national flag (instead of the rei:! merc'ant 'marine flag wom so incorrectly by so many fat-
headed Australian yachtsmen), I sailed my boat into ports in Bali, Seychelles, Djibouti, Ethiopia, the Sudan and Egypt. In not one of those ports was the flag recognised.

Nobody had trouble with the flags on American, French, Italian or Cal)adian yachts. But when they looked at mine they usually asked, 'J\ngleesh:?

1176 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Grievance Debate

Two out of three Australians may have loved it, but I found which indicates in millions of dollars the

it irritating in the extreme.

differences in so-called assistance between

After a while I hauled up my 'h9use' or racing flag. This was a small, square thing, a golden kangaroo on a blue field. I'd
been told about kangaroos by. a distinguished Australian yachtsman who had had trouble with the Oz flag not only in
UK ports but at Newport, Rhod: Island, during an America's

1980-81 and 1981-82. The Treasurer, (Mr Howard), in his very brief reference to rural in-
dustry in his Budget Speech said that budgetary
assistance is being maintained at an estimated net

Cup Challenge.

.

cost of $226m, being $221m for the agricultural

'Don't confuse 'em with Union Jacks and stars', he said. and pastoral industries and $5m for forestry and

'Show 'em a kangaroo. That they can recognise. And, I repeat, recognition is what counts.
I
Ron Saw gave his ideas on the flag but I will not go

fishing. An average person and obviously those in the media define-they have every right to do so-budgetary assistance as Government finan-

as far as he did in that article. I favour a gold Auscial payments to various agricultural and pastoral

tralian. coat of arms wkh the kangaroo, the emu industries. Generally that iswhat budgetary

and the symbols of the'States all on a green backassistance should mean as stated by the Treasurer

ground. But like the two great campaigners for a in his Speech. But this is not so.

new Australian flag-and here I pay tribute to the

late John K. Lavett lind Harold C. W. Scruby, The 1981-82 estimates column comprises sev-

both of Sydney-I do not want to impose my per- . eral different types of expenditure. First of all is

sonal choice. I want to get a movement going for a Government contributions to research and, in the

great group of Australians to make that choice.
This brings me back to Canada. Its flag design for scores of years was identified by a British Red Ensign defaced with the country's arms. It is now the eminently recognisable maple leaf. We must follow Canada's lead. The importance of flags in expressing national character and aspirations is reflected in the process by which the Canadian flag was selected. It was quite a long selection process but the result was the present flag with its colours of red and white and the maple leaf. I hope we will do the same in this country because the new Canadian flag has been a great success. Such a change as has happened in Canada I want for Australia. This is not a party political matter. I hope that there can be a meeting of minds of members from' all sides in this Parliament, an agreement that the time is ripe to start the process for change. I hope that 1988, at the opening of our new and permanent parliament house will be the occasion for that change. If we take this path our national character and aspirations will be advanced for the good of our nation and its people.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

case of the wool industry, to promotion which, of

course, iue matched on at least dollar for dollar

basis by the rural industries themselves. Tne medi-

cal profession and general induhries shOl.lld note

that rural industry matches the Government dol-

lar for dollar on researcn arrangement~ with it,

which is more than those industries do.'The sec-

ond type of expenditure is the stabilis.~tion pay-

ments made by government. These are actual

grants and sh.ould be properly recorde4 as assist-

ance. In the present Budget, out of the total figure of $221m or $226m, whichever total'~ preferred,

the actual figure for stabilisation payments is

about $8.2m. So there is a dramatic difference be-

tween the figures. Those payments~re mainly for

the fruit industry because of the cQl1apse in fresh

fruit prices in the European mar~et this season.

The third item of expenditu/e is the net

differences in the revolving funq or levy receipt

payments; that is, the differenceJn grower money

between what is paid in and pa;ct out for grower

levies, revolving funds and so fo!th. In no circumstances should it be stated as be~g assistance by a

government to industry. Alli: is is money that

growers pay in and payout. TC'me it is an abuse of

the English language for .that to be called

assistance.

'

Mr LLOYD (Murray) (12.5)-My grievance

today concerns the manner in which the Budget The next item in the seri($ that makes up the

Papers present industry assistance and develop1981-82 estimate column irinterest payments or ment. I refer to item 8C of Statement No.3, Estirefunds. It appears to be made up of two basic

mates of Outlays, 1981-82. In particular, my comgroups. The first is inttrest paid on grower's

plaint relates to the balance sheet or table on money through the diffcb~nt levy and revolving

agricultural and pastoral industries and the way in fund arrangements, et ~era which is deposited

which the media and rural organisations interpret with the Government.,] do not see that as being

that data. I deal firstly with the presentation. The assistance; I see it a~.Heasonable commercial ar-

two key columns in this balance sheet are the rangement. If one dtp6sits money with an organ-

1981-82 estimate column which has a total figure of $221.3m on a net basis and the change column

isation which gelS, free use of it some interest
should be paid. 11-&' second group is the interest

Grievance Debate

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1177

subsidy paid to the wheat industry. The wheat industry itself wovld dispute that because by government action it has been required to change , its borrowing arrangements for its first advance. Incidentally, The Government utilises these amounts--,-corr~ctly, I believe-in its overall monetary supply situation as they become available later in the year..
The next item in this column is assistance of a non-specific nature. That covers some direct grants, such as the fertiliser bounty, which should be classed as assistance, but also includes other areas such as 'Irrigation and Other Pastoral Water Projects' and administration.
It is interesting to see the different accounting mechan~sms used for government assistance to agricult~re in Budgets over the last 10 years and also to see the dramatic decline in genuine assistance to rural indus,try over that period. I should clarify that point. I am not opposed to a decline in assistance to rural industry if rural industry is in a healthy' state. Obviously it is in a far healthier state now than it was in the early 1970s when we had the wool and wheat and European Economic Community problems. In real terms the amount of assistance going to rural industry now would be well under half what it was in 1972. Let us also make a comparison with the New Zealand Budget. If we compare the amount of time devoteo' by the New Zealand Treasurer in his Budget Speech to agriculture and to real assistance to agriculture we can see that there is a dramatic difference between the two countries in favour of Nevi Zealand.
I come back to the other two items, 'Irrigation and Other Pastoral Water Projects' and 'General Administrative and Other Expenditure'-the latter of which includes expenses of the Department of Primary Industry and the Bureau of Agricultural Economics and the estimate' for which is $27m. In the 1972 Budget that item was not even included under assistance to rural industry, it was in some other part of the Budget. It has been brought in perhaps to make the figures look better. The Labor Government brought in that procedure. It is certainly not applied uniformly across all Federal Government departments. That is once again somewhat unfair on the agricultural sector.
Water programs wr!e also more correctly placed elsewhere in the' 1972 Budget. This year the figure for water programs is $35m. If we check through the Budgets for the last two or the years we find that a little small print has crept in with respect to water programs. In this Budget, footnote (a) states that that $35m will not necessarily

be spent on water projects of an agricultural or pastoral nature, it is the total amount of money provided by the Commonwealth under its National Water Resources Program. Some of that money could be spent on urban water projects. One could ask how much of the money to be spent on decreasing salinity In the Murray River will be for agriculture and how much will be for Adelaide. How much o( the money to be spent on flood mitigation is for urban situations as distinct -from rural situations? I come now to the next column headed 'Change',which is even more misleading. This Budget Pap~r states:
Outlays on direct assistance to agricultural and pastoral industries are estimated to increas~ by $57.6 million . . .
I emphasise 'direct assistance'. One would believe that was surely government money, but that is not the case. The biggest single factor in this column is the difference in the balancing items in each of the industry levy arrangements. In other words, it is once again the grower's own money. It is up or down from year t9 year because of the difference in estimated production levels and because of the differences in pay in and pay put levels depending on relationships within the iqdustry. But it actually has nothing to do with government assistance to the industry and, even more importantly,the comparisons of so many more or less million dollars each year bear no relationship to the degree of government assistance to industry. It is a completely misleading column. I believe the Department of Finance, which I have been advised prepared this document, should go back and do its homework. It should consult with the Department of Primary Industry so that something accurate and appropriate is provided in relation to assistance by government to rural industry.
The second problem concerns the interpretation of these figures by the media and even by rural organisations. I acknowledge that the Budget provides additional documentation in footnotes and little paragraphs following these tabulations. But evidently people do not bother to read them because the media, when they explain what is happening in the Budget, come out with these completely misleading totals. Even .those footnotes are misleading because they do not describe adequately and accurately the relationship of grower levies, revolving funds and so on. The most surprising misinterpretation of those tables is the way rural organisations accept the figures at face value, which is too simplistic an approach. I hope that at some stage in the future the Department of Finance, or whoever is responsible for putting this document together, will do its work more accurately-and properly than it does at present.

1178 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Funding ofGovernment ~chools

Question resolved in the affirmative.
FUNDING OF GOVERNMENT SCHOOLS
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) proposing that a definite matter of publie importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The failure of the Minister for Education to resolve the impasse in the Commonwealth-State arrangements for the funding of government schools.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (12.16)-The Minister for Education (Mr Fife) has put at risk the funding arrangements for schools in Australia. He has conjured an elaborate ruse which will rebound on all children in government schools. For eight years Commonwealth funds have been provided for government schools in Australia. Some of the money has been provided to improve particular groups of schools under distinct programs such as the Disadvantaged Schools Program, but most of it has gone to State governments as general recurrent grants; that is, to be spent by the State governments in a way they decide on the normal running costs of their schools. State governments have over the years used this infusion of Commonwealth funds to improve conditions in schools. Specialist teachers have been engaged, new courses have been developed, remedial activities have been expanded and class sizes in some areas have been reduced. The States have come to rely on Commonwealth funds to maintain these improvements; that is, the recurrent grants from the Schools Commission are used by the States to support the oontinuing costs' of operating schools.
This year there has been a totally new departure from the practice of the last eight years. For the coming year the Commonwealth has provided to the States $270m by. way of recurrent grants, only there is a catch-an elaborate ruse-and only 90 per cent of these funds are available with no strings attached. The other 10 per cent, or $27m; will be paid only if the States agree to spend a like amount on new programs or activities on transition education. If the States agree to increase their own expenditure on transition education by $27m,. the Commonwealth will make over to the States $27m in general recurrent

grants. If they cannot or will not, then this component will not be available for recurrent purposes. But if the States find the $27m for their contribution to new transition activities, it has to come from somewhere and almost certainly will come from funds available for paying the continuing costs of running their own schools. So either way children at government schools will miss out. Whatever happens in the coming year there will be a $27m cutback in the normal activities of schools. That means there will be about 1350 fewer teachers, which means larger classes, fewer specialist services, fewer remedial classes and the abandonment of course options. This is bad educationally and it is bad government. It is against the advice which came from the' Schools Commission:

The Commission has been unwilling to divert part of the

General Recurrent Grants Program to finance other priori-

ties, however important they may be. To do so would be to in-

volve upheaval of on-going programs. Severe personnel de-

ployment problems would arise iF Funds diminished and the

hard-won achievements in quality and in standards would be

generally jeopardised. Community confidence would be

shaken and much of the inbuilt flexibility available to States to

respond to the particular needs of individual schools would be

lost.

.

As well, it represents a new low in the persistent

deterioration of this Government's relations with

the States. For the first time a Commonwealth

government is not simply telling the States how to

spend Commonwealth funds; it is telling them

how to spend their own funds. Section 96 provides

for the Commonwealth to make grants to the

States on such conditions as are determined by the

Commonwealth. That is fair enough, but 'ear-

marking' introduces a new dimension. The Vic-

torian Minister of Education, Mr Hunt, had this

to say about it:

'

,

When a tied grant is offered under Section 96 of the Constitution (whether or not subject to equal or percentage match-
ing by the State) the State has the right to accept or reject it. In this case the State says that it is financially unable to par-
ticipate because of its existing priorities, it loses funds equal to that which the Commonwealth desires it to spend.' This is worse than blackmail: it is plain extortion.

That is what a LiberalMinister for ,Education in Victoria had to say. He said: 'It's worse than blackmail; it's plain extortion'. Even so this tells
only part of the story. Not only is every government school in Australia to lose out because of a cutback in recurrent funds, but also the capital
works program will be similarly affected. Of the
$125m available for capital expenditure, 15 per cent or nearly $19m must be spent on works
associated with the transition program. The States
have quite properly come to rely on the capital grants from the Commonwealth to support their programs for building new schools, new libraries
and other facilities in existing schools. But with'

Funding ofGovernment Schools

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1179

the imposition of this new requirement all these programs will suffer. The effect will be even worse because of the cutback of over $6m in 1982 capital funds for government schools.
The State Ministers for Education are all incensed at the irrational approach of the Commonwealth. The Victorian Minister of Education has been most outspoken. I quote him again. He said:
The Commonwealth's 'offer' to the States on transition education for the year 1902 is unacceptable to every State. It is not an offer at all: it is an attempt to impose a Commonwealth policy on States and to force them to contribute equally with the Commonwealth to the implementation of that policy, without regard to their views or to the lack of financial capacity in the States to take that course without detriment to existing State policies and programs.
In other words, the States must forego their own programs for the sake of implementing a Commonwealth program under pain of financial disability if they fail to do so.
This public criticism has been echoed by the Minister's counterparts in Western Australia and Queensland. It is indeed rare for me to refer favourably to the views of Ministers from three non-Labor States but in this instance they have a strong case. Their complaint is not just that they are opposed to being told by the Commonwealth what to do with the money they raise themselves; they are opposed also to an extension of the transition program in this way.
What is behind the Commonwealth's insistence? The transition program is a descendent of the School to Work Transition Program which the Commonwealth introduced two years ago. It is a pet project of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). For years the Prime Minister has been trying to identify the villains responsible for the huge and growing level of youth unemployment in Australia. First he blamed the Whitlam Government, then the unions, then the States, then the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission and then the unemployed themselves. Then he started on the schools. He said that it was not his fault that the young could not find a job; it was not his fault that 50,000 young people leave school each year with little or no chance of employment: It was all the schools' fault. The schools he said had given up teaching the basics-the three Rs-and only those destined for tertiary education received any benefit from their time at school. The schools were not, he said, preparing young people for the work force. So the Prime Minister decided to clean up the education system. Hence the School to Work Transition Program which was to operate in schools and in the technical and further education sectors. Indeed, it must be said that the TAFE sector was spared the torrent of abuse which the Prime Minister directed at schools. universities and colleges

of advanced education. It was TAFE which was to overcome the deficiencies of the schooois. This might be temporarily flattering for the TAFE sector but there is a clear risk for it. When TAFE fails to solve the problems of youth unemployment~and of course it must fail~then the Prime Minister's fury will once more be unleashed as TAFE is added to the list of culprits. But for the moment TAFE is safe.
The States welcomed the Commonwealth's new involvement in transition activities. All States had their own programs in this area-some more than others-but all recognised, quite rightly, that it was a clear duty of schools to prepare young people for life which included their working life. What the States have come to resent is the way in which the Commonwealth is now quite obsessed with this area to the disadvantage of other school activities. The States have plenty of supporters. The Curriculum Development Centre has said:
The conclusion we draw from the lengthy debates and excited activity under the heading 'school to work transition' . . . is that they are no answer to our dilemas. . . . There is indeed a crucial role for the school in this respect-
That is, in preparing people for. their working life-
but it is more basic and long term and cannot be accommodated by crash programs.
Mrs Darling-That is why it went.
Mr DAWKINS-Indeed, that is why it went. The retribution of the Prime Minister was visited on the CDC because it did not publicly agree with him. The Schools Commission, in its report for the 1982-84 triennium, said on this question:
Again it is often claimed, particularly by employers, that young school leavers lack the personal qualities and basic skills which confer employability and that if only the schools would do their part in correcting these deficiencies the problems of youth unemployment would diminish. The Commission rejects this argument and maintains that while it is true that a number of young schoolleavers do lack confidence, initative and motivation and do need to improve basic skills, there are many adequately prepared young people who want jobs and are unable to get them.
Quite recently Professor Karmel said, as he has said on many occasions, that it is not the job of youth or education policy to provide jobs for young people. That is an obligation of economic policy and that is an obligation which this Government continues to neglect. Professor Karmel has .also pointed out very recently, the need for concentrating more effort in improving the quality of education in the early years of school rather than the later years. He has said that it would be more humane to concentrate that effort in the early years of schooling rather than to divert resources to the later years of education.

1180 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Funding ofGovernment Schools

Just today it has been revealed that the whole How times have changed. Had he and his col-

basis of the Commonwealth's position is a fallacy. league the Minister of Housing uttered their re-

The Prime Minister has been berating schools for cent criticism of this Government even two years

the poor literacy and. poor numeracy 'of school ago they would have been despatched to oblivion

leavers but now we know from a report prepared just as their former colleague Mr Roberts Dun-

by the Australian Council of Educational Restan was. But times have changed. The whole

search, that since 1975 there has been a very sigcommunity recognises what a sham this Govern-

nificant improvement in the performance of ment and its alleged concern for the unemployed

schools and their students in this area. When the really is. That is not to say that there is not a case

question of literacy and numeracy of kids of varito be made out for a school-to work transition

ous age groups was looked at in 1975 and again in program. The point is that that activity should not

1980 it was discovered that there has been a very advance at the expense of other legitimate and

significant improvement in the literacy and very fundamentally necessary activities of schools

mimeracy skills of those children.

around Australia. If the Government is really

The Government has always been short of supporters for its pre-occupation wih tranision activities. Indeed until recently the Minister for Education could point only to the State governments as his supporters in this area. On 14 May he said in this House:
. . . all State governments strongly support the school to work transition program. The State governments were not forced into that program. At the last meeting of the Education

serious about its concern in this area it ought to continue what it has been doing over the last couple of years. It ought to continue to totally underwrite its activities in this area. It should not require the State governments to contribute to its activities, its programs, when they already have activities of their own. We all know that this government, this Minister and his colleague the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr

Ministers, which was held recently in Hobart, Minister after N. A. Brown) do not give a tuppeny damn for

Minister reaffirmed strong support for the school to work transition program and indicated clearly that the program is not only working well but also is highly successfuL
,It was always somewhat incongruous that the States which allegedly were so enthusiastic would never back up their enthusiasm with financial support for the Commonwealth's program. But now even their praise has turned .sour. Again I quote the Victorian Minister of Education. He said:

unemployed kids. All the empty rhetoric about new opportunities for the thousands of kids turned out of CYSS centres on to the streets is now seen by everybody with crystal clarity. The children at school and the kids out oJ work deserve much more than the deception and neglect they are getting from this unbelievable government. I now seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard the document of the Victorian Minister of Education, Mr Hunt, entitled: 'Resolving the

. . . it should be noted that many educationalists and Transition Fiasco'.

community ll'aders have doubts about the program on a . number of grounds. Firstly, some consider that the Common-

Leave granted.

wealth seems to believe it has discovered the concept, whilst the States have in fact been giving effect to it for a great many years.
Secondly, they point out that the Commonwealth's contribution in the field has largely been to date by way of high sounding policies oft repeated, rather than substantial effort. Its financial contribution so far has been marginal by comparison with that of the States.

The documentread as follows-
3 August 1981 Victorian Education Minister
MrA.J. Hunt RESOLVING THE TRANSITION FIASCO
The Commonwealth's 'offer' to the. States on transition education for the year 1982 is unacceptable to every State. It is not an offer at all: it is an attempt to impose a Common-

Thirdly, some people believe that there has been an undue wealth policy on States and to force them to contribute degree of 'scape-goating' in the exercise. Some Federal polieqUlilly with the Commonwealth to the implementation of

ticians have seemed to use it as an answer to unemployment, that policy, without regard to their views or to the lack of

or as an attempt to throw the blame for unemployment on to financial capacity in the States to take that course without

education systems rather than the state of the economy and detriment to existing State policies and programs.

the absence of employment opportunities for the young.

In other words, the States must forego their own programs

Fourthly, it is virtually impossible for the States to comply for the sake of implementing a Commonwealth program

with the financial requirements and the strictures and rigidiunder pdin of financial disability if they fail to do so.

ties which the Commonwealth seeks to impose. To do so would in any event seriously distort State priorities and erode existing programs of established value.

The guidelines give the impression that the Commonwealth is providing $75m in 1982 for transition education. In fact, the Commonwealth is providing only $27m (i.e. $4m more than in

Fifthly, the financing is a three card trick upon the States 1981) to Government schools for this purpose. $2m is being

and misleads the pubJicas to the extent of the Commonwealth provided to non Government schools. The States are being

effort.

required to provide a matching $27m from their own funds

Even Mr Hunt has seen through this Government

and if they fail to do so their general recurrent grants will be docked accordingly. This is called 'ear marking" and is a way

and this Prime Minister. But I might observe: of reminding the States that ~he Commonwealth collects the

Funding ofGovernment Schools

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1181

revenues and can call the shots. In other words, if the States do not participate at all their general recurrent grants will be reduced by $27m anyway!'lfthey find only $13tm their general recurrent grants will be reduced by $13tm.

In addition, the States are being required to find $19m from their building programs-which have already been seriously
depleted as a result of Commonwealth Loan Council
restraints-and to apply this sum towards capital works or equipment which will assist in transition and to do so regardless of the urgency and priority of other building projects. Again, the 'ear marking' approach is used to enforce
compliance.

Thus, the so-called $75m for transition is made up as follows:

$m

Commonwealth Transition Funds

27

Contribution by States to programs enforced by 'ear

marking'

27

Similar re-direction of State Capital funds

19

Commonwealth funds for non-Government schools

2

Total

75

Seen in this light, the offer is hardly as magnanimous as may have first appeared.
The concept of forcing the States in this way is absolute new in Federal/State relations. When a tied grant is offered under Section 96 of the Constitution (whether or not subject to equal or percentage matching by the State) the State has the right to accept or reject it. In this case the State is being given no opportunity even to reject-for if a State says that it is financially unable to participate because of its existing priorities, it loses funds equal to that which the Commonwealth desires it to spend. This is worse than blackmail: it is plain extortion. It is contrary to the concept of the Constitution and of a Federal compact, contrary to the whole course of past financial relationships between the Commonwealth and the States and completely contrary to the objectives of the New Federalism policies upon which the Fraser Government came into office.
It appears to be a new Treasury device now tried for the first time in the education field which, if accepted or accomplished, would quickly spread to other fields. It could clearly be applied across the whole gamut qf State responsibilities to impose the views and policies of the Commonwealth Government of the day upon the States and to enforce the implementation of its policies by the States, regardless of the results of their own Elections and of the policies and priorities of their Governments.
The course being taken is all the more astonishing in view of the results of a meeting of the Australian Education Council (comprising Education Ministers of the Commonwealth and all States) held in Melbourne last year. At that meeting all States advised the Commonwealth that they welcomed the injection of additional Federal funds into the education system to be used specifically for improving programs to prepare young people for the workplace and life after leaving school. The States all informed the Commonwealth that they already undertook considerable work and expended substantial funds in this area and could not afford further contributions from their own resources. Thus, only the funds provided by the Commonwealth could enable extra effort in this field and those funds could not be wholly or partly matched by the States. All Ministers pointed out that in the financial situation which the States were facing, their education budgets were constrained and that the requests to provide additional funds from State sources could only be met by dropping other valuable programs or distorting existing priorities which they were not prepared to do. The Commonwealth accepted that situation.

The stance now adopted by the Commonwealth reneges completely on last year's accord.
Furthermore the scheme as now proposed by the Commonwealth is hedged in with conditions that make it an administrative nightmare or perhaps impossibility, Half must be spent in TAFE and half in schools-a completely, arbitrary division which will create serious inflexibilities, It does not recognise the different ways in which the Education Departments of the different States have evolved to meet their respective and differing needs. It does not recognise the system of secondary technical education which is unique to Victoria and which undertakes a very great deal of the work entrusted to TAFE in other States.
Then again, one-third of the $27m envisaged by way of expenditure in the State school sector must be by way of cash grants to individual schools at the rate of $10 per pupil. This creates serious inflexibility and disregards both the concept of need and the nature and value of the programme in the individual school: To dale, transition programmes have been developed for the purposes for which the funds were originally envisaged, viz., to assist those young people who are most likely to be at risk. This has meant that programmes have largely been developed in the areas of greatest deprivation and greatest youth unemployment. They have been specifically designed to assist ,young people in those areas to seek a place in the workforce and to remedy some of the disadvantage which they suffer as compared with young people in more affluent areas, whom the records show have greater prospects of employment. Furthermore, local and regional committees have co-operated to ensure that of the many submissions made, the programmes adopted and implemented have been those of greatest value to those most in need, No programme has been adopted simply to spend funds; but this will inevitably occur, at least in some cases, in the event of automatic payments to schools.
The inflexibility in State educational building programmes which is already of great concern in all States, will now become horrific. Commonwealth control of State borrowings for capital works through the Loan Council has meant progressively less to the States in real terms throughout the last five years. The States' capacities to undertake capital works programmes over that period have been virtually halved. In the education field this has been compounded by a reduction in real terms in the capital funds available to State education from the Commonwealth. The result has been that State efforts in the capital field have of necessity been increasingly directed to the provision of new pupil places in areas where these are most urgently needed. The progress of major maintenance and the upgrading of old and sometimes sub-standard schools, has already been seriously retarded. The provision of desirable facilities such as libraries, home economics rooms, assembly halls, gymnasiums and activity centres, has been set back. All States have found that commitments made in good faith on the basis of past funding, cannot-on the basis of capital funding which now applies-be provided for a considerable time or even in the foreseeable future. The redirection of $19m in capital to transition projects will further distort these programmes and further postpone' essential works, even where there have been firm commitments. Community expectations may as a result be shattered without any guarantee of corresponding advantage to the same or any other community, or to its youth! And the States rather than the Commonwealth will get the blame! No reason whatever has even been advanced by the Commonwealth for this strange and unnecessary requirement.
Furthermore, the Commonwealth clearly still fails to recognise the extent of the very substantial State contributions to transition education in the sense of education for working life. In Victoria, the whole of the apprenticeship programme and the greater par't of the work of secondary technical schools are directed to this end, as are substantial programmes in high

1182 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Funding ofGovernment Schools

schools and the majority of T AFE programmes. Victoria now has careers teachers and career education programmes throughout its high and technical schools and conducts a highly successful Work Ex.perience programme as well as Link Courses and Shared Resources programmes. In addition the Victorian Institute of Secondary Education is devoted entirely to facilitating the movement of students from school to work or for further study.
The cost of the unique Victorian technical school systemwhich is almost entirely devoted -to transition education-is $270m, whilst the cost of the other activities mentioned takes the direct and indirect ex.penditure of Victoria on transition to roughly $300m. This surely makes the $7.4m now offered by the Commonwealth to Victoria look miniscule by comparison and the strictures accompanying it somewhat petty and ridiculous.
In 1981 Victoria is due to receive $6.7m from the Commonwealth for transition, unmatched by the State ex.cept of course as to the substantial effort mentioned above. In 1982, under the Commonwealth's proposals, Victoria should receive $7.4m in Commonwealth funds for the same purpose-an increase of $700,000. In return the State must provide $6m from its depleted capital works programme for transition works or equipment and $7.4m contribution towards transition programmes, in addition to meeting the increased costs arising from inflation in respect of the substantial ex.isting effort already described. We simply cannot afford to do this.
The Victorian Government fully recognises the vital importance of education for the workplace and for life after leaving school. As it has already demonstrated, it is willing to assist in the Commonwealth's policy of further upgrading effort in this field through the most effective expenditure of additional Commonwealth funds available. Victoria simply seeks the capacity to do so, without shackles that make the task impossible.
Despite this stand, it should be noted that many educationists and community leaders have doubts about the programme on a number of grounds. Firstly, some consider that the Commonwealth seems to believe it has discovered the concept, whilst the States have in fact been giving effect to it for a great many years! Secondly, they point oat that the Commonwealth's contribution in the field has largely been to date by way of high sounding policies oft repeated, rather than substantial effort. Its financial contribution so far has been marginal by comparison with that of the States. Thirdly, some people believe that there has been an undue degree of 'scapegoating' in the exercise. Some Federal politicians have seemed to use it as an answer to unemployment, or as an attempt to throw the blame for unemployment onto education systems rather than the state of the economy and the absence of employment opportunities for the young.
In addition to these three criticisms, three new ones have now emerged on the new basis of funding proposed by the Commonwealth: fourthly it is virtually impossible for the States to comply with the financial requirements and the strictures and rigidities which the Commonwealth seeks to impose. To do so would in any event seriously distort State priorities and erode ex.isting programmes of established value. Fifthly, the financing is a three card trick upon the States and misleads the public as to the extent of the Commonwealth effort. As seen, Victoria must find an additional $13.4m to get $7.4m-or more correctly, to get a mere $700,000 more from the Commonwealth than it received in 1981. Sixthly, the Constitutional implications of the approach which has been adopted by the Commonwealth are horrendous. It could lead to 'New Centralism' in place of New Federalism.
The unriecessary and unreasonable inflex.ibilities inherent in the proposal must be removed, and the requirement for further payment by. the States, regardless of their ex.isting effort, must be abandoned as agreed last year. When that

occurs, the programme will operate in its true perspective as an effort by the Commonwealth to contribute in a modest way to the achievement of further results in this field. Until that does occur, no State can afford to accept the, -offer'.
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education) (12.31)-1 am surprised that the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) has chosen this week to raise in this House an issue of public importance dealing with education, particularly school education, because New South Wales is in the midst of a State election campaign and the New South Wales Government, with a very dismal record in the education area, particularly school education, is seeking to be returned to office. The honourable member concentrated his attack on the school to work transition program. In the early part of his remarks-indeed, on and off through his speech-he was critical of this program. However, about two minutes before he sat down, he destroyed his own argument by saying that there was a case to be made.for a school to work transition program. He then went on to say that such a program should be totally financed by the Commonwealth Government.
The Commonwealth, since it assumed a larger funding responsibility in the last decade, has been primarily concernep to ensure that national needs in education are met. During the 1970s the need was to improveresource standards of government schools in accordance with the Karmel targets which were set in 1973. As a result of the Commonwealth's supplementary funding, government school resources have improved to a point where standards have never been higher. In fact, the Karmel resource standard targets have been reached and exceeded well ahead of timetable.
Dr Theophanous-You don't know what you are talking about.
Mr FIFE-The honourable member does not know what he is talking about if he challenges the comment that I have just made. I will repeat it so that it sinks in. The Karmel resource standard targets have been reached and exeeded well ahead of the timetable originally set. In recent years a new national need in education has developed. I refer to the need to find alternative approaches for those young people who leave school ill-prepared for work and with inadequate education standards. In an effort to tackle this identifiable need, Commonwealth and State Ministers for Education-I repeat, Commonwealth and State Ministers for Education-meeting as the Australian Educational Council in Perth in 1979, agreed that a comprehensive transition program should be implemented co-operatively between the Commonwealth and the States. I place emphasis on the word 'co-operatively'. The attack by

Funding ofGovernment Schools

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1183

the honourable member for Fremantle this afternoon was based on financing, not the scheme itself.
The Commonwealth subsequently offered the States $150m over a five-year period for transition education and training in the expectation that the States would contribute from the second year of the program. This year, 1981, is the second year of the program. That contribution was expected to be a total from all States of $9m in 1981 and a matching grant from 1982 for the remainder of the program. In pursuing its support of the transition program the Commonwealth has been mindful of the conclusions of the Commonwealth Schools Commission in its recent report entitled 'Schooling for 15 and 16 Years Olds'. The Commission stated:
In their general orientation, most schools lag in their adjustment to the needs of the full range of students.
The honourable member for Fremantle quoted selectively from the most recent Schools Commission report. He quoted that passage which referred to earmarking. He conveniently did not quote paragraph 5.79. For the information of honourable members. I shall read that paragraph. It states:
The Commission has welcomed the Commonwealth's initiatives, that together with existing training and support programs, now provide elements from which a comprehensive youth policy can be fashioned. The key element of the Government's transition policy is the Transition from School to Work program mentioned above, which aims to provide 15 to 19 year-olds with options in education, training and employment or any combination of these, either part-time or full-time, so that unemployment becomes the least acceptable alternative. A total of $150m is to be provided over five years, and government and non-government schools and technical and further education institutions are to participate in it.
I hope that the next time the honourable member for Fremantle speaks in this House on an education matter, and quotes from the report of the Schools Commission on a particular subject, he will provide a balance for the benefit of this House by quoting to the House the other relevant passages from the report. I also take the opportunity of reminding the honourable member and the House that in paragraph 11.12 of the same report the Schools Commission commends the Government for earmarking funds for cash grants for government schools in Australia.
Let me turn to the question of earmarking generally. State governments acknowledge the widespread success of the transition program to date. I repeat that every State government in Australia has acknowledged the success of the program, to the point where some of them argue as to whether they started the program first or whether .the Commonwealth started it first. I am not prepared to waste time entering into that argument. I wish

merely to highlight the fact that every State government in this country maintains that the school to work transition program is an important and successful program and that it ought to be supported, but they look to the Commonwealth Government to provide the finance that is required. We have said that we are prepared to find $150m but we require the States to find $IOOm over the same five-year period. It is on that question that the States and the Commonwealth are differing at present. I have made it clear to State Ministers that if the States, from their own efforts, provide additional funds in this area we will reduce the earmarking accordingly. The honourable member for Fremantle has conveniently overlooked the fact-or he does not know, which should be more of an embarrassment to him than having conveniently overlooked itthat there is a base year and that we have said to the States: 'We will recognise your effort in 1979-80 as being the effort that you were putting into transition when the Commonwealth program was put into place. Any additional effort above your effort in 1979-80 we will recognise as additional effort and we will reduce your earmarking accordingly'. I expect that some of the States will be able to claim a reduction in earmarking. I hope that some will be able to claim a significant reduction, but that will depend on whether they have afforded this program a sufficiently high priority.
The honourable member for Fremantle went on to claim that other areas of education effort in the States will be reduced as a result of the Commonwealth's earmarking. That depends, of course, on the priority that State governments afford education. Maybe the honourable member seeks to speak for Mr Landa in New South Wales by saying that there will be a reduction in effort in some other areas of education expenditure in New South Wales. I do not know; the honourable member does not interject. Mr Lacy, Mr Hunt's assistant as Minister of Education in Victoria, was reported in the Age of 10 September as saying that there will be an increase of 700 teachers in the Victorian education system next year. He made that statement knowing full well that it is the Commonwealth's intention to earmark certain recurrent funds for transition purposes.
Let us look at the degree to which we are earmarking. To give an idea of the amount of money which will be earmarked let me draw to theattention of the House the fact that it represents less than 2 per cent of the total Commonwealth and State recurrent funds for government schools. The capital funds proposed to be earmarked represent less than 5 per cent of the general capital

1184 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Funding ofGovernment Schools

funds available to government schools from both Commonwealth and State sources. Let me just summarise. The States and the Commonwealth agree that this is an important and effective program. The Commonwealth is prepared to put aside from its funds $150m over five years. We require the States to provide matching grants to the tune of $1 OOm. If the States are not prepared to provide that amount of money from their own resources we seek to earmark some of the recurrent funds that hitherto we have provided to the States in an unmarked way.
Let me come back to the matter of capital because the honourable member for Fremantle had something to say about it. I do not know yet whether he purports to speak on behalf of Mr Landa in New South Wales. If he does, let me remind him of the fact that over the past five years of the capital funds that this Qovernment has made available to New South Wales for school building purposes no less than $30m, in December 1980 prices, has been transferred from the capital program in New South Wales to other areas of education expenditure. In other words, Mr Landa and his Government in New South Wales do not perceive the need for an urgent upgrading of many existing schools and the provision of new schools in New South Wales. Not only has Mr Landa and his Government transferred $30m of Commonwealth funds from the school building program but also that Government has reduced its effort in this area by a further $30ln. Students in New South Wales schools have been denied access to $60m that otherwise would have been provided to upgrade school facilities in that State. So let us not hear any more humbug in this place about the Commonwealth's education funding.
All the way through the honourable member's speech he talked about cutbacks. In fact, I think he referred to them almost from the outset. The only cutbacks that have occurred have been in New South Wales, where in the recent Budget that was introduced and not passed by the Parliament-the Government is going to an election instead-the Government reduced expenditure on education in real terms. What have we done at the Commonwealth level? This year we have a 1.6 per cent increase in real terms in education spending as measured against last year.
Mr Dawkins-Terrific!
Mr FIFE-The honourable member opposite says: 'Terrific'. Of course, it is terrific because this year, when student numbers are declining or are being maintained in constant figures, we are increasing our expenditure in real terms. Expenditure is up by 1.6 per cent. Next year it will be up

again by 1.5 per cent. The honourable member's colleagues in New South Wales, the members of the New South Wales Labor Government, have reduced their expenditure on education in real terms. They point the finger at this Government for the deficiences in their system. The deficiencies in the New South Wales system lie squarely at the feet of the New South Wales Government. It has received some funds from this Government and some funds from its own resources to overcome those deficiencies but it has failed to do so. I have pointed out that the New South Wales Government has abused the system that we have had in place to help the State governments. We have allowed them to transfer recurrent funds to capital purposes or capital funds to recurrent pur- . poses to meet emergency situations. They have abused that system and we are going to stop that abuse.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Order! The Minister's time has expired. The time for the debate has likewise expired.
DEFENCE FORCE RETIREMENT AND DEATH BENEFITS AMENDMENT BILL
1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 27 August, on motion by MrKillen:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (12.47)-The Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Amendment Bill 1981 arises out of a decision of the Federal Court of Australia in respect of the interpretations of the Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Act which was advantageous to certain members of the defence forces. The Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) indicated in his statement of 14 May and reiterated in his second reading speech that some 550 defence personnel were affected by the change which the Government announced on 14 May and which will be applicable from that date. Under the change members of the defence forces who retire while temporarily acting in grades higher than their substantive rank are entitled to receive retirement benefits applicable to the higher rank.
This is in line substantially with what occurs in most other Government superannuation schemes, certainly that which involves Qantas Airways Ltd and, with some restrictions, that involving Commonwealth public servants. The schemes, however, are not necessarily comparable because of a large number of complications which occur within the defence forces management structure.

Defence Force Retirement Bill

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1185

Public servants retire at much the same age, irrespective of their level. In the defence forces the payment of higher aUowances poses a very serious problem because of the different retirement ages for different ranks. For example, a substantive major due for retirement may be acting in the rank of colonel. Making contributions to the retirement scheme at the rate applicable to the substantive rank of colonel would entitle him to a substantiaUy higher pension than he would have been entitled to as a major. I think, in fairness to the honourable member, I should say that if his temporary rank-not his substantive rank-is colonel, he still, unless the term is extended, is retirable as a major. I may have skipped a grade in the middle. It is a matter of concern that there are occasions on which persons can serve for very long periods in temporary rank. I have a letter from one Royal Australian Air Force gentleman who served temporarily as a group-captain for three years and who retired while still temporarily in that rank. He is pensionable at his substantive rank ofwing-commander. That seems to me to be an unfair proposition.
Certainly, the Opposition believes there should be some entitlement for a person serving temporarily in a higher rank to elect to make contributions at the higher grade. We make the distinction because people in the defence forces, unlike those in other areas,coUect contributions on the basis of substantive rank. It is the 'practice with the Army and other services for periods of temporary service in a rank to precede the time at which an appointment to a substantive rank takes place as a matter of course. During those periods servicemen in fact benefit by not paying the substantive rank contributions. If they were required to do so they would be disadvantaged as ultimately they would achieve a pension according to the rate at which they were subscribing. I am not sure that equity does not suggest that they should subscribe, but at this stage under the scheme they would be disadvantaged.
There is another major difference in respect of the Defence Forces Retirement and Death Benefits scheme and the Public Service scheme. Whereas there is no disadvantage to public servants to pay a higher rate, whether or not they ultimately achieve the rate of pension applicable to that higher rank, it is a disadvantage to a serviceman if he does not retire at the higher substantive rank. I explain that by saying th~t a servicem'an's contributions remain in the Consolidated Revenue Fund. The contributions of a public servant in fact are refunded on retirement so that if at any stage of a public servant's career the rate at which he is paying contributions

is in excess of that at which he would coUect entitlements on retirement, he does not in fact suffer a permanent loss; the contributions are refunded. In the case of a serviceman, if he acts in a higher rank for a period and subsequently is reduced to his substantive rank, the contributions he paid at the higher rate would be lost and no benefit would be gained from them under the existing Act. Unless changes were made to the Act in order that he may receive some commutation amount for theperiods he served in the higher rank, he would gain little benefit. Even by adopting that course there would be a substantial loss to the majority of servicemen who serve temporarily in higher ranks for short periods but who by a substantive promotion ultimately qualify for the pension applicable to the higher rank.
Two problems obviously exist. Firstly, persons who serve in a higher rank on a temporary basis, I believe, should have a right to elect, I suggest for a period which was deemed to be reasonable-I do not suggest any period-to move to that higher rank. There obviously would be problems in designation of retirement times, et cetera. The Opposition intends to move an amendment relating to this matter. In effect the amendment asks the Government to bring forward changes in the legislation which would provide for that elective right of a person who is serving temporarily in a higher capacity. We believe it is reasonable for a person who serves for any significant period, especiaUy a person who retires in higher rank-in most cases he would know that his retirement was imminent and therefore would be likely to be contributing at that higher rate-to elect to pay contributions and to receive payments on the basis of the higher rank. I think it is consistent with other Commonwealth controlled superannuation schemes that a person whose salary is beyond that applicable to his classification has such an entitlement. I acknowledge the difference which exists in the Service scheme. It is extraordinarily complicated, and probably some of those complications can reasonably be dealt with only by a fairly thorough and ongoing inquiry-I do not suggest it should be a parliamentary inquiry-which could look at those anomalies. They should be dealt with by a future government in order to bring servicemen into line with what has become current practice since these amendments were made to the Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Act.
Mr Killen-Would the honourable gentleman 'excuse me for interrupting? Do you have any specific period in mind?
Mr SCHOLES-I would think something approximating the time applicable to the Public Service, or a little less. Certainly, there would have to

1186 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Defence Force R.etirement Bill

be a reasonable period-not less than six months, further amendment a system which would pro-

anyhow. But there is one other matter which I vide an entitlement for persons holding tempor-

should raise: A lot of correspondence has arisen ary higher rank-it would confer on them a con-

relating to the effect on those 550 people whom siderable advantage over what is provided for in

the Minister designated were affected by the the existing Act, if I may say so-to elect to pay at

changes. I understand that they have the righta higher rate. It should be an elective situation be-

the Act specifies that that right will continue until cause penalties could be involved. If they elect to

September next year-to commute their pensions pay and ultimately they are promoted to that

at the higher rate to which the court ruling engrade they probably will have paid for nothing be-

titled them. But from 14 May this year they will cause they will get superannuation benefits at that

cease to have the right to the higher rate to which higher rate anyhow. We understand that, and

the court decision entitled them. I am not sure of therefore we provide for an election to be made

the equity of that, but the situation as I see it is rather than a compulsory payment at a rate of

that to oppose the Bill would be to create greater grade. The system is not directly comparable with

difficulties and financial obligations for a greater any of the other Government schemes but I think

proportion of servicemen than the passage of the it is unduly restrictive in respect of servicemen.

Bill will effect. It may be that those persons are being badly done by. I think it is true that persons, who have retired, will retire or have served for any significant period at a higher rate within the Services are disadvantaged by the fact that they do not have the right to elect to pay the higher contributions and thus qualify for higher benefits.

I may make one other comment. There is one other problem in the BilL The problem concerns the adjustments of pensions under the BilL At the time of drafting, a 12-monthly adjustment assessment with a delay period of something like three months, which occurs now, was probably reasonable. In effect, what this now means is that with

If there were a refund provision I would suggest that they automatically should pay the higher contributions and that the same criteria as applies in the Public Service should exist; that is, a 12 months period of service at any time during their service at a higher rate qualifies them for a higher rate of superannuation. The defence forces create a problem in that area because of the differing re-

rapidly changing cost structures in the community, service pensions are always being paid at rates which are at least a year out of date. The provision of a formula whereby adjustments could be made at more regular intervals, or made to have application at a more relevant time to the cost increases, which are part of that adjustment, would be a valuable addition.

tirement ages and a number of other aspects. It also has a problem of servicemen consistently and regularly being required temporarily to serve in a

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Is the amendment seconded?

higher rank, which certainly is not dealt with in Mr Beazley-I second the amendment and re-

the Act in its present form. As an amendment to serve my right to speak.

the second reading of the Bill, I move:

Sitting suspended from 1.2 to 2 p.m.

That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'this House calls for the deferment of consideration of the Bill until the Government has prepared and presented additional amendments to provide for the establishment of the right of Service personnel who serve temporarily in a higher capacity than their substantive rank, to elect to contribute at the rate applicable to the temporary higher grade and to qllalify for benefits as if the temporary higher rank were the substantive rank',
That amendment sets out a statement of policy, I think, as opposed to a definitive statement. It asks that the Bill be deferred. That would not alter the proposals set out in the 14 May statement of the Minister. It asks that amendments be included in the Bill. I think this Bill is incapable of being amended under the procedures of this House. Certainly the drafting problems would make that an unreasonable proposition. We in fact are asking the Government to introduce into the Bill by

Mr WHITE (McPherson) (2.0)-1 think the only contentious part of the Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Amendment Bill is the point that was raised by the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) before the suspension of the sitting for lunch. He moved an amendment which I do not believe should b'e accepted. It may have some merit if it were properly researched. The problem with the amendment is that it tends to confuse a personnel management problem with the philosophy of a retirement scheme. As many honourable members who have been in the services know, temporary rank is designed to give the bearer some,authority while he is doing a job. He gets paid in that rank. There does not seem to be a case for his retirement benefits to be dependent on any temporary rank that he may hold and that he may we1110se before his retirement.

Defence Force Retirement Bill

10 Septeinber 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1187

The honourable member for Corio cited a case of, I think, a member of the Royal Australian Air Force who held temporary rank for three years. That is a classic example of confusing personnel management with the philosophy of a retirement benefits fund, The two should be kept quite separate. It is unfortunate that that gentleman served three years in the temporary rank. But I suggest that it is not a case for this Parliament to consider; the service should look at why he did so. I make the point also that the honourable member for Corio kept referring to the compatibility between the defence retirement scheme and the Public Service retirement scheme. I suggest to him-I think he 'made the point at the end of his speech-that really there is no ground for comparing the two. It is my view that the amendment should not proceed. The Minister for Defence (Mr Killen), of course, will speak for himself.
There is nothing of great contention in this Bill. It is a sensible approach to a problem which needs clearing up. The anomaly of acting or temporary rank conferring certain advantages on certain people will be removed. The Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Provisions are designed to treat everyone fairly. At present, through no fault of their own, some members are acquiring an advantage. For example, if two people served 20 or 30 years together and one, at the end of this long period of service, acquires temporary or acting rank for a period of months, he will retire with a certain advantage. I do not believe that is the way the scheme is designed to operate.
Over 500 people will be affected by this legislation, but it applies only to those who retire holding acting or temporary rank. None of them has paid the higher contributions to date. All will be given the right to pay such contributions if they so wish and to receive the benefit in terms of higher pensions and/or a higher sum on commutation. That has been the effect of the decision of the Federal Court of Australia in May this year. So this Bill restores the original intention of the scheme. With that in mind, and because I think it also puts everyone on an equal basis and no one will have an advantage, I commend the Bill to the House. I certainly support it.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (2.5)-Earlier in the day I seconded the amendment moved by the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) and reserved my right to speak. I think the honourable member for McPherson (Mr White) was quite right when he said that the amendent that has been put forward is not a matter about which there is a great degree of contention between the Government and the Opposition. However, I

think it is sufficiently important for the matter not to be dealt with in the way he suggests, by essentially administrative arrangements, but should be dealt with but by way of legislation. Other retirement benefit schemes operate for defence personnel in countries comparable with Australia. Under some of those schemes the holders of temporary rank upon retirement accrue a right to take a pension at the level of the substantive rank equivalent to their temporary rank. I will speak about the British Act a little later. It does contain this provision.
I want to look more broadly at the issues raised in discussing the amendments to the Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Act. I want to mention a number of other relevant matters which are not necessarily raised directly in the Opposition's amendment but which do concern the operations of the retirement benefit and the purpose which it serves. We do not get many opportunities in this House to debate questions related to Defence Force pay and conditions. We do not get too many opportunities to debate defence matters period. When we do we direct our attention generally to matters of grand strategy or procurement policy questions under which we can discuss defence doctrine. The public at large, the Press Gallery and the Parliament, I think, tend to find those matters considerably more interesting than the rather prosaic questions that are raised by the pay and conditions of servicemen.
Nevertheless, it is the pay and conditions of servicemen, of which this retirement benefit is one aspect which, to a substantial degree, determine the effectiveness of our defence forces. They determine our ability to attract and to retain persons of a high calibre. Without the capacity to do so an effective defence effort will break down. The need for well qualified people who are prepared to remain in the defence forces for a very lengthy period is increasing rather than diminishing. This is a result of the increasingly sophisticated technology of modern warfare as the previous speaker and the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) will be well aware. We need people prepared to make a lifetime commitment to the profession of arms. Whether or not they are prepared to make a lifetime commitment to the profession of arms will be dependent, to a considerable degree, on the sorts of benefits which they can anticipate at the end of that period. When one thinks of it, the longest lead time on the development and introduction of any weapon in the defence forces is probably not for some of the more highly sophisticated equipment that we can see today, but for the people who are supposed to man that equipment. It takes 17 years to produce the person to go into training.

1188 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Defence Force Retirement Bill

It probably takes another 17 years for that person to reach a peak of effectiveness. I do not think the various boards and committees which examine our weapons systems would be happy with a 34-year lead time for other aspects of such systems. But in the case of defence personnel, that is the time period that we are looking at. The right treatment of defence personnel is extremely important.
This legislation needs to be viewed from two perspectives. One is the right treatment of fellow members of our work force; the other is that the scheme is an aid to achieving the right personnel for our defence forces. I will use the second aspect to deal with some matters that are not strictly within the terms of the Opposition's amendment but I think are relevant here. There are some problems in the Bill that we are seeking to remedy with our amendment. There are other problems which have not been dealt with but which I believe require attention as well. These are largely of an administrative nature. In the first instance, the Bill permits the continuation of an injustice which occurs frequently at the point of retirement but which technically can occur also at other stages of a serviceman's career. It is possible for a person to act in a rank for a substantial period, not be granted a substantive promotion and be forced to retire on a pension scale which is at the level of his substantive rank, the rank lower than the position in which he is acting. That encourages a situation in senior positions in which a serviceman who could aspire to a promotion is accorded no more than acting status. Most personnel in this position know that their temporary promotion will be their last promotion. We suggest that at that point of their career they should have an option to pay their contributions at the level of the relevant substantive position and effectively to retire at that level. We are not attempting to introduce an element of compulsion in this, but simply to provide the person in such a situation with an option to pay into the scheme and become a beneficiary of it at the level of his temporary rank at the time of retirement.
Such a situation does not exist in the rest of the Public Service, at least not in respect of people acting in a position for beyond a period of 12 months. At that point a temporary position is treated as a substantive position for the purposes of determining a public servant's retirement conditions. We do not want to see servicemen achieve any more or less than that achieved by personnel in other sectors of the Public Service.
In many ways the British scheme is less generous than ours, but not on this point. An officer on retirement is granted one-third of the

difference between the pension payable on his temporary rank and that payable on the substantive rank for each year lip to a total of three years that a person serves in a temporary position; that is, if an officer serves for three years in a temporary rank he receives the full pension entitlement for that rank. In the case of other ranks, the Army pensions warrant states that rank for the purposes of assessing pensions shall be the highest pa,id rank held for a period of two years or more during the five years of colour service preceding the termination of full paid service.
Other problems associated with the DFRDB scheme are not dealt with in this Bill. By and large, the scheme accords with the recommendations which the Jess Committee, the Joint Select Committee on Defence Forces Retirement Benefits Legislation, brought down in 1972. I went through those recommendations before writing out a few notes in preparation for this speech. On looking through the recommendations I came to the conclusion that some of the assumptions that the Committee made on the retirement of members of the defence forces may in fact have been wrong and that if the scales of the defence benefits are related to those assumptions provisions of the Act require further amendment to that put forward by the Minister in thi~. Bill. I draw honourable members' attention to a statement which appears at page 8 of the Jess report, which reads:
This means that the Committee assumes that officers will continue to retire at fixed ages between age 45 to age 60 with the majority retiring between ages 50 and 55.
I think that the assumption that the majority retire between 50 and 55 is wrong. That assumption might easily have led to a miscalculation of the percentage of pay which would be a fair and reasonable pension at different points of retirement. Most officers would retire before 50. A great number of officers leaving at the rank of major or its equivalent would be between 42 and 46. At that point a person who entered the Services at a fairly youthful age, serving therefore between 20 and 28 years, would retire on a pension of between 35 and 47.5 per cent of his annual pay on retirement. The pension payable after 20 years of s!;rvice is 35 per cent of the salary on retirement. That compares most unfavourably with the situation in the United States of America. The scheme there seems to assume a likely service period of 20 years and at the end of that service people retire on 50 per cent of their pay on retirement. Our service personnel do not achieve that level of pension until they have served for 30 years. At that point, in the United States service scheme a retiree receives 75 per cent of his salary,

Defence Force Retirement Bill

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1189

which is almost our maximum percentage applicable after 40 years of service. I hope that the Minister will give his attention to that matter.
The problem is exacerbated when the recipient of the pension is a late entrant to the armed forces, such someone who is commissioned or enters the service at about the age of 30 years and seeks to retire after 20 years of service at the age of 50 years, a point at which I am sure all honourable members,would agree he would have a considerable degree of trouble in obtaining a satisfactory alternative source of employment. Such a person will receive only 35 per cent of his pay on retirement. Those scales are in need of examination and perhaps some of the assumptions made by the Jess Committee, which reported in 1972, ought to be re-examined by the Department and the Minister.
I take this opportunity to raise another matter which has come to my attention. It relates to the administration of the Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Act as it affects persons retiring from the Services. I use the opportunity afforded by this general discussion on the Bill before us to raise this matter. A problem was drawn to my attention by one of my constituents, a Mr D. C. Hanmore, a recent retiree from the Royal Australian Air Force. He visited me recently and pointed out that retiring personnel suffered considerable inconvenience caused by delays in the payment of moneys due. Of course, not all the points relate to DFROB benefits, but to illustrate the point I mention them all. Mr Hanmore when he retired found that he could not apply to have his payment commuted to a lump sum until the day he actually retired. The delay between application and payment was about 6 weeks, despite the fact that the Services were well aware of his retirement at least three months in advance. I suspect that would be the case in respect of most retirees'. To permit earlier notice would cost the Department nothing but would be of considerable benefit to servicemen seeking to take a lump sum payment. Mr Hanmore when he received his cheques in lieu of long service and annual leave found that a substantial percentage had been deducted for clerical error. The withheld payment took another three to four weeks in coming through. Again, given sufficient notice, there ought to be no need to make a deduction for the possibility of clerical error as, with a decent amount of time to investigate the individual serviceman's circumstances, clerical error should not emerge.
Mr Hanmore pointed out to me that before any serviceman intending to leave the service-this was his experience-seeks other employment he

might well want to take a holiday for a couple of weeks or months, virtually a long service leave type of holiday.. But if such a person is required to wait for at least six weeks to receive his commuted retirement benefit and if he is depending upon that to go on a holiday or whatever, that will delay by six weeks his seeking further employment. In the case of Mr Hanmore, the delay left him in a position in which he was not really able to seek work until about 10 weeks after he retired. These are not particularly difficult problems to solve. I think the Department ought to look very seriously at its administration of the Act to ensure that delays do not occur for servicemen in this situation. As I said earlier, it would cost the Department absolutely nothing to accommodate them in this regard.
Given that the Defence Force retirement benefit is one of the benefits given to servicemen to encourage them to join the Services, a debate on the matter gives us an opportunity to mention briefly one or two other benefits which also seek to attract persons into the Services, with which there are some administrative problems at the moment. It is time the Government thought very seriously about the generosity of all fringe benefits, including this one, associated with the Services. Some of the benefits are beginning to fall behind their value of some years ago and are not achieving their objectives. Another case in my electorate recently concerned a constituent named Sergeant Vladich. He is a long serving member of the armed forces and has five children. In 1977 he sought a loan from the Defence Service Homes Corporation as his rental accommodation was too small for his family. On approaching the DSHC he was told that he faced a waiting period of II months. He could not wait that long so he borrowed money through normal channels for a house and renovations. He has now been informed by the DSHC that unless he can prove extreme hardship he cannot renegotiate his loan under the scheme.
From my knowledge of Sergeant Vladich's circumstances, the DSHC must expect near total destitution before it will act. However, Sergeant Vladich has been told of a loophole. He can sell his house, shift out into rental accommodation again and wait 10 months for a loan. Such are the prospects of servicemen without DSHC loans in these times of rising interest rates on ordinary loans. Clearly, the strict conditions of the DSHC cannot be regarded as serving that purpose in the legislation which seeks to render the scheme an inducement to service.
It is necessary when Bills like this come before the House to look at the administration of the Act

1190 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Defence Force Retirement Bill

to ensure that it is achieving its purposes. I suggested that in the case of the DFRDB there are unnecessary delays in providing retirees with some of their entitlements. There are problems with the detail of the legislation. I believe that pensions are not geared to achieving a reasonable level of benefit at the most likely point of retirement. These amendments also fail to achieve justice in all circumstances for persons who assume temporary rank. Our suggested amendment would achieve that objective, I believe at no vast cost to the Government. It needs to be remembered that the point at which defence personnel achieve temporary ranks but do not pass on subsequently to substantive ranks is at the end of their periods of service. We are suggesting that they should have the option of making contributions during that period to enable them to retire at a temporary rank at the level of pension that would accrue to a substantive rank. As I said, the British Act considers this aspect reasonably. The normal provisions for civil servants in this country reasonably concede that situation after 12 months. In seeking that this Bill be withdrawn and reconsidered by the Government we want the Government to do that on behalf of service personnel.
Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence) (2.24)-1 thank the three honourable members who have spoken on this Bill for the very moderate and constructive observations which they have made and for their approaches to the Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Amendment Bill. I say to the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) who led for the Opposition that the Government rejects the amendment. However, I say also that as presently minded and as presently advised I see no merit in what has been suggested but I do not foreclose on the issue. I am prepared to have it put to study. I undertake to do just that. I do not know what all the implications are. I listened with attention to the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley). As all honourable gentlemen have observed, this is a highly complex piece of legislation. It would be in the nature of parliamentary insolence to say that I should consider on the spot the implications of the amendment proposed by the Opposition. I appreciate the very dignified and quiet way in which the honourable member for Corio suggested that we withdraw the Bill. There are implications-I will not weary the House with them-which are unacceptable.
I will say one or two things about the Opposition's proposal. Over a long period I have found myself both anxious and hostile to and about the question of temporary rank. Not one Chief of

Staff serving at the moment, nor one who has passed out of service in the last six years since I have hadthe honour of occupying this position, would be in any doubt as to my views on that point. As the House will understand, it is impossible to avoid the use of temporary rank. People come through the Services designed for promotion to substantive rank. For the purposes of meeting both personal and service conveniencethe two go together-resort per force must be had to temporary rank.
Let me put a proposition to the honourable member for Corio. Let us assume that a serving officer realising that he is to retire in three or -six months' time for the purposes of personal convenience or service convenience, attains temporary rank. He knows that he is to retire in three or six months' time. There would be some disquiet in the Services if that person were to say: 'I can elect to contribute at the rate of the substantive rank and, as a consequence, I will have access to the retirement benefit which will be conferred upon the substantive rank'. I do not shut my mind to this situation. I hope that my friend, having been greeted with that response from me, will not press his amendment. After listening to the honourable gentleman speak before lunch, I asked officers of the Department of Defence whether this matter could and would be put to study. I will undertake for that to be done and furnish the honourable gentlernan with the response. He may discuss it with his colleagues and bring it back in one form or another before the House. I simply do not know all the implications of the honourable member's proposal.
I say to the honourable member for Swan that I do not find myself aggrieved in any sense about the constructive observations he has made regarding delays in the administration of the scheme. Nothing can be more vexatious than a person who is denied access with celerity to a benefit that he or she has earned over a long period. I have noted the cases-I know my advisers have also noted them-which the honourable gentleman with great courtesy has placed before the Parliament and before me. I will undertake to have those cases examined and to ensure that the observations he has made regarding delays in a variety of fields are followed up. I can look back a long time to when I was involved in such matters. I can remember my sense of resentment in those days. No doubt it was sparked by a greater tenderness of years than currently falls upon me. I got into considerable trouble when I argued with a boisterousness that accompanied the tenderness of those years. I assure the honourable gentleman

Crimes (Currency) Bill

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1191

that I will undertake that what he has placed before me will be examined. I ask the honourable member for Corio, in the name of parliamentary time, to spare us the time of dividing on this issue. I have noted what my honourable friend has had to say. I have given him an assurance and I will seek most earnestly to fulfil it.
Mr Scholes-It was never the intention of the Opposition to divide.
Mr KILLEN-I thank my honourable friend for that.
Question resolved in the negative.
Amendment negatived.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Killen) read a third time.
CRIMES (CURRENCY) BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 8 September, on motion by Mr Viner:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr LIONELBOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (2.32)-The Crimes (Currency) Bill has already been passed by the Senate. It was the subject of a rather interesting debate in that place and I notice that the vote was tied 28-all with respect to one amendment which we will be discussing in Committee. The Opposition does not oppose the purpose of the Bill. It relates to the counterfeiting of money or securities and the buying or selling of such counterfeit money or securities. Every nation in the world is anxious to protect its own currency. It is of interest that the international convention under which we are operating was brought into being as far back as 1929. So there is no screaming rush about this matter.
The purpose of the Bill was explained in the Senate. It is to update and revise all existing Australian law relating to the counterfeiting of currency or securities, whether Australian or foreign. The history and purpose of the legislation have been fully canvassed. Honourable members will note some significant articles in th international convention which have wide-ranging application. People who are in a different country from the one in which an-offence was committed by them can be dealt with in certain circumstances by that

country applying the law of the country whose laws have been offended against. The Bill is unique in that regard and reminds one of some old doctrines of international law. There are reservations in relation to the convention by a number of countries which to some extent affect that provision. All of those are covered in the Schedule to the Bill.
The legislation is comprehensive and replaces the piecemeal approach in Commonwealth and State Acts of parliament. The Bill has significant extra-territorial application. Clause 5 of the Bill extends the operation of the legislation to acts, matters and things outside Australia and to all persons, irrespective of their nationality or citizenship. It makes the legislation applicable to the entire world, or the universe. It is not often that we can say that, but we have to do so in this case. A person is not liable to prosecution for an offence under this legislation unless the offence was committed in Australia or on an Australian ship or aircraft or the offence related to Australian currency. So there is some safeguard in those terms. Whilst clause 5 extends the legislation to apply everywhere in the world, the legislation is limited in that the offence must relate to Australian currency or have been committed in Australia or on an Australian ship or aircraft.
One clause which is causing discussion is clause 29. We will be moving an amendment to that clause, which deals with forfeiture and seizure. The clause enables articles to be seized without warrant. That is a matter of contention. Under what circumstances should we allow seizure without warrant? There are certain circumstances in which that certainly would need to apply. An amendment to that effect was negatived in the Senate on a vote of 28-all. Senator Missen voted against the amendment, to which he said the Government should give further consideration in this House. During the debate he stated:
I think it therefore behoves the Parliament to be very careful that it limits the power of taking articles without warrant, and I hope that it will look into this matter further.
If honourable members look at clause 29 they will notice that the forfeiture provision relates not only to money but also to machines, engines, tools, plates, dies and other articles and machinery. It also relates to metal, ink, dye or other material. I suppose that if there were a seizure without warrant from a person in business and it ultimately was proved that no offence had been committed, damage could be done to that person. In that event there would be no redress. It is one of those cases in which we have to talk about the rights of the citizen against the rights of the state. Why should the citizen suffer unless there is a

1192 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Crimes (Currency) Bill

bona fide reason? To that extent we will be moving an amendment not to prevent forfeiture but to provide for the satisfaction of better criteria ,before there is forfeiture without warrant. We will be supported in that by the recommendations of the Law Reform Commission. It dealt with this matter in its consideration of the rights of persons who are the innocent victims of counterfeiting operations. In that respect it must also be worthwhile making the comment that the victims of counterfeiting have no redress. It is about time we looked at the situation from the point of view of a modern democracy and considered whether persons who innocently suffer loss because of counterfeiting ought not be indemnified by the Government; in other words, whether the loss should be borne by the community rather than by the innocent individual. We do not wish to delay the legislation, but we will be moving an amendment in Committee. Subject to that we support the Bill.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
In Committee
The Bill.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (2.39)-by leave-I move:
(I) Clause 29, page 14, sub-clause (2), omit "without warrant, ", substitute "in accordance with sub-section (3A),", ,
(2) Clause 29, page 14, sub-clause (3), omit "without warrant,", sustitute "in accordance with sub-section (3A),",
(3) Clause 29, page 14, after sub-clause (3) insert the following sub-clause:
"(3A) A constable or Officer of Customs may seize an article pursuant to sub-section (2) or (3) if, and only if-
(a) he acts in pursuance of a warrant properly issued by a judge or magistrate; or
(b) he believes on reasonable grounds that it is necessary to act without the authority of a warrant in order to prevent the loss or destruction of the article, ",
The three amendments relate to the one clause. They relate, as I mentioned during the second reading debate, to the provision of clause 29 which starts with the words 'The following articles are forfeited to the Commonwealtb' and not only deals with counterfeit money or counterfeit prescribed securities but also relates to a number of other things such as machines, equipment, paper and so on. Sub-clause (2) states:
A constable may', without warrant, seize any article , , .
This is the sort of provision which is always of concern when talking about the equity of a situation or the rights of the individual. Why does this provision contain the words 'without warrant'? The amendment proposed by the Opposition to

that sub-clause omits the words 'without warrant' and substitutes the words 'in accordance with subsection (3A),.
Our proposed new section (3A) states:
A constable or Officer of Customs may seize an article pursuant to sub-section (2) or (3) if, and only if-
(a) he acts in pursuance of a warrant properly issued by a judge or magistraate; or
(b) he believes on reasonable grounds that it is necessary to act without the authority of a warrant in order to prevent the loss or destruction of the article,
We think that is the safeguard. The matter was the subject of keen discussion in the Senate. I advert to the Criminal Investigation Report No.2 of the Law Reform Commission which dealt with these matters. It stated:
The power to search and seize is undoubtedly a very necessary one for police to have, It has great destructive potential so far as the right to privacy and civil liberties generally are concerned.
So we must balance the situation. The Commission's recommendation was' that certain criteria be applied. They were these: That a person advert to the seriousness and urgency of a situation to justify acting without the authority of a warrant; that he looks at the question of whether there has been consent by the person occupying the premises or an acknowledgement by him that such an invitation was made for a search to be conducted without a warrant or that there was some specially designated statutory authority. What was meant by 'urgent' searches then had to be defined.' The Commission said that such searches could be spelt out as searches incident to arrest; emergency searches necessary to prevent loss of evidence and searches of persons and vehicles suspected on reasonable grounds to be carrying an article which is an offensive weapon. In other words, there was not an attempt to try to define that situation.
The Commission's recommendations are modelled to some extent on the United States of America Fourth Amendment doctrine which provides that:
The rights of the people to be' secure in their Persons, houses, papers.and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures shall not be violated,and no Warrant shall issue, but upon probable cause" supported by Oath or affirmation . . .
Our amendment does give some balance to the situation. In other words, there is to be no seizure or forfeiture without warrant unless in the constable's view there would be loss or destruction of the article involved. I made the point earlier that if those goods are seized and taken away from the person's premises, what redress does that person have? If a person is in the printing business and

Crimes (Currency) Bill

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1193

the whole of the printing press is seized and rec moved he is virtually out of business. Subsequently it could be established that he was innocent but he has no redress at all. It is on that basis that it is not very difficult these days to be put to the somewhat minor difficulty of getting a warrant. It only means appearing before a magistrate. There was also a suggestion that the warrant could even be arranged by telephone.
I do not think I need delay the House any further except to say that I think there is sufficient evidence and background information to show that. warrants are valuable and have a purpose. They are n6t issued just on request. In fact warrants can be refused by a judge or a magistrate unless there are bona fide reasons why they should be issued. Iflaw enforcement officers are given the chance to conduct searches without warrants it could result in an overexercise or an overzealousness of duty which could affect citizens. The amendment strikes a reasonable balance to safeguard both.
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (2.44)-First, I apologise for the absence of the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner), who represents the Attorney General (Senator D"urack), but he has been unavoidably detained and is thus absent today. I understand from the discussion that has taken place with our colleagues in another place that there has been considerable debate and consultation between both sides of the Parliament on this issue. As recently as last week Senator Evans discussed this matter with my colleage the Attorney-General. Further discussions were held with the Department as to the efficacy of accepting this amendment. .
It appears that my colleague the Attorney General was unable to accept the amendment. Apparently there has been further discussion with the Government. The Attorney-General believes that the amendment should be opposed. He sets out the reason as being a matter of importance in common law and common law power. Clause 29
of the Bill is presently drafted as a'refinement of section 9 of the Crimes Act which currently authorises a policeman without warrant to seize goods forfeited to the Crown under laws of the Commonwealth. The refinement is intended to make the seizure procedures more appropriate to counterfeit currency. At common law police have power to seize an article without the authority of a warrant to prevent the loss or destruction of evidence when arresting an offender. The. Opposition's amendments would encroach on this common hiw I power. I think the House would share the view that that is a very important principle of

common law power. Therefore the Government is unable t6 accept the amendment.
Amendments negatived.
Bill agreed to.
Bill reported without amendment, report adopted.
Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr Nixon)~by leaveread a third time.
JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Mr Speaker has received advice from the Leader of the Opposition in the Senate, Senator Button, that he has nominated Senator Colston to be a member of the Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory in place of Senator Robertson.
MEAT EXPORT (PENALTIES) BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Nix~m, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (2.48)~1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time,
The purpose of this Bill is to provide for severe penalties to be imposed on any person who contravenes the provisions of certain regulations under the Exports (Meat) Regulations. The necessity for this course of action to be taken has been brought about by the recent discovery of fraudulent misrepresentation with regard to meat shipments to the United States of America. The areas of difficulty which have been identified as a result of the recent events are covered by regulations 33A, 58 and 59 (1) of the Exports (Meat) Regulations. These relate to the misuse of inspection stamps, alteration or interference with descriptions, tags, et cetera and the making of false or misleading statements in pursuance of the respective regulations.
The existing maximum penalties for any breach of the regulations is $100. We are therefore amending the Customs Act to, amongst other things, allow tbis maximum to be increased to $1,000. It is not considered appropriate to have a penalty higher than this incorporated in a regulation. However, the Government is strongly of the view that further provision needs to be made for much higher penalties to exist for offences of the nature I have just outlined. This is the reason for the Meat Export (Penalties) Bill. It provides

1194 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Meat and Live-stock Corporation Bill

for penalties to be imposed on anyone who contravenes those sections of the Exports (Meat) Regulations referred to previously. Any contravention of these regulations would make the offenders guilty of an indictable offence and consequently subject to penalties of up to $100,000 or imprisonment of up to 5 years, or both.

These new and severe penalties are indicative of the Government's desire to ensure effective deterrents. However, as is normal in penalty legis-
lation of this kind, the Bill also makes it possible to proceed against offenders by summary jurisdiction with the lesser penalties of up to $5,000 or imprisonment of up to one year or both. Summary jurisdiction requires that the court be satisfied that it is proper to do so and the defendant and the prosecutor consent. It ensures extremely minor offences are not unnecessarily taken to a higher court and in no way undermines the ability of the legal system to impose suitably severe penalties for breaches of the law. I commend the Bill to honourable members.

Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown)

adjourned.

.

AUSTRALIAN MEAT AND LIVE-STOCK CORPORATION AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Nixon, and read a first time.

Second Reading
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (2.51 )-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill is one of the measures being introduced by the Government to heighten control over exports of meat and livestock from Australia and to increase the penalties currently available for offences against the statutory provisions governing such exports. Specifically, the Bill we are considering is designed to increase the penalty of $2,000 currently specified in the Act for cases where a licensed exporter exports meat or livestock from Australia in contravention of a condition of his licence. It is proposed that where a licensee is convicted of an indictable offence the penalty shall be a fine of up to $100,000 or imprisonment for up to five years, or both.
An alternative provision is included for dealing with offences in a court of summary jurisdiction, provided the court sees this as the appropriate course and both the defendant and the prosecutor consent. The penalty in those cases would be a fine of up to $5,000 or imprisonment for up to one

year, or both. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.

COMMERCE (TRADE DESCRIPTIONS) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Nixon, and read a first time.

Second Reading

Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (2.53)-1 move:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

The purpose of this Bill is to amend the Commerce (Trade Descriptions)' Act 1905 to provide for the imposition of higher penalties on any person who knowingly applies any false trade description to foodstuffs intended for or entered for export. Under section 12 of the current legislation, the maximum penalty for such an offence is $200. This is totally inadequate and the purpose of this Bill is to bring the penalty up to a realistic level and in line with that proposed under other associated Bills.

This Bill provides for additional sub-sections to section 12 of the Act whereby anyone who contravenes the provisions of the act in relation to foodstuffs shall be guilty of an indictable offence and subject to penalties of up to $100,000 or imprisonment for up to five years, or both. The Bill also makes provision that where appropriate it will be possible to proceed against anyone who contravenes the provisions of the Act by summary jurisdiction with the lesser penalties of fines up to $5,000 or imprisonment for up to one year, or both. I commend the Bill to honourable members.

Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown)

adjourned.

.

CUSTOMS (UNLAWFUL EXPORTATION OF FOOD) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.

Second Reading
Mr MOORE (RYlln-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (2.55)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this' Bill is to amend the Customs Act 1901 to substantially increase the penalties in that Act for offences which relate to the unlawful exportation of food. The Government has decided to take this action following the discovery in the United States of America of Australian boneless beef being adulterated with horse and kangaroo

Companies and Securities Legislation Bill 10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1195

meat. The measures contained in this Bill were foreshadowed by my colleague, the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon), in his statement to the House on 8 September 1981. The penalty for the illegal exportation of any goods other than narcotics is now-a pecuniary penalty of $1,000. However, section 240 of the Customs Act does provide for a penalty of three times the value of the goods in respect of which the offence is committed if the pecuniary penalty is less than three times the value of the goods. The potential penalty could, therefore, be much higher than $1,000.
Notwithstanding the potential of section 240 of the Customs Act, the Government is of the view that the penalty for conduct such as that involved in the illegal exportation of horse and kangaroo meat to the USA should be clearly expressed in the legislation as substantial. Accordingly, the penalties for the unlawful exportation of food will be-increased by this Bill to a maximum fine of $100,000 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding five years, or both. For this purpose, a new offence will be created by clause 5 of the Bill. It will henceforth be an indictable offence to export food which is prohibited by any regulations in force under the Customs Act and the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act.
Provision is made in the Bill for a court of summary jurisdiction to hear and determine proceedings in respect of the new offence. Upon conviction that court may impose a fine not exceeding $5,000pr imprisonment for a period not exceeding one year, or both. The penalty for a contravention of a regulation relating to food has also been increased to a maximum of $1,000. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.
COMPANIES AND SECURITIES LEGISLATION (MISCELLANEOUS
AMENDMENTS) BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (2.57)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill 1981 is a further step in giving effect to the Commonwealth's obligations under the co-operative companies and securities scheme. I am confident that all honourable members are aware of the co-operative scheme, the four basic elements being:

(a) the establishment of the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities;
(b) the establishment of the National Companies and Securities Commission;
(c) the continuation of existing State and Territory corporate affairs offices; and
(d) the attainment of legislative uniformity throughout Australia without requiring the States to surrender or refer any constitutional power.
Further background information on the cooperative companies and securities scheme is contained in paragraphs 6 to 27 of the explanatory. memorandum which has been distributed to honourable members for information.
The first stage of the co-operative scheme commenced on 1 July this year when three of the four substantive codes came into operation in the six States and the Australian Capital Territory. These codes are:
(a) the Interpretation Code; (b) the Share Acq'uisition Code; and (c) the Securities Industry Code.
The Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities is working towards an implementation date of 1 January 1982 for the Companies Code. Background information on each of the four substantive codes is contained in paragraphs 28 to 41 of the explanatory memorandum to which I have already referred.
Before I discuss the Bill itself, I would like to indicate to the House where we are heading with the co-operative companies and securities scheme. At the last meeting of the Ministerial Council it was agreed that during 1982 there would be no substantive amendments to the initial legislation. Initial legislation is that contained in the four codes I have referred to as amended up to and including the Bill I am presenting to the House today. The first reason for this decision is the necessity to give the NCSC, State and Territory administrations and outside practitioners time to get used to the new administrative and legislative structures. The second reason is that it will provide an opportunity to commence work on the preparation of exposure drafts of the various proposals for reform that have been held over until the initial legislation is in place. The aim would be to prepare exposure' drafts in April 1982 with a view to seeking public comments between July and October 1982. This legislation would, following consideration by the Ministerial Council, be introduced into the Commonwealth Parliament in the 1983 autumn sittings. The parties involved in the co-operative scheme have emphasised the necessity for public consultation.

1196 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

The share acquisition, securities industry and structual shifts that are occurring in other areas of

companies codes have been exposed for public government policy and in the pattern of corporate

comment and debate. The contribution made by investment. In the area of government policy

interested organisations and individuals has been there has been a fundamental change in the

substantial. The Ministerial Council proposes to nature of Federal-State relations and a range of

continue this consultative process where proad hoc decisions made by the Federal Govern-

posals for reform are put forward in the future. If ment which alter the role of the public sector in

these objectives are achieved, I envisage that any the economy. The impact of the 1981-82 Federal

amendments introduced in 1982 would cover Budget will be felt more sharply once the various

tidying-up and other non-controversial matters. States have responded to the pressures it creates

The main purpose of this Bill is to make various minor adjustments to the Companies Code before each State introduces its Companies (Application of Laws) Bill. A general outline of the Bill is contained in paragraphs 1 to 4 of the explanatory

and once the narrow role of the public sector begins to restabilise the operation of the economy. On the other hand, corporate investment, both foreign and Australian, is being directed towards a resource based, export oriented growth.

memorandum, and a detailed outline of each clause is contained in paragraphs 46 to 183. The Bill contains several editorial amendments to provisions in the Commonwealth Acts under the cooperative scheme. The opportunity has also been taken in this Bill to' make some other minor amendments. The Bill has been approved by the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities for introduction into the Commonwealth Parliament. I commend the Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr John Brown) adjourned.

The shift in the pattern of industrial development has far-reaching implications both in the immediate term as it takes shape and also in the longer term when it is put into place. It involves a major shake-out of a wide range of import competing industries. It creates conditions which put pressure on firms in all sectors of the economy to restructure. It involves the dislocation of people from their places of living and employment and it creates further fragmentation in the work force and further imbalance in the. pattern of regional development. It involves a further integration of the Australian economy into a world economy which is highly penetrated by the transnational

APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1981-82 Second Reading

corporations. It involves an unprecedented degree of disintegration of the federal system of government responsibility. At this major turning point in

(Budget Debate)

Australian economic history, at this very time

Debate resumed from 9 September, on motion when the national co-ordination of economic and

by Mr Howard:

. social decisions is more required, this Government

That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr UREN (Reid) (3.3)-The 1981-82 Budget will have the harshest long term impact of any of the six Budgets of the Fraser Government. Its impact will be to impose more immediate hardships

has withdrawn from a wide range of Federal responsiblities and dismantled the machinery for government co-ordination. There is no clearer instance of this withdrawal than in the area of housing and urban and regional development.

on a growing number of people, to make our national economy more vulnerable and dependent and to deepen the divisions within our society. In each of this Government's Budgets there has been a massive transfer of funds away from the working people and their dependants towards the wealthy and towards the corporate sector. Wage and salary earners are contributing substantially more to government revenue and companies significantly less. Outlays on social services have been cut dramatically. Expenditure for the corporate sector has increased. The cumulative money transfers of the past Fraser Budgets total tens of billions of dollars.

The 1981-82 Budget is designed to unlock capital and labour from established industries, such as import competing, manufacturing and home building, in order to shift resources across to the mining and mineral processing sectors of the economy. The 1981-82 Budget is also specifically geared to handle two expected problems in the short term: Firstly, the impact of the $7,000m foreign capital inflow in 1981-82 on top of $6,500m last year; and secondly, an anticipated surge in wage demands in the key sectors could flow on to raise average earnings by 13.5 per cent. The fundamental strategy of the 1981-82 Budget is to make room in the domestic economy for

The impact of the Federal Budget transfers of foreign capital inflow, most of which is speculat-

wealth and power needs to be seen alongside the ive, unproductive and inflationary.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1197

Last year about two-thirds of that inflow was directed towards the buying up of Australian firms 'and real estate and speculation in shares. At the same time, the domestic finance market was squee:?ed from both ends; First, the Government imposed overtight monetary policies which have burst out in a rise in interest rates by three percentage points within the last 18 months. Secondly, the State government authorities and foreign-controlled .corporations raised a. huge amount of funds by borrowing on the Australian market. In 1977-78 Australian borrowings by foreign corporations represented 1.4 per cent of total domestic savings. In 1978-79 that proportion jumped to 18.8 per cent. By 1979-80 it had risen to 20 per cent; in other words, one dollar in every five dollars saved by the Australian people was
ouswenderbsyhifporoefigonurcocropuonratrtyio. nOs ntotoapchoiefvtehagtr,eaasterI
said, semi-government authorities, have to borrow to support this resource development infrastructure. I refer particularly to electricity authorities, which have to back up the aluminium smelters. They are offering interest rates of between 15.2 per cent and 15.7 per cent on the loan market. These two sectors are draining money away from the source where small businesses seek their money and where the housing sector seeks its money. They are putting it into resource development. This is the whole strategy of this Government. It is taking funds from the many to divert them to the very few and the very wealthy.
The combined effect of this high demand on funds for resource development in the context of restrictive monetary policy has been a squeeze on home buyers, small businesses, small farmers and local government, limiting access to credit. For the housing industry across Australia, with the exception of Sydney and the Gold Coast, it has meant continued stagnation. It has caused a major number of builders to go to the wall. It has caused an outflow of skilled labour from the building industry and a widened neglect of the housing needs of the Australian people. In some regions of Australia-as I said, with the exception of greater metropolitan Sydney and the Gold Coast-there is real trouble in the building industry. For instance, in Victoria, the building industry is operating at 22 per cent below capacity. This is a time when we have a record level of unemployment. The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown) represents an electorate in the State of Victoria, which has ~n all-time low in the level of employment. Not for one year but for several years now stagnation in the Victorian building industry has been going on. The Minister

knows that if we have more compassion for unemployed people we could get the building industry in Victoria moving, which would have an effect on the white goods industry and on the furnishing industries and therefore there would be a stimulus to employment. But no, he is a part of the Fraser Ministry and locks himself into the stupidity of the policies which the Government is now following. The Government's employment policy is anti-people and, of course, supports the very wealthy and the powerful corporations of this country. On available evidence the Government should be condemned for its scandalous failure to provide the information necessary for an assessment to be made of the housing problems and of access to home ownership in Australia. We know that the level of home ownership has peaked and now it is on the decline. More pressure is being placed on the private rental market and more hardship is being imposed on people paying off their homes. I wish the people listening today could see the graphic table which I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-
INCOMES AND LOAN REPAYMENTS
Mortgage approved

2ndqtr 2nd qtr 2nd qtr

1979

1980

1981

Mortgage rate of interest Average approval
Borrowers average gross weekly earning (household)
Monthly mortgage repayments (i ni tia 1 25-year term)
Mortgage repayments as a % of borrowers average earnings

10.5% $29,300
$336
$276
18.96%

11.5% $34,780
$423
$353
19.26%

13.0% $38,430
$475
$433
21.04%

Mr UREN-The figures are taken from a report of NSW Permanent Building Society Ltd. They show that mortgage repayments as a proportion of borrowers' average earnings rose from 18.96 per cent in 1979-80 to 21.04 per cent in 1980-81. They show also that the average loan rose from $29,300 to $38,430 in 1981, while interest rates rose from 10.5 per cent to 13 per cent. The report from the building society goes on to state that professional and semi-professional employees received 57.6 per cent of loans in 1979
but 67.8 per cent ofloans in 1981. So one can see that again it is the more wealthy people who are being looked after. We can see who is getting the loans and the value of the loans they are getting. We have debated in the House previously the impact of the Government's deliberate policy of

1198 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

sacrificing the housing industry-both private and public-for resources development, the effect of rising interest rates and the declining availability of housing finance. The effect is to turn Australia into a society of landlords and tenants and to increase the hardship of people without homes or without decent shelter. In those debates we have argued that while there is a need for an effective program to assist first home buyers to get access to affordable housing finance, there is also an urgent need to increase substantially public housing funds in this country. We have argued about the number of people who are homeless, the hundreds of thousands of people in temporary, mobile or makeshift accommodation, and we have pointed out the emerging housing needs resulting from population growth.
I again remind the House that in the mid-1970s the Borrie report estimated that there would be 17t million people in this country by the turn of the century. But the latest study which the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) tabled in this House estimates that there will be about 19t million people in Australia by the turn of the century. That in itselfis a substantial increase. The matter that worries us on this side of the House is'that at the same time the Government is undermining the basis of the urban and regional programs which the Labor Government brought into being during 1972-75 in order

to provide a better quality of life, a better standard of living conditions and a better living environment. But the Government has dramatically cut these programs. I will refer honourable members later to a table which will reveal the tragedy of the situation. It is a sad situation because there is no planning by the Government. The Government is sacrificing housing and urban affairs more than any other program because of the blind direction of unplanned and uncontrolled resource development. In other words, the Government cares very little indeed for people. Our concern on this side of the House is that the immediate needs of people are being neglected and that the dismantling of the public sector housing program will leave future governments unable to cope with future housing needs. In a period of high unemployment and underused capacity in the housing industry the failure of the' Government to meet housing needs is a national scandal. Federal expenditure on housing has been reduced' from 3.9 per cent of the total Budget outlays in the last full year of the Labor Government1974-75--.:...to one per cent in 1980-81. In constant prices housing outlays have been cut from $1,413m in 1974-75 to $399m in 1980-81. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard the tables setting out these figures.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

NET FEDERAL PAYMENTS TO THE STATES FOR HOUSING (excluding Aboriginal Housing)

1980-81-1981-82 ($m in 1981-82 prices)

Grants

Repayments of

capital and

+

Loans

interest

Total net payments

1980-81 1981-82

New South Wales

34.8

60.7

75.8

19.7

29.8

45.5

71.0

4.3

1980-81 1981-82

Victoria

24.8

48.2

60.4

12.6

21.2

36.1

56.5

0.8

1980-81 1981-82

Queensland

13.3

18.9

20.3

11.9

12.8

14.2

19.0

8.0

1980-81 1981-82

South Australia

13.0

27.7

33.1

7.6

11.1

20.8

31.0

0.9

1980-81 1981-82

Western Australia

8.9

17.4

19.7

6.6

7.7

13.0

18.4

2.3

1980-81 ,1981-82

Tasmania

5.2

12.0

12.9

4.3

4.4

9.0

12.0

1.4

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1199

1980-81-1981-82 ($m in 1981-82 prices)

Grants

Repayments of

capital and

+

Loans

illterest

Total net payments

1980-81 1981-82

Six States

100.0

185.0

222.2

62.7

87.0

139.0

208.0

17.7

Source: 1981-82 Budget Paper No.7, table 96, 100-105. REAL NET PAYMENTS TO THE STATES FOR HOUSING

$m 1981-82 prices

Fed. Govt payments

State repayment
of advances

State repayment
of interest

Total
State repayments

Net Federal payments

1974-75 1981-82
1974-75 1981-82
1974-75
1981-~2
1974-75 1981-82
1974-75 1981-82
1974-75 1981-82
1974-75 1981-82

New South Wales

252.9

13.6

84.4

13.1

Victoria

200.9

11.8

59.8

11.0

Queensland

201.2

3.4

33.5

3.5

South Australia

115.6

4.8

35.7

5.1

Western Australia

76.9

3.4

27.9

3.4

Tasmania

53.5

1.6

13.9

1.9

Six States

789.5

38.6

255.2

37.8

62.1 57.9
48.9 45.6
14.8 15.5
26.9 25.9
14.8 15.1
9.8 10.2
177.4 170.1

75.7 70.9
60.8 56.5
18.2 19.0
31.8 31.0
18.2 18.4
11.3 12.0
215.9 208.0

177.2 13.5
140.1 3.3
183.0 14.5
83.8 4.7
58.7 9.5
42.2 1.9
573.6 47.2

Source: Budget Paper No.7, various issues, table 96, 100-105.

Mr UREN-The first table reveals the real net
Federal payments to the States for housing after
allowing for inflation, and the State repayments of capital and interest. Aboriginal housing outlays are excluded from the first table because the figures cannot validly be compared. In 1980-81 the total net amount made available to the six States for housing totalled $62.7m. In this Budget
the amount is only $17.7m. The second table shows that total outlays to the States for housing have fallen from $573.6m in 1974-75 to a mere $47.2m in 1981-82. Those figures are frightening. The facts are that the net amount of money made available fell from $573 to $47m. It is a frightening situation. Total Federal expenditure on housing in 1981-82 has increased by $20m compared

with last year. The Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) continues to report that he has increased housing expenditure, but it is at an increase over a year that was an all-time low. The figures really are distorted. In the public sec,- tor housing area the amount is actually 18 per cent less than last year. But the area in which the Government has increased expenditure is that of defence service homes, but even in that area I will show how weak the Government's arguments are.
The increase in outlays includes an increase of $24.5m made available to the discredited Homes Savings Grant Scheme. I might say that in the building industry it is known as the home decorator's grant because it does not help young people

1200 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

buying a home. They may use that money to pay for furnishings but in no way to assist them to buy their first homes. There was an increase of $68m in funding for defence service homes over last year. The total amount made available for defence service homes this year is $160m. In 1974-75, its last full year, the Labor Government made $130m available. In constant terms that would be the present equivalent of $262m. In other words, in Labor's last full year in government in real moneys it paid out $100m more on defence service homes than this Government has provided for this year.
It is about time the Minister for Housing and Construction looked at the real effect of the Budget on housing. What we have in the housing area as a result of this Budget and the previous five Fraser Budgets is a failure of the Government to meet its responsibilities to ensure the housing security of the Australian people. There has been

a deliberate sacrificing of the housing sector to promote resource development. That represents a basic transfer of funds away from the great bulk of the people to the corporate sector. We have referred to the far-reaching changes that are taking place as funds are being diverted away from the needs of the capital cities in order to provide physical infrastructure for resource development in a few regions. We have also pointed to the glaring neglect of social infrastructure in the resource development regions and to the agonising decline of other regions which are being excluded from participation in new growth patterns. We have called for urgent attention to be given to urban and regional policy to avoid an inbalance and polarisation in the future. I seek leave to have an illustrative table incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

EXPENDITURE ON URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT

1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

Current Prices ($m)
Constant Prices ($m) 1981-82 dollars Real Charge on previous year (%)
Real Charge on 1974-75 (%) Proportion of total outlays (%)

205

218

144

118

85

80

74

48

412

381

226

172

117

100

82

48

7.5 40.7 23.9 32.0 14.5 18.0 70.8

7.5

45.1

58.2

71.6 75.7

82.0 88.3

1.15 1.00 0.60 0.44 0.29 0.25 0.20 0.11

Mr UREN-I thank the House. In this Budget the Fraser Government shows even less concern for the quality of life enjoyed by Australians than did the McMahon Government 10 years ago. The Fraser Government shows a total lack of understanding of the dramatic regional changes that are now taking place. Expenditure on urban and regional development has dropped from $412m in 1974-75 to $48m in real terms this year. The growth centres program is now effectively de-' funct. The real facts are that this Government has continually ignored the overwhelming majority of people living in our major capital cities. In fact, their standard of living will continually be lowered because of this policy, because of the draining away of the financial resources and services from the overwhelming number of people in our major urban and regional areas and the division of these financial resources to support resource development.
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Acting Prime Minister) (3.24)-Mr Speaker, we have been listening to the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) speaking in the Budget debate. What is most noticeable about his address is his lack of conviction in trying to convince the Australian people that all is doom and gloom. He struggled very hard at trying to present that picture. There

is no better way to show conclusively how effective, stable and sfrong the Fraser Government has proved to be than to study the Australian economy. There is no better way to show the double standards and the shallowness of the Opposition and of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) than to study their statements on the economy. We have heard a lot in the last few days from the Labor Party about the economy. Australians who hear the Leader of the Opposition at his cynical best on this subject would think that we were back in the days when he was the Treasurer. They were very happy days, were they not! We remember very well that inflation peaked at 17.6 per cent, that unemployment doubled in one year alone, wages went up by 28 per cent in 12 months and Government spending went up by 46 per cent in one year. Also, industrial disruption reached record levels.
Mr Speaker, one is not inclined to refer back to those past years, but one cannot help feeling when one listens to the Labor Party that it really has not learnt anything or is not enlightened at all as to the mistakes it made in the past and it is just peddling the same old policy points of view. The record of the Fraser Government is, in the sharpest possible contrast to that of the Opposition. Its record is one of success, not of dismal failure. It is a

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1201

record of construction, not of deliberate destruction. It is a record of pride, not a record of shame. The effective, consistent management of the Australian economy by the Fraser Government has this nation up and running while the rest of the world marks time. The facts are there for anyone to see.
Last year Australia turned in a sparkling economic performance well in excess of the conservative forecasts of the Treasurer (Mr Howard). The increase in non-farm product of some 4 per cent was the best performance since 1973-74 and private consumption increased by 3.2 per cent. This buoyant demand was reflected in the solid growth in employment. In 1980-81 employment grew by 162,300 people or 2.6 per cent. Over the last three years total employment has increased by 378,000. Over the year 1980-81 inflation was held at 8.8 per cent and business investment grew by 21 per cent, the strongest annual increase in 30 years. Compare this with Labor's record. In the three years Labor was in office investment did not grow, it fell by 2 per cent in real terms. Our present economy is in no way-as the Leader of the Opposition has been describing it-an economy of despair. Of course it is not. It seems to be a very healthy and promising economy, an economy with a future-an economy on the move. An economy on the move is an economy providing growth, jobs and prosperity for all Australians. It is an economy which totally vindicates the policies of this Government. The Budget brought down by the Treasurer maintains and reinforces the strategy of this Government, the strategy that it has pursued since 1975. It is the only strategy possible for Australia to realise the bright prospects of this decade which are obvious to all of us; provided we can maintain sound management. It is a strategy that has achieved results and will continue to do so because it is soundly based and consistently applied.
This Budget symbolises the Government's determination to protect, and to build on, the economic gains we have already made. We have decisively reduced the deficit by almost $1,OOOm. We have given priority to reducing inflation further, to sust,aining the strong rate of private growth. We have helped in a major way to ease the pressure on interest rates. Labor's policies are in direct contrast. The Leader of the Opposition has made thiS only too plain. They are a prescription for inflation and high interest rates. They are a direct attack on the private sector confidence in this country built up so determinedly by this Government after it had been so carelessly destroyed by the Labor Party. The destructive approach of the Labor Party is shown with bitter clarity in its

attack on massive developments of resources, particularly energy resources, now under way in this country. Labor halted new resource development when it was in office. It seems determined to forget none of its mistakes. Let there be no doubt that we are now in the early stages of a new surge in resource development. It is a surge that will build new economic strength for Australia and greater prosperity for Australians.
My colleague, the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch), detailed on Sunday the latest figures for planned major mining and manufacturing projects in Australia. These figures put the value of projects now in the committed or final feasibility stages at a total of $35.5 billion. The figures are not a precise forecast. They are, however, a clear indication of continuing strong growth in the resources sector. The predominant features of this growth are massive investment and long lead times. The immediate need is to finance this development. The benefits it can offer are no mirage. They are real benefits that can flow from these developments to the community once they start producing and exporting. The Government's policies are making it possible for this development to go ahead. Labor's policies would stop it in its tracks.
The Leader of the Opposition wants an immediate resource rental tax. There would be no better way to undermine the confidence in Australia that has been built up over the past six years. This Hayden tax would inevitably mean that many of the projects now on the drawing boards would have to be abandoned. The profit figures of some of our largest mining industries clearly show to the simple minded that the notion that all mining projects make super profits is quite wrong. In the past year Australia has been drawing heavily on the rest of the world for the physical and financial resources it needs to fully develop its potential. There have been major increases in imports, especially in capital goods. This has led to a substantial increase in the current account deficit of our balance of payments. There should be a modest increase in this deficit during 1981-82, according to the Budget forecasts.
On the other side of the equation, there has been heavy capital inflow, reflecting the confidence of the world in Australia's future. This has led to an overall surplus of private capital transactions. A great deal of this capital has come to meet the need of our resource development. It has played, of course, an essential part in easing the pressures on our financial markets. Yet, the Opposition's response to this healthy recourse to overseas capital suppliers of investment goods and finance investment at this time would only cause a

1202 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No. 1)

great deal of harm. All the Opposition has been able to do by reflecting on private capital inflow is to bring about another round of investment bashing.
The Leader of the Opposition, who claims some economic expertise, proposes immediate controls of foreign capital inflow. That is the height of irresponsibility when there is a large current account deficit. The Leader of the Opposition appears to want a balance of payments crisis. He may be all too familiar with this sort of crisis but I have no wish to join him, thank you very much. I am sure Australians do not wish to join him either. I will tell honourable members what he is asking for. He is asking for a sharp reduction in the supply of funds and resources from overseas. At the same time he wants to increase the Governments demands through a higher budget deficit. The consequences of these policies are inevitable. They would squeeze consumer spending, dry up finance, make money more expensive, interest rates would go higher, and/or they would slow the pace of resource development and put a brake on investment, on economic growthand on the growth of incomes in the future.
The choices for the community are quite clear. The Leader of the Opposition and his party abandon economic sense and dance with the witchdoctors when they say it is possible to continue investment in resource areas, lower foreign investment and lower domestic interest rates combined with higher government and individual spending. This formula simply cannot work. It is absolute nonsense. It is just another example of the Opposition's cargo-cult mentality.- The alternative budget presented by the Leader of the Opposition is more proof-that is, if any is needed-that the Labor Party has learnt nothing from its six years in Opposition and from its three disastrous years in government.
The priorities of the Labor Party are the priorities of a party that takes posterity for granted and that believes that the taxpayer is the eternal cow that can be eternally milked. This Government's priorities are clear. We seek to build; we are building a strong economy because we know that is the way to help Australians to build the lives they want. We believe in government assistance to those people in need. We believe in a strong Australia, able to meet its defence responsibilities. In these times there are responsibilities that no government surely can neglect. Over the past six years the defence share of the Budget has risen from 8.8 per cent to 10.1 per cent. This year's Budget provides an outlay of $4, 112m on defence, which is an increase of 5.3 per cent in real terms. Welfare was supposed to be one of the priorities

of the previous Labor Government. In the Labor years in office, spending on social security and welfare averaged 21.4 per cent of budget outlays. In the current Budget, under this Government, which the Opposition seeks to characterise as mean uncaring, welfare has risen to 27.8 per cent of outlays, a rise of 6.4 per cent in six years.
While Government achievements have been significant during the past five years and the prospects are bright, there is no cause for complacency. Neither prosperity nor resource development can be taken for granted in the way that the Australian Labour Party thinks they can be taken for granted. There are clouds on the international economic horizon that could cast their shadows in our direction as well as over many of our major trading partners. There are risks and tensions that could bring current recovery to an abrupt end. The Government, employers and unions, as well as the community generally, must act responsibly and consider the long term interests of the Australian economy. Therefore, it is important that we all work together to see that we have this sustained economic growth, this resource development that is taking place in this country at the moment, and not take it for granted and think that it can be capitalised on well in advance before there is any achievement.
This Budget is an integral part of our economic policies, designed to lay the groundwork for growth and future prosperity. It is, inevitably, part of a long term strategy that is working and one to which we consistently adhere. There must be investment before the community can expect to reap the benefits. Under our policies these benefits will come to the Australian community. Under the opposition's policies, as we have heard them announced in the course of this Budget debate, growth would cease and there would be no benefits to reap. There would be a legacy of higher tax rates and higher inflation levels for our children, as we saw occurring when the Australian Labor Party mismanaged our economy in the past. We cannot allow those sorts of things to happen. The Government will ensure that they do not happen again.
Dr JENKINS (Scullin) (3.40)-1 listened with interest to the rhetoric of the Acting Prime Minister (Mr Anthony). I remain unrepentant and unconvinced. He may feel that the economy is bright, but let him tell that to the pensioners and social security recipients whose purchasing power is being eroded more and more each day. Let him tell that to the unemployed, whose numbers increase at a far greater rate than do the number of new jobs created in the community. Let him convince them that resource development means

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1203

something to them. Let him tell it to the ordinary how ordinary people live which is the Govern-

tradesman working in the factory, for whom rising ment's greatest blind spot.

interest rates make it so much harder to buy his home, and who is faced with a tax which will affect the food, clothing and footwear of himself

Because I serve as chairman of one of the Estimates committees and do not get the opportunity to pursue some of these things in detail, I intend to

and his kids. They are the people who have to be deal with three areas to illustrate my argument.

convinced that the economy is bright.

.While they are narrow fields, they are illustrative.

If honourable members believe that this is not so, I relate the situation of one of my constituents, who came to see me shortly after the Budget was presented. He works in a metal trades factory. He admitted he had never voted Labor in his life, but
had always voted Liberal. He said that he had had a gutful and for the first time in his life he was going to take political action because the increase in interest rates means that it looks like he will lose his home. He looked at the effect of the sales tax on his expenditure and realised that his purchasing power was lessened. He went out and collected thousands of signatures on a petition. I quote what he said in that petition, apart from the

I refer to the subjects of general practitioner training, which should have some effect on better health care and cost containment, education and the Community Youth Support Scheme, which does represent markedly a social cost to the community. With regard to the training of general practitioners, I may find myself differing in some ways with one of my colleagues, because I know that the honourable member for Prospect (Dr Klugman) feels that the basic question is why taxpayers should pay for such training at all, in view of the fact that university courses are free and that medical practitioners can expect relatively high incomes for the rest of their careers.

preliminaries which the House requires of petA number of factors need to be considered. I do

itions. It reads as follows:

not think there is any doubt that general practice

We the people who have signed this petition, ask all parties, is the cornerstone of our health care system, Labor, Liberal, Democrats, and others, to stop the latest inwhether it be in private general practice or the

crease in taxes, and the forever increases in tax which hit all people of the country of Australia in all goods and consumer goods and we call for a referendum on taxes and interest rates.

community health centre. The Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) made the statement that general practitioners provide the most cost effec-

That is the reaction of an ordinary man to what tive form of care. I have some reservation about

this Government is doing. What a shabby Budget that. I believe they have the potential for provid-

this is. We have had six years of austerity Budgets ing the most cost effective form of care. In the

and there is still no relief in sight. The Treasurer words of the Royal Australasian College of Gen- (Mr Howard) after his six years of effort, can only eral Practitioners, they provide the 'most cost

promise more inflation, less economic growth, a effective form of health care because of their pru-

wider gap between the increase in the number of dent use of expensive resources, such as hospital

jobs and the number of unemployed and more care, specialist referral, investigations and thera-

taxes imposed on the ordinary individual through peutic items'. If they are prudent in their use of

the inequitable sales tax. There is also the matter those resources, they do provide the most cost

of a health insurance scheme which does nothing effective form of health care. But to arrive at this

for the quality of health care or for health cost desirable state, training for unsupervised general

containment but which merely shifts the burden practice is essential.

of cost.

'

I think we all acknowledge-the universities

Rising interest rates disadvantage the less acknowledge-that the doctors turned out by the

wealthy. Young people who are trying to get a deuniversities are, in their own terms,undifferen-

posit to buy a home are going further and further tiated doctors. Just as surgeons, obstetricians,

down the drain because of the increasing gap begynaecologists and physicians need specialist

tween their finances and the required deposit. The training, so do the doctors entering general prac-

sales tax on building materials increases the cost tice. The ROYi:J,l Australiasian College of General

of their homes and increases the size of their rePractitioners provides general practice training

payments. If the increase in interest rates is added, through its Family Medicine Program. It so hap-

the situation becomes worse. On top of this, they pens that my former partner in general medical

will have to pay sales tax on furnishings and on all practice is deeply involved in that program. It

the equipment in their homes and they are to be began in 1973 and, apart from a small income it

further dunned on clothing, footwear, et cetera. earns, it is totally funded through the Common-

Surely even Government members must start to wealth Department of Health Community Health

question the effects of their economic policy on Program. The training provided is in hospitals and

the community. But it is a lack of appreciation of general practice. The course requirement is two

1204 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

years experience in hospitals and two years exproviding more favourable premiums to its

perience in general practice. There is a salary subclients.

sidy and a teaching allowance for the first three The next area I will. pass on to briefly is edu-

three-month terms in teaching general practice. cation and the Government's attitude to it. In the

Howev'er, the scheme has reached a stage at which inadequate funds allow no more than a sprinkling

1960s the Australian community clearly indicated that it wished the Commonwealth Government to

of the third term training and the number of second terms that can be funded is diminishing. Gen-

playa part in the funding of education to bring it , to adequate standards. For a time, because of the

eral practices which practitioners take part in the training generally suffer financial loss because the

findings of the Schools Commission there was an improvement in the resources available to

cost of a trainee exceeds what he or she earns.

students. I refer to the recent minority report of '

From the 1981-82 Budget the organisers of the Family Medicine Program have asked only for the restoration of the value of subsidies and allow-

part time members of the Schools Commission which stated:
Guidelines to the Commission have become increasingly detailed and specific, over-riding its proposals on program

ances to a parity with their 1978 values by applypolicy and structure, and reducing its ability to exercise its

ing national wage indexation increments, which would amount to an increase of about 25 per cent. It would cost a total of $0.25m to index subsidies and allowances to parity with their 1978 values, and a little over $1.5m to increase the number of training positions in general practice and to give each trainee three subsidised terms. A total of $1.75m would bring it up to a situation in which doctors training for general pactice were trained in a fashion which would afford them a prudent use of resources, which would be a major factor in
cost containment in the health field. An increasing

own judgment on their implementation . . . which can only act against the long term interest of education in Australia.
I have spoken of this matter a number of times. I have stated that I feel that the guidelines are too ,restrictive. The Schools Commission should be able to recommend what it sees as the desirable course. The Government of the day must then take the political decision of how far it is prepared to finance those recommendations. It is ridiculous to restrict a commission from being able to state clearly its views on what is needed.

number of doctors graduating are finally seeing A number of members of the House have

that the speciality of general practice is talked about the support that is necessary for the

worthwhile.

young unemployed in the community. I feel

emotionally involved. I had to indicate the other

Whilst the Government talks about cutting the night by way of personal explanation that one of

costs of health care, nothing it has done will cut my Community Youth Support Scheme groups

those costs or improve the quality of health care. I was one of the first established in Australia. For

have mentioned one method it could use. It is a the first four months of its existence it operated

method that has been proven but the Government out of my electorate office. My electoral assistant

has rejected it. The Family Medicine Programme was its chairman. I myself was the chairman of the

stated that when doctors cannot be trained in this Scullin electorate Community Youth Support

way their standards are compromised, their inexScheme committee. The electorate has two Com-

perience will result in unsafe and, at times, inapmunity Youth Support Scheme groups and an in-

propriate treatment and they will generate high terim committee because it was hoped to get

costs. Yet, for the extra expenditure of $1,750,000 another. The third one would have operated in

the Government has thrown this method of cost what I imagine is a lower middle class area. It is a

containment down the drain. What a contrast this different socio-economic area to those in which

is to the Government's attitude on health in the other two programs are operating. The in-

surance. The other week I received an assessment terim committee, through an auxiliary, rec~ived a

of how much I would need to pay to keep my grant to survey the area and find the need in it. It

health insurance at the same level. The increase surveyed schoolleavers in grades 10, 11 and 12.

was $20 a month. My immediate response was to The raw response was that, while most of the chil-

write back and say I wanted basic hospital and dren in those grades stated that if they were un-

basic medical insurance with extras which keeps able to get a job after leaving school they would

my contribution at about the same level. I hapregister with the Commonwealth Employment

pened to be looking through an old newspaper of Service, 49 per cent stated that they would not

19 August this year. I found that Medibank Priregister for unemployment benefit. In a further

vate, to which I belong, is able to sponsor the Aussurvey which involved visiting homes in the

tralian Open Golf Championship. One wonders Watsonia-Bundoora area it was found that in

whether it would not be better concentrating on homes where there were unemployed young

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1205

people of 19 or 20 years of age three' out of five were not receiving unemployment benefit.
I use those figures to show that in areas like that there can be a great deal of hidden unemployment. I notice the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown) listening with some interest. That area, which was formerly part of his electorate, reflects the situation in a great deal of his community. I think it indicates that whilst training programs satisfy those who are able to be contacted and fed into-them there is a problem with a large number of chronically unemployed young people who need a bridge between social welfare and training programs. I was initially terribly cynical about the Community Youth Support Scheme but, through experience, I believe it has shown itself to be that sort of bridge. The community is involved. My experience has been that industry has been involved. It was a low key start and I was critical of industry at the time, but we have made contact with industry and it is
co~operating.
I remind the Minister that local legend has it that when he was just a back bench member of parliament, representing the Diamond Valley electorate, he had something to do with folding up the Greensbrough Community Youth Support Scheme. I gather that he did not get on with the clients, the project officers and the objects of the Scheme. Immediately following that the Diamond Valley Shire Council found it necessary to appoint a youth worker for the first time, which indicated that there was a need for community involvenient. These schemes are benefiting many young people with problems. They are adolescents in their formative years. Those problems cannot be dealt with by subsidy. People need a supportive set-up to get them back into the proper stream. I have a copy' of a letter from a young woman who expresses the sorts of feelings that occur. I seek leave to incorporate the letter in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
MY TIME AT LETUS . . .
The first time. I came to LETUS was in February. Kevin told me about, it. I decided to come in and have a look. I was nervou~ and a bit frightened because I didn't know anyone.
Everyone was nice but I just didn't fit in: So Istopped coming in. From then on I just stayed home, BORED TO DEATH, and occasionally went to the CES'and it didn't get me anywhere.
I went out with my friend Sophie which was GREAT until SHE GOT A JOB. I was then ON MY OWN and really DEPRESSED.
I finally decided to go to see Kevin Masci and he suggested I should go to LETUS. I took his advice.

I WENT TO LETUS. Theo suggested various ways to get an Interview. I rang up various firms and I ACTUALLY GOT THREE INTERVIEWS.
I WAS RAPT. In two days at LETUS I actually got somewhere. It was a START.
Everyone is helpful and understanding. The kids here are nice and I have MET LOTS OF NEW PEOPLE at LETUS. LETUS IS A GOOD PLACE TO COME.
Now that I know there's somewhere to drop in I feel relieved because if I never knew about LETUS I'd be stuck at home BORED and MISERABLE.
I'm the type who just can't hack being alone, 'cause I go crazy; I NEED SOMEONE TO TALK TO AND SOMEONE WHO HAS TIME TO LISTEN.
Everyone at LETUS is friendly. No-one snobs you off. Occasionally I still feel left out because I don't really contribute in some of the conversations. Mainly because I don't understand what's going on. So I keep my mouth shut and just listen. I feel that I'm like this only because I'm still new and don't really know everyone too well.
I like coming in and I think it's great that there is a place in Lalor which HELPS THE UNEMPLOYED.
LETUS has helped with jobs and interviews more than what the CES have. At the CES they couldn't give a shit about us. I hate that joint. I've given up on them. At \east at LETUS people like Theo and Jane are prepared to HELP.
I'd like to say that I'm really rapt I did come to LETUS 'cause everyone has been really great.
Christine
Dr JENKINS-I thank the House. The important thing about this letter is that its writer expresses a complete lack of confidence in the ability of the Commonwealth Employment Service to understand her problems. She expresses confidence in the support given to her by the people working with the Community Youth Support Scheme. Despite the fact that she was attending the Commonwealth Employment Service, she had no offers of jobs. As a result of advice received from the Community Youth Support Scheme she was able to think of a different approach and in fact applied for three jobs. She had that support and really feels that thi~ WIll be a
a continuing association. I believe it is not too late
for reassessment of a continuation of a scheme based on the Community Youth Support Scheme.
Mr SPENDER (North Sydney) (4.1) - The Treasurer (Mr Howard) in his Budget Speech rightly pointed to the damage that excessive wage demands would have on the prospects for the further creation of jobs. He went on to say:
It is important that the abandonment of the wage imlexation principles not be seen as having left a vacuum in this area.
In recent days Commonwealth an<;l State Governments, as well as the ACTU and National Employers, have all pointed to the continued existence of workable conciliation and arbitration processes-which in some respects are more flexible than the indexation arrangements-to settle wage. claIms. It is essential that all parties co-operate to make these processes work effectively.

1206 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

In saying this the Treasurer voiced a concern felt by many Australians that we should continue to have a workable system to process and resolve wage claims. The question is: Do we have such a system?
For many years it has been received truth for Australians who interest themselves in industrial relations that a centralised system is essential for settling claims and for resolving disputes about other conditions of employment. A centralised system, despite its acknowledged faults and weaknesses, has now been entrenched for more than 75 years. As a country we have grown so accustomed to it, so dependent on it as a permanent and reassuring feature on the industrial landscape-a feature many believe has had a stabilising influence in industrial relations-that to suggest that the system has had its day and should be scrapped as expeditiously as possible is likely to provoke cries of protest from even its most virulent critics. Australia has become an addict of a centr;;tlised system and a voyage into the unknown after many years of addiction is not an alluring prospect. However inadequate, however defective, and however much the continuance of a centralised system tends to obscure industrial realities that need to be confronted and dealt with, the system is at least known and understood. Even if it does not work, to stick to a known and cherished failure-one that still has a widespread if mainly unthinking support-is vastly better than experimenting with somthing new. Experiments can fail. If this happens those with political responsibility will be blamed.
Allowing for the dangers of questioning such a cherished anachronism, the time has surely come to ask some. fundamental questions about it. Do we need a centralised wage fixing system? Does it answer the needs of the times? Is it possible to have one that works well enough to justify its continued existence? In my view, the answer to each of these questions is no, and we need now to look to something to put in its place and to face all the necessary and painful readjustments in our thinking and in our attitudes to industrial relations that such a move will entail.
Let me now make good my view that the system has had its day and needs to be scrapped. I shall begin with a brief description of it. Early in our history we chose a unique road to achieve industrial peace. This desirable and, some would say, illusory goal was to be attained through State and Federal systems of conciliation and arbitration. Tribunals set up under statute would deal with industrial disputes and settle rates of pay and other conditions of employment. Those were simpler times and hopes were high. Thus Henry Bourne

Higgins, the first long-term President of the Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Court, as it was in those days, could say of the Commonwealth Conciliation and Arbitration Act:
The Act makes a strike or a lock out an offence . . . in other words, the process of conciliation, with arbitration in the background, is substituted for the rude and barbarous processes of strikes and lock outs. Reason is to displace force; the might of the state is to enforce peace between industrial combatants as well as between other combatants; and all in the interest of the pUblic.
Mr Justice Higgins reflected his times. In those days belief in the rule of the law and in adjudication in the interests of all aimed at achieving a just and legally enforceable result was widespread. With it, and of cardinal importance to the operation of the processes of conciliation and arbitration, there was a general community acceptance of sanctions as a necessary part of the price for securing a wide measure of industrial peace.
No one would recognise the noble sentiments expressed by Mr Justice Higgins as a description of what we now have. Belief in' the rule oflaw and acceptance of adjudication have greatly diminished. As for sanctions, while there remains in the Conciliation and Arbitration Act a panoply of provisions which makes possible the imposition of penalties for strike action, the industrial reality is that for some years these provisions have been dead letters.
The constitutional division of powers between the Federal and State governments has resulted in an unwieldy and complex system. There are at present some 24 principal tribunals established under Federal and State statutes whose functions include prescribing legal minimum or actual rates of pay. The linchpin of the whole system is the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission.
Let us now, therefore, examine the assumptions which underpin the centralised wage fixing system. I shall point to two, each of which is vital to its effective operation. First, there should be widespread acceptance of the decisions of the Commission and the other major tribunals. Second, the State tribunals should provide supporting mechanisms for the Commission's decisions so as to give effect to the principle of uniformity in wage fixing decisions for those employees who fall under State awards. '
As to the first of these assumptions, while a limited amount of divergence from what the Commission lays down may be acceptable without straining the system too far, it was a basic failure by participants to observe the Commission's decisions that led to the abandonment of the indexation system on 31 July this year. Nor is there anything to suggest that things will get better, that

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1207

in the future there will be a wider acceptance of the Commission's decisions. A cursory awareness of the reactions of some of the interested parties to the Commission's recent decision on the claim by the Transport Workers Union that the Commission endorse its agreement with the Australian Road Tansport Federation makes clear how unlikely it is that major unions will docilely accept refusals by the Commission to endorse agreements which the Commission judges to be unsustainable.

As to the second of the assumptions I have mentioned-the need for State tribunals to provide supporting mechanisms-one need only read the submissions made in the recent national wage case to realise how little there is left of this assumption. Mrs Marsh, who appeared on behalf of the AUl!tralian Council of Trade Unions, submitted-I paraphrase what she said-that differing ground rules to wage fixing applied in some of the States. This submission provoked Deputy President Isaac to say to her:

Mrs Marsh, doeS this amount to saying that a fundamental assumption of the Commission's centralised system, namely a supporting mechanism via the ~tate tribunals is no longer operative?

Mrs Marsh did not answer this question directly-I do not for a moment criticise her failure to do so-but an examination of the submissions made by her on behalf of the ACTU and of what was put by the Commission to her-these are to be found on pages 108 to 113 of the transcript of 28 July-makes it fairly plain that the answer to the question posed to her was yes.

With these two assumptions gone, how can a
centralised system effectively function? The answer, of course, is that it cannot.

But there are other and independent reasons

for rejecting the continuing validity of a cen-

tralised wage fixing system. Let me point to some

of them.

.

In the first place, why should it now be thought that a centralised system still suits Australian conditions? Enshrined in the centralised system is the doctrine of comparative wage justice. This doctrine is embraced by many, including the Commission, as art article of faith always to be observed in wage fixing. What it means is that employees doing the same work for different employers or in different industries should by and large receive the same amount of pay irrespective of the capacity of their employer or industry. The result of the application of this doctrine has been a general uniformity of award rates for tradesmen throughout Australia. But as is pointed out by Deputy President Robinson in his 1980 paper

'Dispute settling procedures and techniques in Australia':
What seems to escape many commentators is that the same doctrine is applied in relation to each and every condition of employment whether it be standard weekly hours, overtime or weekly penalty rates, number of paid public holidays, bereavement leave, sick leave, annual leave, long service leave, make up pay for jury service, all manner of loadings and allowances, redundancy payments or preference to unionist clauses.
The extent of the application of this doctrine is illustrated by the great volume of exhibits which are tendered for the purposes of showing rates of pay in different occupations throughout Australia. That would be ~mown to anyone who has had anything to do with the operation of the system. Comparative wage justice is understandable enough in a centralised system as it is spread to all facets of that system. It is, after all, difficult to see how a centralised system can operate without the application of general rules across the board.
But there are several reasons why comparative wage justice should now be discarded. First, because of the widespread publicity given to wage cases' throughout Australia, the effect of an increaSe in rates of payor allowances in one industry is that there is immediately a demand for this to apply across the board to other -industries. In the result, comparative wage justice encourages wage instability and acts as a catalyst so that where rates of pay are raised for one group other employees become dissatisfied with their own rates and seek to catch up. Secondly, given the size, complexity and diversity of the Australian industrial scene there seems to be no good reason, apart from the pursuit of equality of rates of pay for their own sake, why, for example, a tradesman employed at one end of the continent should be paid the same rates of pay as his counterpart working in a far more profitable business and in a quite different industry 2,500 miles away. As long as rates of pay are adequate there should be no reason why the differences in industries, in working conditions and in profitability should be reflected in the price that employers pay. This really is no more than the application of ordinary market forces to wage fixing.
A second and independent reason for rejecting the continued validity of the system of centralised wage fixing stems from the absence of sanctions. Sanctions, now historical curios, were considered by the founders of the system to be essential to its maintenance. This was a sensible view since a centralised wage fixation system c'annot work if, when it is under stress, there are no sanctions for its enforcement. It is not unlike having a criminal

1208 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

code without police, courts or penalties. If the decisions of the Commission can be ignored and condemned in blunt and derisive terms by some who disagree with them, what point do they have?
A final reason I shall put for the rejection of the
continuing validity of the centralised wage fixing system arises from the inherent conflict between the basic constitutional functions of the Commission, that is, to prevent and settle by conciliation and arbitration industrial disputes extending beyond the border of anyone State and the use of the Commission as an instrument of the Commonwealth Government's economic policy. Section 39 sub-section (2) of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act requires the Commission to have regard to the effect its decisions will have on the economy, employment and inflation. But obviously cases will arise where the public interest in settling a dispute will clash with the public interest requirements of section 39 sub-section
(2). The recent decision on the Transport Workers Union agreement with the Australian Road Transport Federation is a case in poinLFor whatever reason the employers agreed to the $20 raise claimed by the Transport Workers Union. But the Commission, strongly influenced by public interest, the effect on the economy and the pressures for flow-on, refused to approve the agreement. However strongly it may be argued that this was a responsible decision on the part of the Commission it is difficult to escape the conclusion that decisions based on public interest reasons and that reject agreements reached between disputing parties are not the best means of resolving industrial conflict.
To sum up, I think it is clear that the present system is not working and the probabilities are that it will not work in the future. In my view we should say so and look for a substitute. I will noW make a few suggestions about a substitute system. First, let the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission have the role of fixing a minimum wage, a wage below which men and women should not be expected to work in a prosperous and civilised country. For the rest, there should be a two-tier
system. The first tier should be constituted by direct negotiations between employers and employees. What I intend is that the parties be responsible for their own agreements and accept that responsibility. Employers and employees should after all be the best judges of their own interests. Why should they not accept responsibility for the ground rules that govern relations between them and negotiate between themselves wages, including relativities for margins and skill and negotiate other conditions of employment. The market value for work-the rate an employer

is willing to pay and an employee is willing to accept-is generally the best guide for measuring what value should be placed on work and what relative value should be placed on different occu-
pations. It is hardly novel to look at market prices for that purpose.
Agreements reached by direct negotiations should, I think, have these features. First, before final acceptance by negotiating parties agreements should ordinarily be put to all employees who would be affected by them for their acceptance. By this means employees would have a right to accept or reject them and thus come to have a direct responsibility for their own rates of pay and working conditions. Second, the agreements should ordinarily contain provisions for sanctions, including money sanctions, enforceable against both employers and employees and enforceable with a minimum of legal technicalities. Agreements without sanctions are no more than empty and pious expressions of future hopes. Third, each agreement should contain specific grievance settling procedures binding on all parties. Fourth, agreements reached by direct negotiation should be lodged with the Commission for registration. The Commonwealth, when it thinks it is in the public interest' to do so, should have a right to object to an agreement within a strictly limited period and to ,have it brought before the Commission. This option should be used sparingly and with care. Otherwise once the specified period has elapsed the agreement becomes binding for all purposes.
The second tier of which I spoke would be constituted by conciliation and arbitration. The existing tribunals could be used and they could be resorted to in cases where direct negotiations may be inappropriate. While this second tier should remain, the whole purpose of what I propose is actively to encourage direct negotiations, the acceptance of responsibility by those who engage in negotiations for the results arrived at and the observance of the agreements so reached. In the end, the plan would be to replace conciliation andarbitration by direct negotiations: Obviously amendments to the Conciliation andArbitration Act will be required and it is ~qually obvious that new mechanisms will be nee<;led. These should include the appointment of agreed third party arbitrators from outside the conciliation and arbitration system to facilitate direct negotiations and the 'representation in direct negotiations of non-union employees.
What I have outlined involves the following points. First, it involves the rejection of the notion that a system without sanctions can compel.either observance or respect. Secondly, it involves the

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1209

acceptance of market forces as the best general guide for the setting of wage rates and conditions of employment. Thirdly, it involves the rejection of comparative wage justice. Fourthly, it involves recognising that the Federal Government's powers in the area of industrial relations are in any event limited greatly by the Constitution. Fifthly, it involves acceptance by employers and employees of rates of pay and conditions of employment and the responsibility for getting those rates of pay and conditions of employment agreed to. Sixthly, it involves a very great reduction in the Commission's role.
I conclude by saying that it is well recognised that in industrial relations there are no immutable truths. Today's answers may be utterly inappropriate to tomorrow but new answers most certainly need to be found to the questions that face us.
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (4.21)-This Government has produced a Budget that will ensure the continuance of the highest prolonged inflation in Australia's history and the highest unemployment ever experienced in Australia. It is the sixth consecutive Liberal Budget to threaten the security and confidence of every Australian and to eat away at the Australian way of life. The Budget attacks the family and if this attack continues we could well see the destruction of family life as we know it in Australia. The Budget gives no relief to wage and salary earners. It gives no relief to the family. It will worsen unemployment. I do not understand how the Treasurer (Mr Howard) can intimate that this is a restrained Budget when the total of all the changes in taxes it undertakes makes the tax rake-off greater this year than at any other time in our history. There will be an increase in the tax burden for every taxpayer in Australia but the greatest increase will be, as it always is, for the pay-as-you-earn taxpayer, whose payments are to rise by 22 per cent on those oflast year.
The Treasurer's identification of Australia's problems would be a lot more convincing if we had not heard it all five years earlier. For six years the Government has been telling us that the econc omy is healthy, that unemployment is dropping and that inflation is under control. This Budget makes it clear that six years ofFraserism and right wing economic theories have come to nothing. The Government has argued consistently that the true measure of its achievements in economic policy should be its supposed success in controlling inflation. How often have we heard the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in particular, boast that Australia's inflation rate had been reduced to a level below that of our major trading

partners? However, hidden away in the Budget statements-on page 47 to be exact-is the following statement:
Australia's inflation rate is now shaping to rise as fast or faster than the average for our major trading partner countries in 1981.
There we have it. In 21 words the Fraser Government's proudest boast turns to ashes. When we add that to the Treasury's prediction that there will be little change in the average level of unemployment, what is left of the Government's economic strategy? Another area in which the fine print of the Budget statements contradicts the Government's public posture is that of tax avoidance. The Government occasionally undertakes a flurry of activity .to give the impression that it is fair dinkum in its attempts to control tax-dodging. However, if Treasury forecasts can be believed, it is not getting very far. Likely revenue losses in the personal income tax area are expected to increase from $170m to $220m. The tax avoidance industry-one of the few growth industries around-laughs at the Treasurer's puny measures and will continue to laugh at them so long as he refuses to adopt the principal of retrospective legislation. It should come as no surprise that PAYE taxpayers are becoming rather restive when we consider that they now contribute 82.7 per cent of all income tax paid by individuals. In 1975-76 the figure was 76.1 per cent. In other words, non-salaried individuals are increasingly able to avoid tax, at the expense of the great majority of Australians, through contrived legal schemes. Perhaps the Liberal Party has abandoned the work ethic in favour of the lurk ethic. The Treasurer is not renowned for his sense of humour but, in the established tradition of after- 'dinner speakers, he started his speech with a joke. He said:
1980-81 was a year of solid growth and achievement for the Australian economy.
It was a year in which the benefits of this Government's economic policies not only became more apparent, but were widely enjoyed by the Australian people. Nothing illustrates this more than the fact that real wages rose by over 4 per cent in 1980-81-again that was shared by 140,000 extra people in employment.
Is the Treasurer really claiming credit for the wage rises obtained by the trade union movement? I have heard of making a virtue out of necessity, but this is really beyond the pale. This Government has fought tooth and nail against wage increases ever since it came to office. In every national wage case since 1975, this Government has argued that Australia's wage-earners should get no increase at all-not a cent!.During his more candid moments, the Treasurer has

1210 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

stated publicly that the Government's aim is to reduce real wages. Now, due to the determined efforts of the trade union movement, wage earners have finally achieved some justice over the past year-no thanks to this Government and the Treasurer tells us how marvellous it is and how it vindicates his economic policies. We could give him nought out of ten for logic but ten out of ten for gall.
Who would ever have believed that we could have a government in Australia so unconcerned with unemployment, with all the social problems accompanying it. This lack of concern can be illustrated by the answer given to my colleague the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) when he asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Mr Lynch) whether he would give an assurance to the House that there would be no reduction in any form in protection for the motor vehicle industry. The Minister for Industry and Commerce did not make much of a fist of answering the question. He just stood up and said: 'No'. My colleague the honourable member for Port Adelaide drew the Minister's attention to the fact that any reduction in protection to the motor industry in Australia could mean the loss of 17,000 jobs, and all the Minister could say was: 'No'. He and his Government really could not give a hoot about 17,000 jobs-to them they are just numbers on a sheet of paper. The motor vehicle industry got another hit in this Budget. Sales tax on cars will increase from 15 per cent to 17t per cent, and as well, tax on items such as seat belts and windscreens will go straight from zero to 17t per cent. This comes at a time when the road safety people throughout Australia are hflving so much success in urging the use of seat belts to cut the death and injury rates from road accidents. Road safety apparently does not rate any higher than jobs with this Government.
Sales tax, the most regressive form of tax of them all, is also to be used against the family. One wonders what this Government has against the family. There are some very significant changes which are going to hit at the income of every family in Australia. These will include the doubling of sales tax on furniture, floor coverings, white goods, crockery and bedding. No luxuries are included among those items. The housing industry estimates that it will cost at least $1,000 more to build and furnish the average home, and this comes at a time when Australians who dream of owning their own home are still reeling from the tremendous increases in interest rates that this Government has also presided over. I wish to quote from a news release from the Master Builders Federation of Australia, which is not

known to be a radical organisation. In answer to the 2-lper cent sales tax on building materials it states:
This tax has not been justified
It will impose further burdens on those less able to afford it
It follows savage interest rate hikes
It will increase costs:
It must result in a further fall in the number of houses built
It will increase the cost of houses, hospitals, schools as the increased costs cannot be absorbed and will have to be passed ' to consumers
I add that the sales tax on bitumen, tar and so forth will increase the cost of building roads. The States will feelthe effect of that.
Perhaps the most disturbing aspect of this Budget's assault on family living standards is the context in which it occurs. Real living standards have been consistently eroded by the Liberal National Country party policy of higher taxes and cuts in real wages. But the 1981 Budget is the Government's most savage attack yet. If we take into account the fifth Fraser health scheme, the rises in home loan repayments, the 20 per cent electricity charge increases in Victoria and the sales tax increases, it is difficult to see how people will be able to cope. Clothing, shoes, books and newspapers will be the subject of a new 2-!- per cent tax. I do not think that any other English speaking country imposes a tax on books. In fact, even in the United Kingdom, when Mrs Thatcher imposed the value added tax, magazines, newspapers and books were specifically excluded. I wish to quote from a letter from the Library Association of Australia. It stated:
It is the simple realisation that books are not ordinary'merchandise and nationally and internationally they rightly enjoy a special status and occupy a unique position in our lives.
Books playa vital role in preserving and giving succeeding generations access to the cultural heritage of mankind, They are the fundamental tools of education from primary school through to university, and as general reading for continuing life-long education.
This sales tax becomes a tax on knowledge, a tax on information, a tax on culture. The promises of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) of 1975-77 start to look very thin when one goes through this Budget. Interestingly enough, the Treasurer said on Nationwide:
There is a lot oflicence taken by people with what precisely Mr Fraser did say in 1975 and if you look at the fine print . . .
However, until the Prime Minister'came along, we on this side of the House imagined that one looked at the fine print when one was buying a second hand car, not when one was looking at

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1211

what the Prime Minister had to say. The Budget nicely demonstrates the three most distinctive characteristics of the Fraser Administration-its incompetence, its dishonesty and its inhumanity. The Budget shows the Government to be weak in understanding, weak in commitment and weaker still in delivery. The 1981 Budget, according to the Government's own predictions, will lead to higher inflation, higher unemployment, less economic growth and lower living standards for the Australian family.
The Metal Trades Industry Association of Australia, not known as a radical organisation, resolved to convey to the Government the Association's bitter disappointment at the Government's treatment of the metal industry in relation to industry protection policy. In its letter, it went on to comment on the increasing unpredictability of the Government's industry policy. It pointed out that the Government's action was unjust and punitive and that the references the Government was sending to the Industries Assistance Commission would undoubtedly have the ultimate effect of placing Australia's metal trades industry at a competitive disadvantage with other countries. So this Government does not just act against the best interests of the family; it also acts against the best interests of Australian industries.
The Opposition is prepared to oppose the new indirect sales tax increases vigorously. We are, of course, disappointed to find that the Australian Democrats, having done a soft shoe shuffle in various directions in the other place, have now come out with the ludicrous proposal that they will request alterations. But, when the Bills come back to the Senate-undoubtedly, not altered-they will support them. Perhaps their new line is 'Let's keep the bastards guessing'. While on the subject of the Democrats, it is worthwhile to give their statement on the sales tax legislation some close examination. It really is a masterpiece. It starts by saying:
It is our intention to support the Budget in the main on the grounds that the Government has the inalienable right to govern.
This is a bit odd to begin with. They are not supporting the Budget 'in the main'; they are supporting the Budget-period! Having stated that the Government's right to govern is inalienable, they add:
so If it does in a responsible manner.
Perhaps the Democrats should club together to buy a dictionary and look up the meaning of the word 'inalienable'. Having qualified the unqualifiable and alienated the inalienable, our newest political force-or farce--trumpets:

The Australian Democrats will not allow the Government to Force Australians to pay a tax to stay alive because it is a tax on necessities.
Not very grammatical, perhaps, but very stirring stuff. In the final paragraph, they meekly announce that they will, in fact, allow it after all. This illustrates, of course, the dangers involved in trying to travel in opposite directions at the same time. It gets rather involved, and, before you know where you are, you meet yourself coming around the other side.
It is in the area of tax, both sales tax and income tax, that the Prime Minister shows his dexterity, if not his honesty. In 1975, 1977 and 1980 he made flamboyant pre-election promises to Australian families-most of which were ditched once the election was over and the Government back in office. It is in the field of taxation that this Government has the most staggering record of duplicity. We, on this side of the House, have no doubt that the Government will again take the pitcher to the well in 1983. I imagine by that time the Australian family would have thrown up its hands in horror and said: 'Please promise me no more promises'. The effect of these new sales taxes will be to bring the Government an estimated additional revenue of $132m in 1981-82, or $330m in a full year. The taxes being the type they are, the Government can continue to encroach year by year on the Australian family's pocket. Perhaps the Treasurer does not understand that, if he takes $330m out of Australian families' pockets, out of the consumers' pockets it is $330m that they cannot spend. This will hurt the small businessman, not the multinationals. The small businessman, already battling to stay afloat, will be savagely hit by the higher sales tax.
This is not a low tax government-it never has been. It is a government that is responsible for the highest taxes in the nation's history. In all the things that affect the family, this Government has reduced spending in real terms, education is down 2 per cent, health is down 22 per cent, transport and communications are down 53 per cent, water, electricity and gas are down 57 per cent, housing is down 59 per cent and right at the very bottom, showing the Government's concern, welfare housing is down 60 per cent. One of the many petty, mean things that the Government has done in this Budget is to discontinue the modest programs under the Community Youth Support Scheme. The Government has shown no interest, not just in the unemployed, but in the social problems and the misery and despair connected with unemployment. This, of course, is despite one of the Prime Minister's other promises-one of 1977 vintage:

1212 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Defence Communications Project

We will be generous to those who can't get a job and who want to work.
In conclusion I believe that the social costs of this Government's policies are too great to be borne by any community. Blinded by ideological obsessions, the Government is deliberately pursuing policies designed to hit the old, the sick, the poor, the handicapped, the children and the unemployed. It is no coincidence that these are the groups with the least political muscle, the ones the least able to fight back. Changes to health insurance will further increase the cost of health care in pursuit of the notion that decent health care should be available only to those who can afford to pay for it. Higher charges for prescription medicines will place a further burden on the chronically ill, the low income earners and, again, the family. The continued downturn in welfare housing will add to the misery of those who cannot afford today's high rents. Cuts in State education spending, forced by Federal action, will discriminate against those in government schools and in the poorer section of the Catholic school system.
In a society which is rapidly polarising the affluent and the battlers, the burden is again being placed on the shoulders of those least able to bear it. The unemployed, the poor, the sick, the old and the children are increasingly the hapless victims of a government devoid of understanding, devoid of compassion and completely unaware of present social problems, let alone the future ones that their policies are creating. Any society that adopts, albeit indirectly, a philosophy of the survival of the fittest does so at its own risk.
Debate (on motion by Mr Dean) adjourned.
DEFENCE INTEGRATED SECURE COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK
PROJECT
Ministerial Statement
Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence)-by leave-I wish to advise the Parliament that new tenders are to be invited for the Defence Integated Secure Communications Network known as the DISCON project. Negotiations with Collins International Service Co, known as CISCO, which was provisionally announced as the preferred tenderer by my colleague the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) and me on 6 April last, will be terminated. My colleague and I are in total agreement on this course of action. A prime concern in our deliberations was that Commonwealth procurement procedures be and be seen to be above reproach.

I should outline the course of events which has led to this decision. In announcing our decision in April we made it clear that the awarding of a contract to CISCO would be subject to negotiation of satisfactory terms and conditions of contract. Although contractual negotiations were commenced with CISCO no contract has been finalised. On 26 June 1981 CISCO advised the Commonwealth that it proposed the substitution of the major sub-contractor and subsequently CISCO forwarded a formal addendum to its tender setting out the details of the proposed substitution. When this advice was received it raised a fundamental issue about whether it was appropriate to accept such a substitution having regard to the Commonwealth's established tendering procedures.
I lend some emphasis to that because the Commonwealth's tendering procedures are there not to be observed casually or by way of inclination but completely by way of a discipline. There may be some observers of the scene-indeed some political practitioners-who would be disposed to seek to wring some political mileage out of the Government's decision. I strongly suggest to those people that they should be cautious in seeking to offer any rebuke because governments of all persuasions have meticulously observed these tendering procedures. I have read some commentaries involving some rather harsh and pejorative language suggesting that there has been some error of judgment on the part of those within the Department of Defence. I emphasise that the tendering procedures are there to be observed com-: pletely and at all times.
The matter was put to a comprehensive and meticulous review. All the technical, financial and contractual effects of the proposed substitution were examined. It was concluded that the change in the major sub-contractor and the consequences that flowed from that constituted a substantial alteration to the original tender proposal. My colleague the Minister for Administrative Services and I agree on the course that will now be pursued. The first step in calling new tenders will be a public invitation to firms to register their interest. This is necessary in view of the time that has elapsed since the origiriallist of four tenderers was agreed. A shortlist of companies will be selected from the responses and invited to tender.
A restriction on potential tenderers will be that only Australian, British, Canadian or United States firms which can meet stringent security requirements will be considered for the central design and software aspects of the project. There has been a degree of uninformed public speculation about the delay that will be caused by a decision

Defence Communications Project

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1213

to recall tenders for DISCON. In my statement on 6 April I said that the first phase of the DISCON project would be completed in 1984 and that the development of the complete Australia-wide network would extend over about 10 years.
Certainly re-tendering will delay the completion of the first phase of DISCON by about a year but, taken in the context of our planning for the whole network, the delay is not substantial. Indeed, there would appear to be good prospect that a re-arrangement of the later phases of the project will allow this to be made good. We are presently giving consideration to that. It remains for me to say only that I have complete confidence in my technical advisers on the DISCON project. It will enable the rapid and secure handling of many types of information. It will establish a nationwide defence communications network responsive to the demands of the command and control systems of the Defence Force in the future. I present the following paper:
Defence Integrated Secure Communications Network Project-Ministerial Statement, 10 September 1981. '
Motion (by Mr McVeigh) proposed:
That the House take note of the pap~
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (4.45)-The Government has taken the only course open to it, given the facts of this matter. It is clear, as I was saying earlier in the day when the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) kindly informed me he would be making this statement, that the original tender was not capable of being met and included within it items which were not at a stage of development which enabled it to be guaranteed to be delivered by the prime contractor with relevance to a specific sub-contractor. It should be noted also that in the statement by the Minister restrictions have been placed on the sources from which contractors can be drawn, and it names specific nations and excludes the country from which the alternative sub~contractor was to be derived under the Collins International Service Co. proposal. It seems that in' that instance for some rec:l,son the Government does not believe that that sub-contractor is satifactory. I do not wish to name the contractor because that would be unfair to it if it is not true. But it certainly is to be excluded from being part of a tender, if the Minister,'s statement is to be read as literally excluding a number of European countries.
The Opposition is concerned about this matter. I do not share the Minister's confidence that there are no areas in relation to which some concern ought to be expressed by this House. The matter

of the Defence Integrated Secure Communications Network program is not an isolated instance of technical pmblems arising. This has occurred especially in areas of high technology and has involved the manner in which these programs have been assessed and implemented by the Department of Defence. At an earlier time a series of Auditor-General's reports dealt with computers and matters directly arising from the management of computers and were highly critical of the Department. On the basis of them. I understand corrective measures now have been taken. Nevertheless, that material is available.
It was alleged also by a former employee of the Department of Defence-he was the subject of considerable investigation and inquiry by this House-that Defence Department computers are capable of being milked from outside by relatively simple means. This is another area of high technology in which there is at least dispute about the professional competence of the people involved. In respect of the assessment of this tender and the whole lead up to the project I draw the attention of the House to a considerable amount of debate which took place before the Katter Subcommittee of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence. I do not want to go through the answers to various questions which were supplied by Mr Berthelsen who gave evidence on this specific matter and in fact worked on this project in the Department of Defence at an early stage. If the Minister is agreeable I seek leave to have Mr Berthelsen's answers to questions'15 to 18 of 29 July 1979 incorporated in Hansard. They form part of a public document. If they were incorporated it would save a lot of the time of the House.
Mr Killen-Can I have my friend's assurance that it does not disturb the flow of it?
Mr SCHOLES-The matters raised in those questions subsequently were the source of debate before the Katter Sub-committee of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence. They later were the substantive subject matter of a hearing and a report by the Committee of Privileges. I shall read item 49 of that report because I think it is relevant to this matter.
Mr Killen-With respect, they are the answers by Mr Berthelsen who was not at any time subject to competent cross-examination.
Leave not granted.
Mr SCHOLES-The matters raised are ones of 'public record and those who are interested in the background ,of this matter-I do not wish to press the matter-will find those answers interesting in that they deal with highly technical matters

1214 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Defence Communications Project

and are highly critical of the handling of this matbasic to the actual decision in favour of the ten-

ter. I think that is relevant to the matter before derer, which was neither available nor likely to

the House. I wish to read to the House paragraph become available in the future. It could have be-

49 of the Privileges Committee report which was come available only with additional expenditure

made at the end of the last Parliament. It reads:

for development purposes which I would assume

On all the evidence before it the Committee is satisfied that was not covered in the original tender, by the Ausa number of persons within the Department of Defence inditralian Government.

vidually and collectively determined not only to rebut the evi-

dence of Mr Berthelsen but to go further and if possible to silence him, to discredit him personally, and to deter him (and
others similarly minded) from offering further evidence which was critical of the Department of Defence before the Subcommittee on Defence Matters . . .

I will refer to another matter; that is, the truck order. The Government rejected the International tender on the basis primarily that it was not prepared to be in development cost arrange-

The last part is irrelevant but the first part is quite relevant to this matter because the substantive criticism made was in respect of the handling of the'matter and the technical competence of those who were dealing with the DISCON matter.
I want to deal with the last paragraph of the Minister's statement because I think it cannot be accepted by this House. The technical assessment of those who tender for a contract of $200m has to be beyond question. It is fairly evident to anyone who has listened to the Minister's statement or has followed this matter for any period that at the

ments. That mayor may not be a correct decision. It never put in a tender. It submitted an item for a development design. I think the Minister is aware of that. I am not pressing that matter, I am merely making the point that advice has been given on a tender on a technical matter which could not stand up to any examination on the basis of competence and technical expertise. The Government has now taken the only course open. Had it not reopened tenders-I do not dispute that decision-the tendering process would have been thrown open to considerable doubt.

time of the announcement of the successful tender I want to raise another matter on which I think

the Univac switching system was not available it is time this House had a response. The Katter

and not likely to be available. It was at such a Sub-committee spent a considerable period, and

stage of development that if it had been included this House a considerable amount of trauma, on

in that contract it would have been at the cost of the matter I raised earlier and also on the report

the Australian Government in that additional on procurement. It was presented to this House

development would have been necessary.

two years ago. The Government has a policy that

As I understand it, that development has not taken place and the contractor, in negotiations for the signing of that contract, was not able to give any assurances that that switching system would

within six months of the presentation of a report a response should come from the department and the Minister concerned. In that case no response has been forthcoming.

be available. He subsequently sought to bring into' the contract a different sub-contractor for what is a substantive proportion of the fulfilment of the contract. That must place doubt on the competence of those who made the recommendations on which the decision was based. I do not blame the Minister for that. But I cannot accept that the Minister has confidence in advice which was so obviously in error. It should have been patent to those examining the system that it included items which were not technically available at the time at which the decisions were being made. I would have thought it was a responsibility to ensure that a tenderer was putting forward a substantive tender on the basis of equipment which was available or was at such a stage of development that it was certain that it could be made readily available.
That was not true in this case. The successful tenderer was able to receive the contract, presumably on the advice of technical experts, which in-

One other matter which is of substance is the report of the Privileges Committee which was made in the last Parliament. It was not debated in that Parliament but assurances were given by the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) that a debate on the substantive matters in that report would take place in this Parliament. Those matters have much broader significance than the matter which is before us now because they deal with the procedures and the competence of committees to carry out their functions. That is a matter dear to the heart of the Ministt<r. It has not come before the Parliament in one al;1d a half sessions. At this stage it is not listed. I believe that both matters ought to be dealt with by the Government as a matter of urgency. I believe that procedures should be set in train to ensure that in future a tender which quite clearly cannot get through the screening process cannot meet the proposals that are contained in the tender requirements.

cluded an item of equipment, which probably was Debate (on motion by Mr Dean) adjourned.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1215

APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1981-82
Second Reading
(Budget Debate)
Debate resumed.
Mr DEAN (Herbert) (4.55)-This year defence has, quite properly, been accorded a high priority in line with Government policy. Budget Statement No.3 deals with defence. It begins:
Consistent with the policy announced by the Government last year that there be a sustained development of the Defence Force and national defence infrastructure, outlays on Defence in 1981-82 are estimated to increase by 16.3 per cent to $4111.8 million. The provision involves a real increase over 1980-81 of about 5.3 per cent. Defence outlays are expeCted to rise to around 3 per cent of gross domestic product by 1984-85; in 1980-81 they were 2.7 per cent and this year's estimate represents a further increase in the proportion of Defence expenditure to gross domestic product.
The aim to get defence spending to 3 per cent of gross domestic product by 1984-85 is in itself highly laudable. I support it. It follows then that I support the appropriation planned for defence this year. Again, quite properly, much of the money appropriated this year will be spent on the acquisition of equipment. Future acquisitions of equipment, as the Budget Statement points out, will require much more money later. Certainly we must have the best equipment. Nevertheless, we must also have the best personnel. I am concerned that the forces must attract and hold eager, dedicated and able serving members. I wish to give some attention to this point during my speech.
Overall there is considerable ignorance in the civilian community about the part that the defence forces play in the community at large. I will give some examples of that using my home city of Townsvilk Established there is the Third Task Force at Lavarack Barracks and the Royal Australian Air Force base at Garbutt. They involve over 3,000 Army serving members and about 450 RAAF serving members, making approximately 3,500 serving personnel overall. With the wives and children of those personnel who are married, the defence forces add something like 10,000 directly to Townsville's population, which is about 10 per cent of its present total population. The size of that defence force adds considerably indirectly to the overall population of the city.
Those people spend a great deal of money in and around the local community. The estimates vary, but the spending of the members of the defence forces in the local community in Townsville probably.amounts to over $lOOm per annum. In addition to that, local businessmen are able to

take out local direct contracts with the defence forces. It is not often understood or recognised that through the defence establishments of the city of Townsville, this is a very large part of the city's population. It is making a contribution to diversity in the background and in the lifestyle of the city. A large number of service people play~a vital part in the local economy.
In addition, the establishmen t of Lavarack Barracks, as an example, ,and the continuing life of the defence forces in Townsville, obviously mean that capital projects have made and still make enormous contributions to the city's economy. For example, at present, Lavarack Barracks, Stage II is being built at a cost of some $6m and by virtue of the build-up of the defence force in Townsville about 250 houses are being constructed or acquired at what will probably be a total project cost of $12m. Townsville, therefore, and other cities with defence establishments, benefit enormously. The civilian community does itself a disservice if it does not recognise this, welcome it and, at the same time, make personnel and their families feel welcome and wanted.
The civilian community is ignorant also about what service Jife involves. The simple question is: What, in fact, does a soldier do? The civilian community knows little about the. long and arduous hours of training that go into serving in the armed forces. It knows little about the harsh conditions of being on exercises, of sleepless hours, of living on rations, of resting in the dirt and of the sheer heavy work that exercises involve.
Last week I had the advantage of spending two days and one night on exercise with the 4th Field Regiment from Lavarack Barracks. The 4th Field Regiment consists of two L5 pack howitzer batteries and battery headquarters and about 350 troops in all were involved in the exercise. To say that I was highly impressed would be an understatement. Those 350 men worked hard and long in rough conditions in the high range area west of Townsville. I could describe in some detail all that I saw. Suffice it to say in summary, that what they did they did with impressive skill, speed and precision, both by day and by night.
In passing I say that I am grateful to the 4th Field Regiment and to its commanding officer, Lieutenant-Colonel McInnis, for letting me join it and learn from it. We must be continually concerned about attracting and holding this sort of eager, dedicated and able soldier. In that regard we must be concerned therefore, about defence force pay and conditions. During the exercise last week I had the opportunity of speaking with most of the troops. The first thing that I learned was

1216 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

that there was widespread disappointment with the results of the Coldham recommendations on work value change in relation to defence pay. I imagine there still is. Unfortunately, part of that disappointment stems from a lack of knowledge about the report. It is simply not yet well understood. Nevertheless, I did convey that sense of disappointment to the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen). I am indebted to him for some further information that he has given to me.
The work value change-it is only the work value change which is the subject of the Coldham second report-recommends, overall, an increase by virtue of work value change of 6.9 per cent in service pay. This compares with some Australian Public Service professional classification increases. For example, engineers had a 5.6 per cent work value change increase and other professional officers had a 5.6 per cent work value change also. Examiners of airmen had a 5.8 per cent work value change increase and professional engineers employed by various local government authorities have had work value changes of between 5 per cent and 8 per cent. The work value
change increase for clerical administrative and professional staff employed by local government councils has been between 4 per cent and 6 per cent. On that sort of comparative basis the change recommended by the Coldham report is not necessarily ungenerous.
If we look at some basic figures we see again that the work value change has been a reasonable
one in comparative terms. It means, at the bottom level of defence pay, an increase of something like $11.64 a week. Work value changes for tradesmen
in the metal industry have meant increases of about $9 per week and for first-year and secondyear draftsmen of about $9 per week. Production, supervising, technical and clerical staff in the motor vehicle industry have received work value increases of about $9 a week. Tradesmen have received an increase of about $9 per week. That is so for virtually all of the major motor vehicle manufacturers in this country. On that comparative basis the work value change is not necessarily ungenerous.
Nevertheless, it has to be pointed out also that the work value change does not take into account over-award payments in industry; nor does it take into account overtime payments. I am sure that some of the expectations that service personnel had, and which were expressed to me last week, were heightened by recent pay increase decisions, by the fact of over-award payments and by the overtime that is available to some workers. Some of the recent pay decisions which are more notable would be the decisions in relation to Telecom

Australia's workers and the decisions in favour of members of the Transport Workers Union. Indeed, defence personnel cannot claim overtime. Although they do have the service allowance in compensation, there is a widespread feeling that the service allowance currently is simply an inadequate level of compensation in lieu of overtime.
There is, of course, a continuous review made within the Department of Defence to ensure that there is no diminution of the policy of the Government; that salaries of all service personnel will, at all times, be kept abreast of wage and salary standards applying in the community, with particular emphasis on those applying in other areas of Commonwealth employment.
I urge the Government to ensure that this policy is applied swiftly and equitably if general wage increases are shown to be getting ahead.
It is worth pointing out also that some members of the defence .forces can expect some additional benefits later this year. Broadly, these should come about in two ways. Both were referred to in the Coldham report. I will quote. firstly from paragraphs 2.9, 2.10 and 2.11, beginning at page 11 of the report. Paragraph 2.9 states:
We do not consider that work value change should embrace or be considered as subsuming a particular area of work which has. undergone such a marked change in substance and form as to demand that it-be reassessed in a new industrial context. In other words, circumstances may exist where certain work has transcended the limits of work value change by taking on characteristics which qualify it for reclassification
Paragraph 2.10 states:
Our further report will therefore include an investigation of possible areas of work within the Defence Force which possibly require reclassification.
2.11 It is probably unnecessary to state that none of the remainder of the reference will be jeopardised or stultified by this separate exercise involving a final assessment of work value change. The rectification of any misalignments in salary reference points, the correction of anomalous and inequitable situations and a review and possible readjustment of salary penetration can all be considered without doublecounting, free from any self-imposed impediment, in a salary system which has been augmented for work value change.
Paragraph 8.6 on page.46 refers to the service allowance. As I have already mentioned, there is a feeling that-this is an inadequate compensation for personnel notbeing able to claim overtime. The Coldham Committee states in paragraph 8.6:
In the interim report on the present terms of reference we recommended an increase in Service Allowance commensurate with the movement in salary. We again recommend that this be so. So as to ensure that Service Allowance is accurately assessed, detailed information is being sought on the hours worked in the Services. It is therefore possible that further changes to Service Allowance will be recommended in our later report.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1217

There remains for me to consider the conditions of work of service personnel. The Coldham Committee, as is mentioned in the report, received some 1,600 submissions from individual servicemen and servicewomen. Many of those submissions went on to mention areas of dissatisfaction within the defence forces, but these matters were outside the terms of reference of the Coldham Committee. Nevertheless the Coldham Committee referred to those areas of discontent. Suffice it for me to read again from the report. Paragraph lO.3 on page 49 states:
The areas of discontent most frequently expressed cover some of the circumstances when Defence Force members are obliged to pay for rations and quarters.
In my own talks with troops last week I certainly found that there is a great deal of dissatisfaction about circumstances where Defence Force members have to pay for rations and quarters. It is a real bone of contention. Paragraph 10.3 continues:
There is also dissatisfaction with the uniform maintenance allowance, the charges levied for certain items of clothing and the adequacy of payments made in association with postings. Inconsistencies are alleged with respect to married quarter standards and rental and to education allowance including the standards adopted for its payment and its adequacy. Entitlements for 'reunion travel' "for separated families also came under criticism. Underlying many of the complaints was an expressed dissatisfaction with the frequency of postings at some stages of a member's Service career.
Those are important matters. I hope that they will be given urgent consideration by the Department of Defence and by the Government. I began my speech by pointing out that Australia is now spending substantial amounts of money on defence. As I said at the outset, we are intent on building up a first rate, well equipped Defence Force, adequately funded. Let it be stressed that we must ensure that Defence Force pays and conditions are such that the forces attract and hold eager, dedicated and able members.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (S.IO)-It comes to my turn to say something about the 1981-82 Budget. I describe the Budget as a Budget which will reinforce the politics of greed. Further, it seems to me almost obscene that the level of poverty in a state of plenty which has been endemic to Australia, even in its most prosperous post-war years, is now attaining major proportions. I use the word 'obscene' advisedly because this is happening in a country which, by any estimation, is one of the best placed countries, at least economically, in the world. Australia, so we are told, is benefiting from the first phase of the so-called resources boom-however overstated that might be, I might add-and, we are told, overseas investors are rushing in with money for development. So it seems to me that there is a very

cruel paradox in the fact that stringent economic measures deemed necessary to cope with the alleged boom and to ensure higher general prosperity in the longer term entail worsening and widening hardships for the economically disadvantaged. The poor are hit so that the non-poor might be better off. Some paradox! Some obscenity! Just how many Australians are living below the poverty line is a mystery. Professor Ronald Henderson, whom most people would deem a reasonable authority in this area, estimates the number at over two million and increasing. Predictably, the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) disputes that claim but, strangely, produces no counter-estimate. However, what is crystal clear from the available statistics on the unemployed and others economically depressed is that the number is daunting for an advanced Western country with Australia's relatively small population. To add to the confusion, regrettably the Government has suspended the garnering of important statistics which would give a better insight into the true state of affairs in this area. Where does the answer to this degrading inequity lie? Economists offer all kinds of academic solutions. But after all, in the final analysis, economic theory is theory about human behaviour, however much economists wish to reduce it to pure mathematics. Conservative politics is about serving the haves at the expense of the have-nots.
There would be no insoluble problem, either economically or politically, about relieving the plight of the poor if the balance of society were prepared to give a little more of its share of the cake; but quite obviously it has set its face against that. The economists and the conservatives know that. This Government has encouraged the Australian community to be self-centred and quick to take umbridge at making any sacrifice for another's sake. I might add that that attitude, quite depressingly, is not exclusive to Australia; it is manifest very clearly also in the Reagan and Thatcher administrations. For example, we have witnessed the massive tax cuts which President Reagan recehtly granted to the middle class at a cost to social welfare in the United States of America. Recently President Reagan has even taken to quoting President Coolidge, whose commitment to robust self-interest as a spur to economic growth and recovery promoted the Great Depression.
Recent political polls indicate that the day is not far distant when the social decency of the great mass of Australians will rebel against the Fraser Government's lack of a human face and its propensity to produce mean, dispiriting Budgets

1218 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

such as the one recently presented. Any governCYSS-kindly, loving attention from project

ment which consistently strands and penalises officers who are concerned to ensure that those

people on low wages and social security benefits, kids realise that there are people in the world who

which promotes the politics of greed and which are not necessarily hostile to them because they

caters to the haves as against the have-nots, has are not terribly capable. At least if CYSS centres

sown the seeds of its own destruction. One perremain open to those kids they will have some-

fectly good example of this lack of humanity is thing to do through the day. What they do at night

clearly manifest in the Government's attempt to is another story. It appears that at least 200 of

close down the Community Youth Support them are living on the streets in Parramatta.

Scheme. I notice a report in a paper today-if
Press reports can be believed-to the effect that in the party room several members of the Government parties, including, I might note, the Deputy Speaker, were very critical of the Government's claim on CYSS finances.

Honourable members can imagine the difficul-
ties those kids with no family support have surviving and on $36 a week which is the dole for unemployed kids under 18 years of age with no family to go home to. That represents $5 a day by any mathematical calculation. I hope that the

For a minute or two I wish to recount my experiences with three CYSS groups which operate within my electorate. I know the kids well. I guess Parramatta might well be considered a very large

Government will have a rethink about CYSS. I ask that sincerely. I am sure there is enough humanity amongst some members of the Government to ensure that such a decision is made.

city. Some people have described it as the Kings Cross of the west. The CYSS groups seem to be gathering points for some of the more hopelessly treated kids in surrounding suburbs. My experience with them is that the training schemes that have been promoted as an alternative to CYSS do

I wish to devote the rest of my time to speaking about the meat industry, about which I have a specific knowledge, having spent something like 28 years as a practitioner in that area.
Sir William McMahon-Successfully.

not suit their needs. They are basically kids from Mr JOHN BROWN-Yes, successfully. In

broken homes, kids who have passed through orfact, for five years I was Chairman of the Whole-

phanages or other institutions. They are kids with sale Meat Traders Association of New South

very little educational attainment. Very little inWales, which strangely is an employers group. I

itiative has ever been infused in them by their was a union member at the same time. In fact I

families. They are kinds who lack any sort of famwas a union member for 20 years. I think I am

ily support. Very few of them have ever known a reasonably qualified to say something about the

room of their own. I have always thought that meat industry. I am, as most responsible members

CYSS offered them a haven of security, at least of this Parliament are, appalled by the events of

through the day, where they could belong to at recent weeks. I am appalled because the great

least something, even if not to a family. It appears . mass of people in the meat industry who are con-

to me that, whereas in some other areas the cerned, as is the case with most other industries,

proposed training schemes might be a good are decent, reputable and honest traders. It seems

alternative to CYSS, they certainly will not proto me quite sad that the reputation they as an in-

vide an answer to the problems that exist in my dustry have built up over generations has been

electorate.

torn asunder by the evil acts of a very few people.

I hope that the tendency I observed today in the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown) to show some inclination to soften his attitude towards closing CYSS will become a continuing attitude. Perhaps the Government will think more seriously about what it proposes to do in that area and will tailor its proposals to suit particular areas. I suggest that Parramatta is one area which should be so considered because there we have about 500 kids in three CYSS groups who really do not have much potential to obtain a job in a very difficult employment area, where 30 or 35 young people are looking for every available

I am not very happy with the Government's response, I might add. I think the Government has failed to comprehend the size of the problem. I doubt that it even realises the size of the industry. Meat exports to the United States amount to almost $800m a year. By any standards it is a very big industry. It concerns not only exporters but also it goes well down the line to the graziers. The right honourable member for Lowe (Sir William McMahon) is sitting in the chamber. He would have great sympathy with the graziers, being one himself. If our export industry collapses it will be a total disaster for the graziers of Australia.

job. Training those kinds would not do much good There are more than the graziers to think

because there are no jobs to put them in anyhow. about. There are also the slaughtermen who have

What they need is what they are getting from devoted their lives to their profession. Presently

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1219

between 9,000 and 10,000 slaughtermen are unemployed in Australia because of economic conditions, droughts and the turndown in our export markets. Honourable members can imagine what it will do to that group of people if our export industry cannot recover from the shock. There are also exporters, many of whom are going to the wall because of Australia's prestige in this area being damaged so much recently. There are the shipping companies who ship all the meat overseas. There are the owners of abattoirs in Australia, be they municipal authorities, private companies or State governments. So many of them are closed at the moment because of the conditions I have explained that also affect slaughtermen. Finally, and probably most importantly, Australia's reputation as a trading nation is now at a very low ebb because of this problem.
Of course, there are alternatives for the United States. It does'not have to buy its meat from us. Australian meat has always gone to America, despite a very strong lobby from the agricultural industry in the United States which does not want Australian meat to go there. It is fair to say that President Carter promoted the import of Australian meat because it was cheaper than the American commodity, in which case it was a counter to that country's high inflation. If the Minister thinks that our exports to the United States will pick up overnight, as he seemed to suggest yesterday in the House when he said that all Australian meat-I think the amount was 38,000 tonnes-has now been released by the United States authorities, and if he thinks that the Americans will be rushing to buy Australian meat he is quite wrong. He does not understand the fettish that the American people have with hygiene, particularly the proper procedures for the inspection of meat.
There seems to be a belief amongst some people that the high standards that the Americans imposed upon our abattoirs and meat inspection procedures in the last 10 years were an attempt to make our meat dearer. That is not the fact. Anybody who believes that does not understand the fetish I spoke about which Americans have with hygiene. In fact, they have done us a favour. They have made us revamp our whole meat industry and improve the standard of our abattoirs and boning rooms so that they are now the best in the world. Johnny Carson who runs the largest television program in America makes jokes about the hamburger he bought which he knew was made of Australian beef because it started to nibble the lettuce. When we descend to the situation of being a joke in America the chances of the market picking up rapidly are very slim. For this reason, I

think the Government's reaction to the whole problem was inadequate.
The first reaction of the Minister seemed to be to look for legitimate abattoirs which had been killing horses fit for human consumption and blame them. I think he looked at Tancred Brothers Pty Ltd. I notice that the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) is absent. Perhaps it is just as well. It was an insult to Tancreds. It is a decent, legitimate operation. It has been killing horses at its Bourke abattoirs and exporting horse meat to Tahiti, Belgium, Japan, et cetera. There was no go there. The next thing the Minister did was call in six Commonwealth police. That is not bad. It is one policeman for every $IOOm of business we were to lose. That number was extended to 11 and finally to 19. With all due respect to the Commonwealth Police, the statements of Commissioner Woods on television last Saturday night were very enlightening. He said that he believed that the police could have pursued with much more vigour the complaints made about export meat in 1975.
To call in the Commonwealth Police did not seem to me to be a very reasonable reaction. I compare it with the reaction that the Government took when 2t years ago, a trading operation in Melbourne called the Co-operative Farmers and Graziers Direct Meat Supply Ltd, a co-operative owned by farmers, principally members of the National Country Party, went broke for the third time. It had a shortfall in funds of $14m. This Government, despite criticism I made at the time, rushed in and provided $7m. The Victorian Government provided a similar amount to pick it up. That was the worst business decision ever made. The company had been broke three times in the past. It was destined to go broke again and did. The $14m disappeared. I ask honourable members to compare those reactions. An amount of $14m was provided to rescue an ailing company whose shareholders were farmers. That decision was made overnight. But when an industry worth $600m a year was under threat the Government's reaction was to call in II Commonwealth policemen. I wonder for how many years we could have employed II Commonwealth policemen for $7m. There seems to be a grave imbalance in the two reactions.
One of the problems I face when I consider the Department of Primary Industry is that, with the exception of the right honourable member for Lowe who has, I understand, previously been an incumbent of the position of Minister for Primary Industry in his highly reputable past and former Senator Wriedt who was Minister for Agriculture

1220 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

in the Labor Government, the Department of Primary Industry has always been a sinecure for the National Country Party. With all due respect to you, Mr Deputy Speaker, I do not have a great deal of admiration for the business acumen of farmers. It seems to me to be quite stupid always to include the meat industry in the Department of Primary Industry. After all, it is not a primary industry; it is a secondary industry. It requires expert traders in order to run profitably. Why the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation includes meat is totally beyond me. There should be a separate authority which handles the meat industry in Australia. Let the cockies run the livestock operation if they want. They have some skill in that area. But let us keep them out of the meat industry.
In the Department of Primary Industry the main meat man is called George Mackey. In the meat industry he is normally known as George Lackey because he is considered a lackey to the cockies. Any board that has ever been set up in the Department of Primary Industry, particularly those concerned with the meat industry, has always been swamped by the farmers. They have outnumbered the meat men by two to one. The present Chairman of the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation is Mr Geoff Jones, formerly an employee of F. J. Walker Ltd. His favourite expression is: 'We don't want any socialism in the meat industry'. Perhaps he should look at the Lamb Marketing Board of Western Australia. Sir Charles Court, by no stretch of the imagination, could be called a socialist. I am sure that Geoff Jones would consider the Western Australian Lamb Marketing Board to be a socialist authority. It is a government authority which looks after the marketing of Western Australian lambs. It is a highly successful venture.

marketing of meat is taken away from the Department of Primary Industry and given to the Department of Trade and Resources, or some other department that has skills in the trading of commodities, the better.
Not so long ago I looked through the Year Book which designates, amongst other things, the professions to which parliamentarians aspire. I found it quite strange that whilst about 6 per cent of the Australian popUlation devotes itself to primary industry, 42 out of 125 members of the two Government parties in the two Houses of Parliament describe themselves as primary producers. Is it any wonder, with all due respect to you, sir, as a National Country Party man, that the National Country Party lobby in this Government is so strong? We are being ruled by a rural rump. Forty-two out of 125-one-third-of members of the Government parties are described as cockies. I have great respect for practising cocki~s, but not much for their capacity to run the meat industry. There is one thing I would like to finish on. About 14 days ago the Australian Meat 'Industry Employees Union warned the Department of Primary Industry that there was in a cold store in Darwin, and at Port Hedland, meat that was probably adulterated. Nothing has been done as yet. That leaves me with one of two conclusions. Either nothing was done so that somebody could get the meat out of that cold store or it was shipped before they got there to look at it.
Mr Birney-Did you report this?
Mr JOHN BROWN-The union reported it. One way or another that meat may turn up in America.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

The record of farmers in the meat industry in Australia is appalling. I have mentioned in the House before a number of organisations which the farmers have set up, either on a co-operative basis or a trading basis, to market their own meat. The litany of failures is unbelievable. I can think of four recent failures in New South Wales: They are the Rural Producers Co-op Pty Ltd, Producers Direct Meat Pty Ltd, the North-West Marketing Group and Vanlaine (Pty) Ltd. They all went broke within two years, no matter how much financial support they had from the farmers. The farmers are trying to sell their own meat on the world markets. They are totally incapable of doing so. The disaster which has befallen the meat industry in Australia in the last month is largely a measure of their inefficiency. The quicker the

Sir WILLIAM McMAHON (Lowe) (5.31)- Because of the experience with my first Budget as Treasurer, with various exchange rate changes under the Holt Government and my Government, with the Budget of 1960-61 and, as Prime Minister, the Budgets of 1971-72 and 1972-73, I have always carefully analysed each Budget in the light of the latest economic trends. Long before the 1981-82 Budget was delivered on 18 August I became concerned about the trends in the Australian economy at home and its effect internationally. The announcement on 1 September by the chairman of the CRA group that its profits had fallen from $1 OOm in 1980 to $16m in the first six months to June 1981 reinforced my opinion that much greater consideration must be given to the known facts of today and the forecasts of

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1221

tomorrow and less to the effects of what happened two months ago.
Sir Ian McLennan, one of the really great Australians, said on 9 September, that 'the so-called boom, that never was, is not likely to be other than a period of accelerated development'. This sets out my views perfectly, but I would add: 'But only in certain parts of the economy'.
The official statements relating to the forecasts about the $33 billion investment boom during the early 1980s did harm. They were interpreted as meaning that the boom was having immediate effect. Understandably it incited the left wing unions to make immediate and excessive demands for increased wages well beyond the country's capacity to pay and damaging to our international price advantage.
Treasury's publicily expressed views, based on the Gregory thesis as crudely interpreted, that the mining boom with big increases in export income made it essential that protected industries, particularly the manufacturing sector, must make way for the mining and energy industries have proved to be exaggerated. Of course, some movement is necessary, but at the moment appreciation of currency is doing the job. Gregory always qualified his thesis with the reservation 'other things being equal', which they never are.
I illustrate the point I am making in this way: Exports were $18,900m last year and $18,600m the year before. Imports were $19,000m last year, $15,900m the year before-a very big increase.
Expectations of substantial economic growth were created which cannot be satisfied. There is a distinct possibility that the economy may have already turned into a downward phase of activity or a phase of reduced economic activity which commenced before the 18 August Budget. If this is in fact the case, then the contracting influences introduced in the Budget will certainly reinforce and intensify this downward trend. One of the underlying economic assumptions in the Budget was a need to ensure fiscal and monetary policy changes to dampen down expectations and enthusiasm. This policy no longer fits easily with the necessity for economic growth, nor is it consistent with the economic and financial facts that are now becoming public.
Of course, our prospects are good provided that wages are kept closer to growth of productivity; that we are sensitive to changing economic and financial trends which require change; that we avoid a repetition of the economic and financial blunders of 1973 to 1976; and that we adhere to policies needed to achieve the Government's objectives.

These are the facts: In 1980-81 our gross domestic product increased by 2.9 per cent. There was a fall in farm product of 12.3 per cent in the aftermath of the severe three-year drought and a rise in non-farm product of 4 per cent. What was not said was that the biggest improvement in growth of non-farm product of 6.1 per cent took place in the first half of 1980-81; that is, from July to December. Non-farm growth slackened to a mere 1.6 per cent in the second half of the year to the end of June 1981 and has shown so signs of recovery since then. Factory output began to falter during the June quarter of this year and slumped dramatically in July 1981. Statements in the Budget Papers create the impression that industries are in such a strong position that changes could be made to the company tax structure to ensure greater and sustainable receipts to the Treasury. The recent very heavy fall in profits explodes this theory. In any event, the normal proportion-close to 18 per cent-of profit shares as a percentage of GDP, which has long been the norm, has not eventuated. According to Budget Paper No.1, it is now only 15 per cent.
I turn to inflation. The Treasury estimates the consumer price index figure as 10.75 per cent 'over the year 1981-82 as a whole'. This is not the proper or the most responsible way of estimating the real increase in CPI and its effect. The only figures that can really be trusted and relied upon and which will affect community expectations are the June on June figures. There can be little doubt that because of wage and some other influences, including the 2+ per cent increase in the wholesale sales tax, inflation measured by the June on June method will rise by at least 13 per cent.
Most important is the fact that average weekly earnings are close to the margin between the two taxation brackets; that is, between the level at which 32 per cent of earnings will be taxed and the level at which 46 per cent of earnings will be taxed. There is a widespread fear amongst workers that this will happen. Work patterns are adjusted to prevent this happening and overtime is all too frequently refused.
Average earnings are now approximately $300 a week. Ifthey rise to $332 a week many of those in the 32 per cent bracket will move into the 46 per cent bracket. Average weekly earnings have to rise by only 10.7 per cent for this to occur. Treasury estimated in Budget Paper No.1, page 46, that average weekly earnings rose by 13.5 per cent in the year as a whole. In fact on the latest information they rose by 14.1 per cent. This rise clearly demonstrates the damage done to the economy by indexation and the irresponsibility of

1222 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation BiII (No.1)

the activists in the trade union movement. Avergale proportions. The trading banks are now fully

age weekly. earnings are expected to rise in -Ient, only a few weeks after the Budget has been

1981-82 by about 13.5 per cent. I believe this brought down. The private sector must suffer un-

understates the likely magnitude of wage inless the methods mentioned are used.

creases by a wide margin. Receipts will be a great deal larger because of wage increases. What a bonanza this will be for the Treasury with only half indexation!

Our overseas balances with the Reserve Bank, which are an important element in the money supply, have fallen, with gyrations up and down of course, from $6.1 billion on 26 November 1980-

The Treasury believes that 'the basic frameto $4.5 billion on 27 August. There has been a loss

work in such actions, that is achieving wage reof $1.6 billion. Gold revaluation, of course, played

straint, has been laid by the Budget'. This is a part.

another innocent approach to real life. As we all know, militant trade unions will do their own thing in their own way, no matter what framework has been laid in Budgets or elsewhere.

As a result the liquidity ratio of the major trading banks, which averaged 19.4 per cent in July, has fallen. The first company tax instalment of about $900m probably means that the liquid

An increase in wages of the size I have menand government securities ratio is down now Close

tioned, without accompanying tax indexation to . to 18 per cent which is the minimum.

allow for increases in the CPI, will put many workers into the 46 per cent tax bracket. This will lead to another series of wage demands to recover by chlwback those extra taxes. Initial action will be taken by extremists in the trade unions with the inevitable flow-on to other trade unions.
I turn to employment. The growth rate of employment is expected to rise by about 2 per cent, with little change in unemployment. I have already stated the facts relating to non-farm economic growth. We will need a miracle to achieve this goal of 2 per cent and to keep the CPI to 10.75 per cent. Capitulation and agreement by the employers in theTransport Workers Union case to an increase of $20 a week with its inevitable flow-on, plus further wage demands already threatened by the Australian Council of Trade

The Budget also forecasts that the current account deficit in our balance of payments will be somewhat bigger than last year's by. $5.4 billion. This means that for the Budget estimate to achieve the Treasury's objective, private capital inflow of about $7.8 billion will be necessary.
The prospects of achieving this objective do not look good. The net capital inflow of $360m for August was the lowest since December 1980, even though public non-monetary enterprise borrowings of $90m contributed. The trade account deficit was $149m, down on July's figure of $399m, which was a record. The surplus of private external transactions whic.h is important from the money supply point of view is expected to be the same as last year, $2.8 billion.

Unions to cover discounting losses and inflation, In my opinion the inflow of private capital will

virtually rules this out.

be much less than in 1980. This will create a mass-

On Tuesday, 8 September, the ACTU made it clear that it was determined to co-ordinate a campaign for large wage rises for six million people. The increases sought will be from about $10 a week to more than $30 a week. Industrial action will be one method of achieving this objective. This is, of course, in addition to the $20 rise now in the pipeline.
I turn to the financial side. In order to restrain

ive credit squeeze as the Government is relying entirely on a surplus of private sector foreign exchange transactions to provide liquidity growthin the financial sector. A very big fall in the profits of the mining companies and the peculiar aftitude to such matters as a request to the Shell company to dispose of 25 per cent of the parent company's assets will be a deterrent to the movement of private capital from overseas.

inflation the Budget relies heavily on the control It has now been conf;irmed that export prices,

of the money supply-M3. Here we run into the foundation of our prosperity, have slumped

difficulties. Even with inflation at 10.75 per cent again with the assistance of appreciation of the

as estimated by Treasury and non-farm GDP currency. In July the index slumped by 1.1 per

rising by more than 3.5 per cent, GDP at current cent. Manufacturing was hit the hardest. Strict

prices would have to rise by at least 14 per cent.

adherence to the money supply target of 10 to 11

The 10 to II per cent restraint on the money supply would be another impediment to economic and employment growth, unless the banks borrow

per cent will also mean higher interest rates. The large domestic surplus will have no impact on interest rates.

overseas, special reserve deposits are reduced, or The biggest mistake in the Budget relates to the

the velocity of circulation of money intensifies to expectations of tax reductions. Statement after

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1223

statement has been made which led taxpayers to believe there would be a reduction of personal tax. The President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions-for that matter many other trade union leaders-had good reason to think such a promise had been made. This would have been the basis on which some restraint on wages could have taken place with trade union support-a restraint which is an essential ingredient of economic success. The reaction was bitter when the expectations were destroyed. It was really bad politics. Just the opposite has happened. In fact it is expected that the net income tax on individuals will rise by 18 per cent to $21 billion. This will be 51 per cent of total receipts. Interest rate pressures will intensify whether or not these expectations are fulfilled. It does not matter whether there is a surplus of capital flow which would necessitate sales of government securities to the non-bank public at higher interest rates to prevent successive growth in the money supply; if there is a short fall of capital flow, competition in the market place will cause interest rates to rise.
I refer to the international picture. There can be little doubt that with the exception of Japan, the major Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development countries with which we trade will not increase their gross domestic product by as much as one per cent. International trade will suffer. We are already suffering from this plus the 10 per cent revaluation of the Australian dollar. We have had the biggest trade deficit in 10 years. During 1980-81 export values rose by about 2 per cent and imports by about 21 per cent. Manufacturing industries are now moving over with a vengeance to make way for imports. Manufacturers have been most affected; mining operations are being affected as well. Repayment of overseas loans will, of course, be much easier.
More importantly, for at least six months I have been challenging the soundness of the continued appreciation of the Australian dollar against the United States dollar and separately against the basket of goods of our other main trading partners. As I have said already appreciation reduces export earnings and therefore the profits of the Australian producers. In time consumers will suffer. Appreciation of the currency also increases our wage cost disadvantages. There will be some price benefit so far as the price of imports is concerned. The degree of benefit is doubtful. I do not think it will be substantial.
The cost advantage due to appreciation of the currency can be illustrated by what has happened

in the past. In 1976, when the Prime Minister himself took the responsibility for devaluing the currency by 17t per cent-and rightly so-we turned the international cost disadvantage of 25 per cent into a cost advantage of 14 per cent. Of course the reverse must happen when we revalue as is happening now. Cost advantages internationally will be reduced steadily.
Additional tariff protection also occurs because of devaluation and is reduced by appreciation. The technical experts have miscalculated again. Their emphasis has been in the wrong place.
The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) certainly understands the effect of the appreciation of the currency that is now taking place.
I also express my approval of the broadly based wholesale tax which should have been introduced a year ago. Some critics obviously do not understand the need for the wholesale sales tax if personal income tax is to be reduced. This is an objective which most people say they want. The tax is also necessary to replace, for revenue purposes, the fall in the crude oil revenue in 1981-82 compared with 1980-81. In 1980-81 the crude oil levy rose by 40 per cent. This fiscal year-1981-82-it will rise by only 11 per cent to $3.44 billion. Sales tax will rise from 12.7 per cent to 38.6 per cent to $2.91 billion.
We will need all the luck in the world, even in this lucky country of ours, to reach the goal the Treasurer has set out in the Budget. Now is the time for the Government and the academic economic world to have another penetrating look at the trends in the economy. It is a pity-I am sorry I did not ensure it either when I was Prime Minister or Treasurer-that Australia has not got an independent national economic and financial advisory council with a staff free from Treasury control to advise the Government.
I have not mentioned our farming industries. They have gone through three years of drought, probably the worst known in our history. To keep on depreciating the currency and reducing the rewards to farmers is inexplicable.
These facts also show the idiocy of wanting a rent resources tax which is just another deceptive way of wanting to get far greater government revenue to support extravagant expenditure programs.
To sum up: I do not think the reaction on the Australian stock exchanges or the drying up of capital inflow can be taken as thorough approval of the Budget.
Mr Barry J ones-With reluctance, I move:
That the debate be now adjourned.

1224 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

nlX Avoidance on Profits

Question resolved in the affirmative.
TAX AVOIDANCE ON PROFITS FROM SHORT TERM PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS
Ministerial Statement
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-by leave-The Government has decided that the income tax law should be amended to remedy a defect by which it is possible to escape tax on profits made from short term property transactions. A subsidiary company purchases property and then, instead of the property being sold by the subsic\iary after it has appreciated in value, the shares in the subsidiary are sold to realise the profit. The particular provision of the law in which the loophole exists, section 26AAA of the Income Tax Assessment Act, stipulates that profits arising from the sale of property purchased within the previous 12 months are taxable. However, where property is disposed of by selling off shares in a subsidiary company used to acquire the property, the operation of section 26AAA is avoided if the shares have been held for longer than 12 months. It is possible to achieve the same effect by using a conventional trust or unit trust as the vehicle for the purchase and sale of assets within 12 months or by arranging to hold an interest in property through a chain of companies, or through interposed companies, partnerships or trusts. It is then only necessary to sell off an interest in one of the entities that make up the interposed chain in order effectively to dispose of the property, but again in a way that will avoid the operation of section26AAA.
To correct this situation, the Government proposes that section 26AAA be amended so that it applies where a taxpayer sells shares in a company or a beneficial interest in a trust estate if, at the time of sale, the company or trustee owns property that was purchased within the 12 months preceding the sale and the value of the property at that time is not less than 75 per cent of the net worth of the company or trust estate. Property that is trading stock, depreciable plant or property held for resale at a profit will be outside the scope of this rule. Where the conditions outlined apply, the taxpayer will be assessed on so much of the sale price of the shares in the company or the interest in the trust estate as reflects the difference between the value at the time of the sale of the property purchased by the company or the trustee and the price for which it was purchased. Appropriate adjustments will be made for any expenses incurred in respect of the property or for any amount that is included in a taxpayer's assessable income by reason that some

shares in the company or part of the trust interest had been purchased within the preceding year. The proposed amendments will extend to cases where a taxpayer sells shares in, a company or interests in a trust estate or in a partnership and at the time of sale the company, trustee or partnership in turn has a proprietary interest-for example, through interposed companies, trustees or partnerships-in property that was purchased within 12 months before the sale. As in the case where a direct interest in a company or trust estate is sold, the amendments will be operative where at the time of the sale the value of the proprietary interest represents not less than 75 per cent of the net worth of the company, trust estate or partnership.
The amendments will also ensure that tax on short term property gains cannot be avoided by the device of liquidating a company or winding up a trust estate and distributing in specie property that has been purchased by the company or trustee within the previous 12 months. To prevent this kind of avoidance arrangement, the amendments will stipulate that section 26AAA applies to a sale of property received by a shareholder or beneficiary as part of a distribution in specie, where the sale of the property by the shareholder or beneficiary occurs within the 12 months following its purchase by the company' or trustee. The shareholder or benefi~iary will be assessed under similar rules to those that are to apply where shares in a company or an interest in a trust are sold to reflect an increase in the value of company or trust property.
The amendments will not apply to sales of shares in a company or units in a unit trust that are listed on a stock exchange or are ordinarily available for purchase or subscription by the public, or to the sale of property distributed in specie by such a company or unit trust. Investors need have no fear, therefore, that everyday stock exchange transactions will be adversely affected by the amendments, which will catch only those cases where the whole substance of the transaction is that property is bought and sold at a profit within 12 months., The amendments are to apply in relation to prqperty that is purchased after today. The neces~ary legislation will be introduced in the Parliament as soon as practicable. I present the following paper:
Tax Avoidance on Profits from Short Term Property Transactions-Ministerial Statement, 10 December 1981.
Motion (by Mr MOQre) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (5.54)-1 wish to make a few comments in relation to this paper.

Tax Avoidance on Profits

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1225

Firstly, I express support on behalf of the Oppotransactions of which we are not aware at present

sition for the measure which has been announced have involved tax losses. Indeed, other forms of

by the Treasurer (Mr Howard). It is something the way in which avoidance schemes have

which we have several times called on him to operated are referred to in the Treasurer's state-

undertake. We are pleased that at last he has anment, which indicates that they operate on a

nounced that the Government is to take action in much wider basis. More than just a few key

this regard.

companies are involved. The Government should

Secondly, I wish to raise the matter of the delay in the action. In late March of this year the Bell group of companies made a $16.5m profit on the sale of Elders shares after a share raid on that company. We raised then the matter of these profits being tax free. Subsequent to our raising that issue in the House the Treasurer announced that he was conducting a review of the relevant
section of the tax law. On 9 April, after further questioning from the Opposition, he said in the House that he was in the process of putting together certain recommendations to the Govern-

not allow those involved in this blatant tax rip-off to get away with it scot-free, which seems to us to be involved in not providing for the retrospective operation of this legislation. We think that the ap-
propriate thing to do, as we have recommended many times in the past, is to make the date of operation for any anti-tax avoidance legislation of this kind the date at which the Government understands a sche)11e to have first operated. We -cannot for the life of us see why thiS should not be
done when in just three instances some $27.5m is involved. Much more is certainly involved.

ment as to what ought to be done, and that he Question resolved in the affirmative.

hoped to put these recommendations to the Government shortly. Now, five months later, we

Sitting suspended from 5.58 to 8 p.m.

find that he is finally able to give us a statement and to tell us that the Government will legislate to clean up this section and to prevent the rampant

APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1981-82 Second Reading

tax avoidance operating through it. It seems to us

(Budget Debate)

to be an extraordinary delay. I cannot see why it Debate resumed.

has taken so long for such action to be undertaken.
The third aspect to which I refer is the Oppo-

Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (8.0)-This is a heartless Budget. Its domestic surplus of $1 ,500m, the largest since the Australian Labor Party

sition's concern about the date of operation, which I understand to be today. That means that this measure will not affect any transactions which have occurred prior to today. We cannot see why this legislation should not have retrospective operation. What is involved here is quite blatant tax avoidance by substantial companies which have been making a lot of money by selling property-not directly but by selling subsidiary companies in which the major asset was that property-and thereby avoiding the intention of the law and making vast tax-free profits in the process. Apart from the example of the profit made by the Bell group of companies on the Elders shares, there was also a case in November 1979 when the Bell group made $llm tax-free by selling shares in Ansett Transport Industries Ltd through the sale of a subsidiary company, Bell Bros Air Charter Pty Ltd. In August last year the Bond group of companies made a tax-free profit of $32m by selling shares in White Industries Ltd-again, not directly by selling the shares but by selling a subsidiary company, the Narla
Prospecting Co., the main asset of which was the White Industries shares.

Budget of 1973-74, is achieved at the cost of the weakest elements in society, those who bear the heavy costs of the withdrawal of services-the unemployed, the deserted, the sick, the unskilled and
the poorly educated. An outstanding example, I think, has been the abolition of the Community Youth Support Scheme, which action can be seen quite justly as another act of war against unemployed young people by the Fraser Government. Unemployment for six months or more can be fatally destructive to young people. It destroys their sense of competence and confidence. The aim of CYSS is not economic; it never was. Its aim is social and personal. It was set up to provide psychological and emotional support to people who feel abandoned and hopeless. The elimination of CYSS is one of the cruelest acts ever per_petrated by the Fraser Government. At this stage only a back bench revolt within the Liberal Party can save CYSS. I appeal to National Country Party members of parliament and Liberal back benchers to show some evidence of social conscience and save CYSS. The amount of money saved in cutting out CYSS is trivial. The work of CYSS has turned many young people away from

In those three transactions alone there has beendespair, violence, drugs and suicide. We should

a tax loss of some $27.5m. Undoubtedly other not be surprised if, before very long, we see acts of

1226 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No 1)

Brixton-style terrorism in our streets. The social costs of eliminating CYSS will far outweigh any cash gain to the Government.
In my electorate of Lalor in Melbourne's western suburbs there is a very heavy concentration of youth unempioyment due historically to the very great over-specialisation in heavy industry in the area and the great deficiency of service jobs. In the electorate of Lalor-we have four CYSS groups there-the impact of the withdrawal of the Community Youth Support Scheme is something that is felt personally by hundreds of people. I ask the Government to reconsider the whole basis on which the Scheme has been abolished. At the very least it could be tided over until 1982. I hope that the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt), who is at the table, will pass that on to his colleagues.
Some honourable members will have been shocked by the terrible story in Britain a couple of weeks ago of the twp young men, Graeme Rathbone and Sean Grant, 19-year-olds who committed suicide by gassing themselves after some months of unemployment, of drifting in and out of jobs. They went around rather pathetically with aerosol spray cans of paint inscribing walls with their names, Sean and Graeme, throughout the whole area. Nobody helped them. It was a tragic story. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard the account from the Melbourne Age of 29 August under the heading 'Jobless youths' suicide shocks Britons'.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
JOBLESS YOUTHS' SUICIDE SHOCKS BRITONS
From Peter Smark
London, 28 Aug.-Britain is reeling from the visual impact of television's reporting of the suicide of two teenagers, who took their lives because they were unemployed.
It's not that the television cameras were trained on Graeme Rathbone and Sean Grant, both 19, when they connected a rubber hose to the exhaust pipe of a stolen car and gassed themselves to death on a plot of wasteland in their home town ofWidnes.
But before they died, the youths spent week after week spray painting their christian names on building after building throughout Widnes. The "Graeme" and '~Sean" monuments shown by television cameras brought home, perhaps more poignantly than anything so far, the feeling of desolation felt by many British teenagers.
At an inquest in Warrington yesterday the Coroner, Mr John Hibbert, blamed the state of the British economy for their deaths. "These two boys had the courage to take their own lives. It is not an easy thing to do but they felt the world didn't hold a future for them," he said.
Outside the court, Mr Hibbert told reporters he hoped government at all levels would take note of the deaths and realise the danger they held for the future. "There is no answer in young people taking their own lives and I hope others won't

follow their example but the danger is obvious," Mr Hibbert said.

Graeme, a storeman, and Sean, a forklift truck driver, both
lost their jobs in the past few months as the companies-
employing them were hit by Britain's economic slump. They were charged with causing criminal damage with a graffiti
spray after they had painted their pathetic calls for attention all over powerhouses, streets, walls and abandoned houses.

The inquest was told that Sean had left $A40 with a note saying: "This is for Mum, Dad and the kids".

Both came from close families and until they lost their jobs

had had happy home lives, the inquest was told.

.

Graeme's mother, Mrs Betty Rathbone, said that she had often found her son sitting weeping in the kitchen in the
months before his death. "He used to say there was nothing left, he had no job and there was no future," she said.

Graeme and Sean left a note signed by both in the suicide
car. It said: "What have we left to live for now there is no work for anyone? All teenagers have to do is hang around
street corners getting moved on by police who think you are up to something."

The unemployment rate in the north-west of England is about 16 per cent. In Widnes it is about 25 per cent.

AAP-AP reports: police and a school principal today described the two 19-year-olds as troublemakers.

The youths' former school principal, David Blacow of
Fairfield High School, said Sean had a job only a week before he died and Graeme had "drifted in and out of jobs".

"They struggled for jobs but no more so than any other
boys. I think their deaths resulted from a prank that went wrong," Mr Blacow said.

He said the youths were often in trouble for spray-painting their names "throughout" Widnes, and a Warrington court
official said the youths had been committed for trial on two burglary and three property damage charges involving spray
paint.

A Widnes police spokesman said: "There was constant
trouble with these two. You only had to come into town to see their spraying all over the place. The damage amounted to a
lot of money".

A local Granada Television documentary on the boys said
their vandalism was a "cry for help", but Mr Blacow disagreed: "I can't go along with this. It's absolutely ridiculous, especially when you think Sean had a job up until a week before he died".

Mr BARRY JONES-I thank the House, In
my capacity as the shadow Minister for Science and Technology I want to concentrate some
attention tonight on what I see as the most serious
long term implication of the Budget, and that is the threat to Australia's intellectual base, I see siX.
main issues which I will not have time to describe
in full, but I can at least outline and illustrate some of the points, The first, I think, is the wind-
ing down of research and development. When I
talk of what has happened in the Department of
Science and Technology I will expand on that. The second point is the imposition of tertiary fees
for second degrees. That really has very serious implications because the second degrees in many
cases are for research projects, The real problem,
I think, with the imposition of the fees is that it becomes yet another disincentive for people to go on

Appropriation Bill (No 1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1227

to increase their intellectual capital. One of the problems is this: A young engineer, for example, after he has gained, say, a first class honours degree, may have to decide whether he goes on to do research work or goes into industry. Somebody may say: 'You have a good degree. We will give you $12,000 a year to start off. We would rather have you in industry. If you want to go back to do a second or later degree, you can do that later on when you are established'. The young engineer may say: 'Well, that sounds like a pretty good deal. It will give me an opportunity to get married and start a family', and so on. In all probability he takes the opportunity afforded by industry. But the day when he goes on to do that second degree, that further research work, never eventuates. ThaUs the great area of loss that wesuffer. Those people are distracted from going on to contribute to the sheer volume of knowledge that we have in our research pool. We cannot afford to have that happen.
The third factor is simply the reduced participation in tertiary education and the increased fallout in secondary schools. That means that in Australia we now have an educational profile that is more characteristic of the Third World than it is of the technologically advanced nations. We had the phenomenon in the 1970s of a persistent fall from 1974 in the numberofyoung people who are completing their secondary education and those who are going on to tertiary education. That, in terms of what is happening in the more technologically advanced nations-the United States of America, Japan, Sweden, Switzerland, France and West Germany-represents a dramatic fallback by Australia.
The fourth point is the sales tax on books. The 2t per cent may not in itself seem to be so tremendously important but its significance as a symbol is enormous. The fifth point is the failure to pursue projects of scientific excellence in which Australia is a world leader. I draw attention to two projects which. have received no government funding whatever in this Budget. The first is the synthesis telescope which the Astronomy Advisory Committee recommended as being of the highest im~ portance for Australia. Australia has had a world reputation as a leader in radio astronomy. It is one of the areas in which we are possibly the first or second nation in the world. But so keen was this Government to ensure that it got its billion and a half dollar domestic surplus that it said: 'No, we will give up our opportunity to remain No. 1 in this field. Who needs the synthesis telescope?' No doubt the free marketeers from Western Australia, Who are so conspicuous by their absence, would applaud that decision. They would

say: 'Unless there is a buck in it, unless there is an immediate economic return who cares?' The result is that the project has been postponed. I think that is appalling. That is nothing less than an act of economic sabotage because we are undercutting, we are destroying the whole intellectual base, the things that we ought to make ourselves proud of.
The other project that I am very much concerned about is the Starlab project, in which the Government is deferring participation. Let me tell the House something about Starlab. Starlab is an international consortium. Only three nations are in it. The three nations are the United States, Canada and Australia. The object of the exercise is to put a space laboratory with its OWn telescope into space. It is an absolutely audacious project, an amazing project. Even there, if one looks in the long term, it is thought that it would have enormous economic significance. It all sounds like something out of Jules Verne or Arthur C. Clarke. One of the projects that the Starlab people have in mind is testing their belief that in outer space it would be possible to construct ball-bearings -of a crystalline purity that could never be approached on earth and that those materials could then be brought back to earth and used in machines with an efficiency of a type that we never even dreamt of before. If the project succeeds its implications are absolutely enormous. They are breathtaking. It will change the whole nature of our mechanised society if it works-and there is a strong possibility that it will work. How interested is this Government in that project? One can judge its interest by the amount that is allocated. The project organisers asked for seed money of $104,000 to start the project up because Australia's part was to do the specific instrumentation, which was the cheapest of the areas. For their pains the Australian National University and the Mount Stromlo Observatory got zero-nothing; not one cent. That is how interested this Government is in Australia's long term development. That is how ambitious this Government is to see us up with the world leaders in the development of a new technology of importance to every nation on the earth.
Mr John Brown-Double what they got last year.
Mr BARRY JONES-That is exactly right. I regard it as a national disgrace. What has happened? The $104,000 seed monl'<Y has been produced by a French electronics company, Matra S.A. of Toulouse. It has contributed the money. It says that, if the Australian Government is not prepared to do it, it regards the project as so essential internationally that it is prepared to contribute the $104,000, so much of a scandal would

1228 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No 1)

it be if this project were allowed to die. How contemptible it is that Australia has to have its entrance fee to this great international project paid for by a foreign country because our own Government, in the pursuit of its $1.5 billion domestic surplus, is too lacking in interest and in national pride to get this project going.
The sixth point I make is about the selling out of the 'buy Australian' principle which was a valuable factor in encouraging what there was of the Australian computer industry. By eliminating that principle economic support for the system has gone.
I am concerned that there are three broad scenarios for Australia. The first is that throughout the 1980s things will remain essentially as they were in the late 1970s; that is, that a period of dynamic and insistent technological change will have no impact on society and that unprecedented dynamism merely )Vill reinforce the status quo. I think this concept is too absurd to pursue, and yet it is a commonly held view in the community.
The second scenario is that there will be a widening economic and social gap between the skilled and the unskilled, the rich and the poor, and the educated and the illiterate. This is the essence of the free market Friedmanite approach to managing society-the competitive model based on the view that life is a race which inevitably leads to winners and losers. If this view prevails the likeliest outcome is that Australia will divide into two societies with a social chasm between

them. There will be growing unemployment, alienation, competition for resources, leading inevitably to challenges to law and order, acts of violence, terrorism along Baader-Meinhoflines, and some elements of a police state with an armed guard on every street corner.
Mr Milton-You're describing this Government's policies.
Mr BARRY JONES-That is what it wants. The third scenario-the optimistic one-would involve the substitution of a co-operative approach to the distribution Of work, assets and income. The obstacles to adopting this approach are threefold: They are cultural, psychological and economic. But, contrary to popular belief, the economic problems would be the easiest to overcome. The greatest problems are cultural and psychological-our broad historic view of the society we live in and the value systems it incorporates and the view we take of ourselves and our immediate families.
I want to describe for a few minutes the impact of technology on employment. I draw the attention of the House to the extraordinary figures provided in an answer given by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) on 5 June 1981 in answer to a question about the actual increase, in absolute figures, in the Australian labour force in the period from 1966 to 1980. I seek leave of the House to incorporate the figures in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

August 1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980
December 1978 1979 1980

Labour force
Total (I)
'000 4,902.5 5,019.8 5,136.8 5,261.9 5,473.8 5,608.4 5,753.9 5,888.7 5,996.1 6,119.7 6,190.5 6,354.7 6,365.3 6,415.3 6,639.0 6,538.7 6,646.8 6,821.5

Part-time employment

Annual increase
(2)

Total (3)

Annual
increase ( 4)

'000

'000

'000

475.1

117.3

509.7

34.7

117.0

530.8

21.1

125.1

572.7

41.9

211.9

569.7

-3.0

134.6

576.1

6.4

145.5

621.4

45.3

134.8

690.1

68'.7

107.4

727.4

37i3

123.6

794.4

67.0

70.8

860.9

66.5

164.2

900.9

40.0

10.6

951.5

50.6

50.0

957.3

5.8

223.7

1,022.0

64.7

940.5

108.1

971.5

31.0

174.7

1,021.1

49.6

(3) as percentage
of (I)
percent 9.7 10.2 10.3 10.9 10.4 10.3 10.8 11.7 12.1 13.0 13.9 14.2 14.9 14.9 15.4 14.4 14.6 15.0

(4) as percentage
of(2)
per cent
29.6 18.1 33.4 -1.4 4.8 31.1 51.0 34.7 54.2 93.9 24.4 477.4 11.6 28.9
28.7 28.4

Appropriation Bill (No 1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1229

Note: The estimates are from the Population Surveys conducted by the Australian Bureau of Statistics and refer to civilians aged 15 years and over. As the estimates are based on information collected from occupants of a sample of dwellings they are
subject to sampling variability. For details of standard errors and definitions used see The Labour Force, Australia (6203.0).

Mr BARRY JONES-The extraordinary thing about these figures, incidentally, is that one might expect, given that there have been no very dramatic variations in the total population, that the increases in the labour force would be more or less constant year by year-that there would be a steady increase, perhaps-and that the figures would be as constant as the death, birth or marriage rates. Such is not the case. There are the most extraordinary variations in the period. We do not know at any given time what the real size of the labour force is, and we cannot know what the real unemployment rate is until we know what the total labour force is. It took months to get an answer to this question. I simply point out-I hope that people read the answer when it is printed in Hansard-that, for example, in the year ending August 1978 the annual increase in the labour force was as low as 10,600, in the year ending August 1980 the increase in the labour force was 223,700. In other words, there has been a variation of the rate of 2,110 per cent. I do not know too many other areas in which one would find such a staggering variation in the input. It has clearly been the case that in periods when people are pessimistic about their future in the labour force they are inclined to hold back. The result is that Ministers can then say: 'Things cannot be all that bad because the number of registered unemployed has fallen'. Sometimes those figures may be completely misleading. One may get the impression that things are improving but, in fact, a great reservoir of people in the work force simply have held back because they see no future for themselves. They say: 'What is the point of applying ifit does not get us anywhere?'
I wish to say something about robotics. I think it will prove to be one of the great areas of technological change in the 1980s. Whether the draft Industries Assistance Commission report on motor vehicle manufacturing is adopted or not, whether quotas and tariffs are changed or maintained, and notwithstanding the election of a Labor government in 1983, it is certain that employment in motor vehicle manufacturing in Australia will fall throughout the 1980s. We might not like it, but we would be deluding ourselves not to recognise the trend. We can and should take action to modify the rate of decline and protect the victims of technological change. In the 1980s the primary calise of this fall will be industrialised robots. I used the words 'motor vehicle manufacturing in Australia' because it would be misleading to refer to an Australian

motor manufacturing industry. Australia is the host country for branch offices of multinational motor corporations, and basic questions of policy are decided overseas, in many, if not all cases, without Australian participation or consultation.
Employment in motor vehicle and component manufacturing and assembling in Australia amounts to about 80,000 people, while employment in related service industries-sales, repair and maintenance and fuel supply-is about 160,000, a proportion which invariably provokes surprise. Just as robotisation will reduce the motor manufacturing labour force, the increased use of automated techniques in motor service industries-self-service pumps, word processors, computerised inventories and stock movementwill also reduce overall employment. As with so much of the new technologies, Australia will face a dilemma-that is, assuming that we can get our hands on it. We may be damned if we do adopt it and damned if we do not. I point out that the estimated number of industrial robots in operation in 1979 was as follows:
Japan 10,000 United States 3,000 West Germany 850 Sweden 600 Italy 500 Poland 360 France 200 Norway 200 Britain 185 Finland 130 Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 25
But by 1980 in Japan the number of robots had increased to 19,000 and in the United States it had increased to 4,000. It is estimated that in 1990 Japan will have 50,000, the United States will have 25,000, Western Europe generally will have 8,000, and Australia will have 2,250. General Motors alone plans to have 14,000 robots by the year 1990, and it will be a $2 billion industry in the United States. Human beings will have to act quickly and decisively to head off the competition of robots and other computerised devices. Robots can be a valuable instrument to perform dangerous and exhausting work but they must not be used to destroy work opportunities for a skilled labour force. At the ALP's national conference in 1982 the most comprehensive and thoughtful policy on science and technology put forward by any party in any country will be adopted. The central feature of that policy is an insistence on full and frank disclosures of proposals on technological

1230 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No 1)

change, the direct involvement of unions in technology negotiations and the revival of the political process.
Parliament must take the leading role in determining when and how new technologies are adopted to ensure that the benefits are shared and that the control of high technology remains in Australia's hands. The Fraser Government sees Australia essentially as the supplier of raw material~ to others. That is why there is a persistent downgrading of our capacity. I believe that the Fraser Government has adopted a Quislinglike policy in this regard. It is to be utterly condemned. I believe the Government will be swept out the next time we go to the polls.
Mr BRAITHWAITE- (Dawson) (8.21)-Mr
ain Deputy Speaker, in rising in this debate on the
Budget. I reminded that honourable members have a very wide range from which to choose their subject matter. I am particularly reminded by your speech to this House in the last sitting week in which you confessed that perhaps there is too much confrontation in thi~ House between people with equal ideals. The effort of people with great ability, as we have heard from the previous speaker, the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones), is for nought if we confront and do not try to get down to the business of governing this country. There is room for the Opposition. and Government sides to come to a consensus which can only be to the benefit of the country as a whole.
Mr Uren-Your Cabinet is the most classridden Cabinet in history.
Mr BRAITHWAITE-The Opposition interjects. It is a very sad reflection on the business of this House that perhaps the only time honourable members really come together is on condolences, salary rises and superannuation considerations. I think there is a message in this. I hope that for the good of the people we are expected to represent that we can -come together more often. As an instance, in the House only yesterday in a speech on the Budget an honourable member felt that he had to make a point with further confrontation by throwing papers in the face of the Minister for Employment and Youth. Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown), who was then at the table. I wonder in retrospect what this does apart from achieving good headlines.
There are aspects of this Budget that I feel are worthy of proper debate. During this session we will come to grips with one of them; namely, the reference in the Budget Speech to the Industries Assistance Commission and particularly the cost

effectiveness of the Government's policies on subsidies, grants, tariffs, taxation concessions and quotas. The reference immediately before us is on car manufacturing. Quantifying all these subsidies is subject to conjecture. Taking them all together, the cost of protecting-if I can use that wordindustry in Australia must come to some billions of dollars. It was estimated in this House by Bert Kelly, probably about three years ago, that the cost was about $4 billion. No doubt it has increased since. The question we have to address ourselves to is: Are we to see this protection increase or to see it stabilise and gradually reduce? .
There are many arguments on this matter. Protection is applied unequally. There are some beneficiaries but people are also penalised. The best argument on Government protection is given in the evidence by a group which said the protection that was offered by the Government to its manufacture kept it from improving its industry and trying to keep pace with world events. As a result, while industries are protected and can probably continue to be protected there is no incentive to improve productivity. This is one very good argument that should be looked at.
If protection to the industries in Australia involves $4 billion, it is fair to say that this is to protect industries catering to the local market and not the overseas or the export trades. The only assistance the export industry in Australia gets is from export incentive grants, which are not massive. About 19 per cent of our gross domestic product involves our export industries. The rural industries and the mining industries are the great exporters. No protection is offered on the overseas market for their products. They are subject to fluctuating world prices. As a result the industries have to compete and become efficient. If 19 per cent of Australia's gross domestic product comes from industries that are not protected, the other 81 per cent is basically where the protection lies. The 19 per cent, is contributing towards the cost of this protection one way or another. The biggest proportion is paid by the consumer, the taxpayer, the ordinary citizen of this country. It might be unfair for me to mention a hypothetical figure of $4 billion which cannot be properly quantified without looking at the .assistance given to rural industries.
In the grievance debate this morning the honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd) made reference to the subsidies, grants and assistance available to rural industries. He said that the presentation in the Budget in this regard was not a fair reflection of the assistance given to rural industries. The figure was put at $221m, which included the $35m which will be made available for

Appropriation Bill (No 1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1231

the water resources program, much of which will go to urban Australia and to manufacturing industries not related to rural industries. A total of $221m is said to be a rural subsidy in that regard. I also put a big question mark on the Budget statement that the averaging provisions are worth $215 to primary industry.
What annoys me about this argument about tariffs and protection is that many people in the city argue that rural people are subsidised up to the eyebrows. If that is the case, they all wear their eyebrows on their kneecaps. This is certainly not the case. It might come as a surprise to some of our city counterparts and city representatives that the Telecom rental charge in some places in my electorate is $500 per year as compared with $120 in the city. There is certainly no subsidy in relation to roads. The theory appears to be that the further south one travels on national highway the better the national highway becomes and the further north one goes the better the fishing is. Better fishing is a very poor compensation for bad roads. There is also a penalty against Northern Australians who have to pay insurance surcharges because of cyclones and other acts of God.
We will have a chance to come to grips with the problem concerning the car manufacturing situation. In the last fortnight or so we have seen a massive publicity campaign undertaken by the motor industry and the unions on why the industry should be protected to the extent it is. I understand that protection is worth about $15,000 per year per worker. It is interesting to note that the shipbuilders were being protected to the extent of about $18,000 per worker per year. I do not think it is a matter we can ignore. It must be debated thoroughly in this House because in the end we have to assess the whole tariff situation of motorcar manufacturers.
Mr Humphreys-But that does not apply to all of them, does it?
Mr BRAITHWAITE-We have to know the cost of protection, the assistance that is being given to industry and the proper costing. We have to find out whether it is effective. On the basis of the argument of the person who says that by receiving tariff protection he has no incentive to improve his business, we have to see how effective this is. Is it keeping the business inefficient as some say? Should we phase it out? Nobody is suggesting that we can dump the situation as the Labor Government did in the period 1972 to 1975 with such dramatic effect on the employment situation. The rural people have been asked to make adjustments and readjustments over many years. I

think it is only fair that we should now ask industry to make similar adjustments.
The other major aspect of the Budget. I want to deal with is sales tax. It has been stated that the broadening of sales tax is a deliberate policy of the Government to broaden the tax base, giving a further commitment to indirect taxation. The unfortunate situation is that in the change of the mix there was no immediate set off in direct taxation. I am the member for a rural electorate. I probably have more reservations than most about indirect taxation becase in rural Australia, in the country areas, outside the manufacturing areas, an inevitable extra tax will be paid on some goods by means of tax on the freight component. This is a tax that is not paid by the city consumer. That is one inequity to begin with.
My opinion on a change to indirect' taxation as opposed to a change to direct taxation is not as parochial as one might think. There are many other additional reasons, common throughout Australia, for my opposition to these. changes. Firstly, the Government has not given direct taxation a chance to be as equitable as it should be between everybody. While acknowledging that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has been successful in his moves to counter tax avoidance, the reason for this avoidance has not been properly assessed. I am one of those who feel that by decreasing the direct tax rate the tax base is increased naturally. As a consequence, the tax collections w'ill probably remain constant, but more possibly they will increase over and above the previous figure. President Reagan's new taxation policies should be carefully monitored by this Government to see if, in fact, what I have said will be the result. I understand that the lowering of tax rates in West Germany over the last few years did not diminish its tax collections.
Secondly while applauding the initiatives of the Government following the review. of Commonwealth functions and the planned reductions in expenditure, I believe that there is still room for cuts in Commonwealth expenditure. but, more particularly, cuts in State expenditures. When one considers that it is Commonwealth funds that feed through to the States,' this would have an effect on the Budget. After all, expenditrure cuts at whatever level are a major part of direct taxation reform. That is an area with which we can start.
Thirdly, the Government has not come to grips with the tax evasion industry, or the subterranean economy. While I agree that tax rate reductions in themselves will not have a major effect on the evasion of taxation, more positive moves could be

1232 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No J)

made against this industry which is estimated to collect between $10 billion to $15 billion in Australia. per year. The result is a considerable loss of Commonwealth revenue. The view seems to have been taken that if one cannot beat them, one joins them. The basis for that view seems to be that there will be less evasion of sales tax than income tax. Perhaps that is so, but I do not think it will ever be beaten. It is questionable I feel that it is not an alternative to really cleaning up the subterranean economy. For instance, it is suggested that there could be profit made by holding an inquiry or investigation into tax evasion in the buildingindustry? But will we be content with the set off of 2t per cent sales tax on building materials as against trying to collect that money from that area? By doing that we are not getting at the evaders, and again the system becomes inequitable.
Sales tax is known to be paid equally on basic commodities by both the rich and the poor. At least the progressive rate of taxation still redistributes wealth while indirect taxation does not. There are other aspects of the sales tax to be considered, particularly the commitment of manufacturers to pay the sales tax within 21 days of the date of the closing of business. While this is great for the car industry, which operates more or less on a cash system, it is not so good for other businesses that keep stock. They will have to pay the tax although they may not move that stock for months. That is one of the other inequities that should be looked at. Many people in business are now faced with the further cost of collecting a second field of tax. They have not been relieved of their first cost in relation to direct taxation. Perhaps we ought to look at the cost of the accounting records and the competence of small business to adapt to this.
I argue for a flatter rate of taxation and a clean up of the present income tax legislation as an alternative to an increase in indirect taxation. I want to be specific about some of the anomalies and inconsistencies of sales tax. I refer to page 248 of Budget Paper No.1. I feel that this list will create as many anomalies and inconsistencies as it was intended to relieve. I want to deal with two inconsistencies. I know that other honourable members, particularly those that have grain trucks operating in their areas, have similar problems. The first inconsistency relates to private railways, manufacturing enterprises, that compete with public railways. As from the date of the Budget they will be subject to 17t per cent sales tax. The other inconsistency relates to vessels which are used for recreation purposes. My point is that contracts have been entered into for the

manufacture of some of these items, over periods ranging from months to years, for which there is no recoupment as far as sales tax is concerned. This applies also to grain trucks.
My particular interest relates to tourist vessels. The sales tax legislation states, as the income tax legislation states, that the end user determines the nature of the business. Industries within the tourist industry are not businesses in the sense that we would like to believe. They are recreations. That is not correct. The tourist industry in Australia is a business. It is one that is being disregarded in many ways and we are adding a further penalty to it. I know of situations where vessels can be manufactured for the purpose of ferrying people, for use as work boats to transport employees from one point to another, but once one commits money for a tourist vessel for charter work or things like that one is immediately subject to the 17t per cent sales tax. I have a problem in this regard that I have referred to the Treasurer. A person who is having a tourist launch constructed at this time could be up for an additional $150,000 to $200,000. I do not think that we can afford to continue offending the tourist industry. Up until October last year we offended the industry by excluding it, because of its recreational nature, from the benefits of the investment allowance. We saw fit to amend that legislation last October. 1 hope that we can look at this aspect and get such vessels included in the sales tax exemption list.
The final matter about which I wish to speak is roads. I have mentioned before that poor roads constitute one of the penalties of living in rural Australia. The national highways are a particular problem area. Often the government is requested to supply relief in certain areas. Perhaps we do not know whether we are catering for the wants or needs of people. Too often it is difficult to identify what we are catering for, particularly in relation to welfare, social opportunities and industry. But in the roads area there is an identified need. What is being provided is less than is required for the needs of the people of Australia. I come from a State that has as its Minister for Main Roads a certaill Mr Hinze, a man with whom I cannot always agree. I think certain Ministers here have disagre'ed with him from time to time. However, I think he is spot on when he says that some of the national highways in Queensland are billygoat tracks. He said that as a result of a trip he made recently he was nearly ruptured. I do not know how he was nearly ruptured. Still I think that if we can identify the national highway system we can also identify the rest of the road system in Australia.

Appropriation Bill (No 1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1233

I expect some sympathy from the Minister sitting at the table, the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt), because Queensland probably has the greatest length of declared national highways of any State in Australia. Yet, it receives almost the same amount of Commonwealth funding as Victoria, which has only one-sixth of the national length of highways as Queenslands, and receives a little over half of the funds allocated to New South Wales, which has just one-third of the national highway system of Queenslands. There is a recognisable need for more funds for Queensland. I received a letter from the Minister for Main Roads in Queensland the other day. He said that with the present rate of expenditure it would take 20 years to bring the declared national highways and developmental roads up to standard.
Mr Hunt-That is not good enough.
Mr BRAITHWAITE-It is not good enough. I intend to repeat that time and again within the Parliament. Twenty years is not the life of a national highway. It is often shorter than thatabout 15 years. But the problem in Queensland-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HUMPHREYS (Griffith) (8.40)-The long awaited Budget turned out to be, according to the Press, economically conservative. I suppose one should congratulate the Treasurer (Mr Howard) on his Budget strategy, not because it possesses any inherent good qualities but rather because he has succeeded in pulling the wool over the eyes of most of the Government members. I say 'most of the Government members' because there are a few exceptions, most notably the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock). Let us not be deceived. The Treasurer and his happy hackers have been slashing away at the public sector and grinding out mini-Budgets for the past 12 months. This Budget represents the culmination of the efforts of a long line of artful fiscal dodgers, designed to hoodwink the Australian people. In the past 12 months we have witnessed a psychological as well as a fiscal war of attrition, and the Treasurer calls it 'lowering our expectations'. We have witnessed two rounds of interest rate rises, the horrendous razor gang purges, the death throes of a universal health scheme and the abandonment of tax indexation. I could go on and on. Is it any wonder that the Australian subconscious has been ground into submission?
Throughout the year the Treasurer has sold us the line that it is his and his Government's role to

create the kind of environment in which a resources boom can take place and he calls it 'getting the setting right'. The setting is, of course, supposed to harmonise with the so-called ideology of small government. Hugh Stretton, reader in history at the University of Adelaide, encapsulated this Government's ideology when he said:
There are a few people who really do think that the quarry in this country would be more profitable to the quarry owners if the rest of us were allowed to starve to death.
That is a philosophy apparent in the Budget which was presented to us on 18 August this year. It has also been the Government's mode of operating since it came to power. The Treasurer talks about creating a receptive economic climate for a resources boom. He makes no mention of the fact that the quarry owners are non-residents or that the Fraser Government's sell-out of Australian resources to overseas capital is damaging the economic prospects of most Australians. He made no mention of the fact that private capital inflow during 1980-81 totalled more than $6,000m, more than four times the level of the preceding year and the highest level in Australian history.
It is unbelievable that the Government has made no policy changes through this Budget to control the avalanche of foreign capital. Instead it is starving potential home buyers, many businesses and even State borrowing programs of the vital capital to which they as Australians are entitled. The Government, by asking Australian taxpayers and consumers to pay more in sales tax and hence bear the brunt of its mismanaged monetary policies, has institutionalised a situation in which Australians have become second class citizens.
The Government is wielding the stick and dangling the carrot. The stick-the 2.5 per cent sales tax-is being wielded to dissuade Australian consumers from the belief that they are entitled to share in the benefits of the resources boom. The carrot is reserved for the increasing number of foreign speculators in Australian real estate. According to figures in the National Times of 23 August this year, between April 1976 and December 1980 such investors spent almost $200m acquiring 10 million hectares of rural land. It would be very interesting indeed to know how much of Australia they really own. But we are not allowed to find that out these days-they will not tell us. I think it would be very embarrassing for the Government if we could find that out. To a lesser extent, and since the Treasurer made it possible, the carrot is also reserved for Australians who can afford to invest overseas-even though

1234 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No 1)

in the process they are denying jobs to Australian!\.
In March this year the Treasurer gave us the benefit of his views on indirect taxation. It was a tedious thesis which can be summed up in his conclusion:
It is not possible to raise sufficient additional indirect taxation to provide noticeable personal tax relief without adding to the CPI.
The message was plain: There would be no tax relief but there would be no additional indirect tax either. The Australian taxpayers breathed a collective sigh of relief. However, by the old trick of conning us into believing that we would not get one without the other-in other words, that indirect tax was a quid pro quo for increased tax relief-we fell victim once again to the old threecard trick. Like a professional card sharp who disarms, with his deceptive frankness, the Treasurer has tried again to pull the wool over our eyes. However, his bluff has now been revealed for what it is-a super con job. It is my belief that the majority of Australians will not fall for it. Our poor old tired Queensland Premier certainly has not fallen for it either, which does not say much for the Budget.
With the 1981-82 Budget estimates for sales tax revenue standing at $2,913m in anticipation of the $81Om additional sales tax which the Government is snatching from the Australian consumer, we are entitled to ask: Where is the other half of the bargain-the personal tax relief-which the Treasurer, seduced us into believing would accompany indirect taxation? In March the Treasurer argued that $500m raised in indirect taxes results in an addition to the consumer price index of almost one per cent. What is the different setting now that enables him to justify adding to inflation? After the c:tbandonment of tax and wage indexation and after the increases in sales tax and health costs, the Australian wage and salary earner is certain to demand economic retribution, and rightly so. It is nothing short of budgetary vandalism when pay-as-you-earn tax receipts are projected to rise by 21.9 per cent to $18,640m while company tax collections rise by less than half that percentage to a mere $5,170m. The Budget is particularly provocative when it is the final act in a year of attrition and grinding down of the living standards of Australian people.
While the Treasurer has been busy 'getting the setting right', or rather creating a classic scenario for economic warfare between capital and labour, the private sector has not exactly been going overboard with expansion plans. I believe small businessmen are thrilled at the prospect hazarded by the headline in the Australian Financial

Review of 18 August 'Higher prime likely to follow interest rise'. Just to show how thrilled certain businessmen are in my electorate, I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard a telex from the Master Boat Builders Association of Queensland. I have shown it to the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt).

Leave granted.

The document read as follows-

PRESS RELEASE BY MASTER BOAT BUILDERS' ASSOCIATION OF QUEENSLAND

Date 26th August, 1981 '

Attention Attention Attention Attention Attention Attention Attention

Members of the Master Boat Builders' Association 'of

Queensland are appalled at the apparent implications of the

sales tax provisions of the recent budget proposals for the boat

building industry not only in regard to future construction but

also to vessels currently being built.

'

If previously exempt vessels are now to be taxed and in addition tax is also to be levied on vessels yet to be completed then this will be an intolerable impost on boat builders and
their future operations, Where million dollar vessels are involved, individual boat builders will be faced with staggering
amounts of tax especially if it is applicable to current construction.

The industry has already been dealt a blow by the freeze on
trawler fishing licences since 1979' which has restricted the
building of trawlers and has left the inDustry looking to .the charter and tourist vessel sector to sustain it. In addition, the
industry faces the prospect of importation of larger s'econd hand vessels since the regulations were relaxed in May this year over the protests of the association to allow the import-
ation of vessels up to 50 tons gross register as against 15 tons previously. Should the sales tax be applied on top of these disabilities, then the industry's future viability must be placed in doubt and further aggravate the unemployment position. Consequential effects of failures amongst boat builders will be felt back to suppliers to the industry who will also be affected directly should the tax apply to previously exempt equipment and spare parts.

The association calls for relief and urges that the exempt
status of the industry be retained and that if this is not done then the tax level should not be increased from nil to I7t% as
proposed but set at a much lower level such as the 2+% as proposed for certain other previously exempt goods, and
further that any tax which might be applicable should not apply to vessels whose construction began prior to the,budget date and are under contract for a fixed price which is finny instances involves a Commonwealth Government bounty,

Mr HUMPHREYS-I thank the House. The

reaction of the small businessman and the wage

and salary earner to this year's Budget is total dis-

gust, but the lot of the' poor, the pensioners and

unemployed people is immeasurably worse. The

much maligned hard core of unemployed

people-that 55,OOO-strong human tragedy which

this Government has kicked about or' ignored

since it came to power-are the unnecessary vic-

tims of the Budget.

'

The Treasurer, in his wisdom, is saving a mere $10m a year by abolishing the Community Youth

Appropriation Bill (No 1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1235

Support System but, in so doing, he will create social problems that will cost 10 times that amount. All honourable members should be well aware of that. We on this side of the House certainly are. One might have excused this shoddy proposal if it had been part of a carefully thought out strategy-if, in abolishing CYSS the Treasurer had applied the quid pro quo and traded CYSS for job creation. But this decision is remarkable for the complete absence of associated forethought. Only two months ago a new CYSS centre was set up at Colmslie in my electorate with a grant of $26,000. Now the Colmslie CYSS is closed. Two months ago many young unemployed in my electorate were entitled to expect CYSS to survive. However, this Government is continually adyising Australian people to lower their expectations. At the same time it is inviting the quarry masters overseas to raise theirs.
, For six years. we have been vainly expecting family allowances to be increased. Finally, after he came within a whisker of losing the last election, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) grudgingly made a pre-election promise to increase family allowances out of oil tax revenue. The Budget increase in family allowances to families with three or more children is more a sop to mollify a certain independent senator I feel than a real fulfilment of the ,1980 election promise. There is no joy in this decision for the typical nuclear family, the single parent family, the unemployed family and the majority of pensioner families> Only' 21 per cent of pensioners and unemployed with dependants are eligible for increased fall)ily allowances. According to my colleague,Senator Don Grimes, 163,000 or 79 per cent of. pensioner and unemployed families are ineligible. .
The pensioner was entitled to have, his or her expectations met in this Budget. The pensioner was expecting, at the very least, to have the halfyearly lag in adjusting pensions according to consumer price index increases brought up to date. Due to this lag, or failure to catch up with the CPI, the Government will save $90m in this financial year at the pensioners' expense. I should not imagine it would be very proud of that. The pensioners' expectations have not been met. Even worse, many have been deprived of what may be their sole source of companionship. When increased sales tax on pet food and pet grooming aids make it nearly impossible to keep a pet, pensioners will undoubtedly ~ake comfort in the knowledg'e that they live in a country where lowered expectations and lowered vision are sustaining, ~he, nation and its leaders. The plight of

the pensioner because of the increased sales tax demonstrates how regressive this tax is. It is utterly reprehensible that a single pensioner receiving $69.70 a week will be paying exactly the same sales tax increases as the Prime Minister who is earning almost $2,000 a week. When our poor old age pensioners purchase even a chocolate at the confectionery store in the future they will pay 17+ per cent in sales tax where once there was none-and so will the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister and the Treasurer dismissed the Queensland Premier's flat tax proposal as economic illiteracy, but the same crass indifference to the disparities in the distribution of incomes underpins this sales tax philosophy.
Wherever we look in this Budget we find hocus pocus and sleight of hand. If ever a government practised dubious economics of substitution it is this one. It takes with one hand while creating the illusion that it is replacing with the other but when we look more closely it is all an illusion. For example, the Government has attempted to persuade us that the homes savings grant allocation is to increase by $29m this Budget year. It sOl,mds very good until we look at the 1980-81 Budget outcome. At a time when 300,000 people are said to be living in caravans and a further 150,000 persons are homeless, the Government's spending in housing assistance programs is $17m lower than its 1980-81 Budget estimate.
Mr John Brown-Shameful!
Mr HUMPHREYS-It certainly is shameful. In this Budget, aspiring tenants in public housing did not expect to be deprived of rent assistance. After 12 February next year we will have the anomalous situation where two public housing tenants living side by side will be in an unequal situation. One tenant, because he' qualified for supplementary assistance some time ago, will receive $5 a week. His neighbour, who moved in after 12 February 1982, will receive nothing. As at 30 June 1981, $1 Om in defence service home loans remained undisbursed and an additional $7m of homes savings grant moneys also remained unspent. The Government is also holding back on aged and disabled housing finance. We were promised $225m for this purpose to be disbursed over three years. From $75m a year the program has now been dropped back to $45m a year. This year $58m is allocated, and even if it is completely disbursed $120m must be spent in the next year to complete the allocation. Given the Government's habitual underspending record it is highly improbable that aged and disabled housing will receive $120m in 1982-83,

1236 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No 1)

While the poor in this country have received a raw deal out of this Budget, those in developing countries appear to have done a little better. Or have they? Now that the North-South gladiator and champion of the underdeveloped poor, our Prime Minister, has admitted that it is self-interest and not altruism which motivates his concern for them, the developing poor must truly be relieved. If self-interest has led to the situation where Australia's aid contribution is still 0.55 per cent short of the level recommended by the Pearson Commission, heaven help the Third World if the Prime Minister is guided by altruism! We know the Prime Minister's altruism of old. Ever since Ayn Rand announced 'altruism is dead' her disciple, the Prime Minister, has been applying this principle with religious zeal. Even the handicapped whose expectations have been unrealistically raised throughout the International Year of Disabled Persons, due to the Government's extravagant public relations programs, know all about the Prime Minister's altruism. Half way through the International Year of Disabled Persons the best that the Government can come up with is four more paltry initiatives worth $5m for the remainder of the Budget year. The Budget increases to the incentive allowances for workers in sheltered workshops will benefit just over 8,000 persons. Furthermore, the allowances have not been increased for six years. It is hard to avoid the impression that the Government has been shamed into increasing them.
What appeared to the Press to be an economically conservative-Budget has been exposed for the sham and deception that it really is. To the aberrant Australian earning $800 a week, who lives in a mobile home, has more than three children and is employed by the Australian Security IntelligenceOrganisation, it is barely tolerable. To the majority of Australians it is one more in a series of Government defections from its duty and a reminder that the quarry masters have a prior claim to this nation's resources. I noticed in the Budget Papers that the sales tax on seat belts in motor vehicles has been increased but expenditure on road safety has been decreased. I have also noticed that the increased Budget estimate for bankruptcy is at an all time high. I imagine that the Government will have to budget for a higher amount next year because many small businessmen will go to the wall over the increased sales tax. Many other little people will go too. Let us all hope that the Government will also be gone.
Mr JARMAN (Deakin) (8.58)-1 support the Budget brought down by the Treasurer (Mr Howard). Although this Government, like all governments, has had its criticis from time to

time, one thing that it has achieved is the reputation among thinking people in the community of being a responsible government, one which has done a great deal to restore stability and confidence in our economic future-something which was lost during the hapless Whitlam years. I think it is fair to say that most people expected this Budget to be a fairly tough one and tough Budgets are easy to criticise. I prefer to describe this as a responsible Budget brought down by a responsible government which has very few options if it intends to see that the Australian economy remains on a stable and even keel.
Since this Government took office in 1975 it has been fundamentally concerned with curbing inflation and government expenditure. It believes that taxpayers cannot be required to go on paying more every year for the types of excesses which occurred during the period when Labor was in office between 1972 and 1975. History can be a great teacher, and it is interesting to look back over the past decade to see what occurred to Australia's economy during that period. When the Whitlam Labor Government came to power in 1972 unemployment was about 1.4 per cent of.the work force and inflation was 4.5 per cent. When it went out of office three years later inflation was running at 17 per cent-it even reached an annual equivalent of 19 per cent in one quarter-and unemployment was somewhere between 5 per cent and 6 per cent. The economy of Australia, not solely but largely as a result of the Labor Government's policies, was in a state of considerable disrepair. T!:lOse years did a lot of damage. The way in which taxpayer's funds were lavishly tossed around and the way in which. the Public Service was allowed to expand to such vast proportions led many people to believe that government funds were inexhaustible. People tended to forget that governments have no money of their own, that the money they hand -out can come only from the workers and the taxpayers.
The Fraser Government, on coming to office in 1975, realised that firm measures had to betaken to reverse the trend of those years. The brake had to be applied, and applied it was. Since it came to office the Government has curbed it's own expenditure by placing a ceiling on the never-ending expansion of the Public Service-the so-called fat cats, as Clyde Cameron, a former member of the Whitlam Government, dubbed the public servants. It is the Government's view, however, that it is no use the Federal Government drawing in the purse strings on its own expenditure unless all levels of government-State, Federal and localalso share in the task, thus easing the tax burden on those who produce the wealth from which

Appropriation Bill (No 1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIYES 1237

government funds come. How different the economic climate in Australia is today after 5t years of the Fraser Government's economic policies compared with the economic climate when this Government took office.
Particularly encouraging, in fact exciting, was the release of the mid-year economic prediction of the Paris-based Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, commonly known as the OECD which, as honourable members know, consists of a grouping of 24 main Western economies. The OECD predicted that energy and resource-based development, which this Government has deliberately encouraged since coming to office, in contrast to the policies of the previous Labor Administration, will take Australia this year to the top of the developed world's growth table for the first time since comprehensive statistics started to be gathered. It also predicted that Australia was likely to hold that position well into 1982. Economic growth in Australia this year and next was estimated by the OECD to outstrip that of each of the other 23 countries, even Japan. This growth in Australia will run up to four times the average of the whole OECD area. If wages can be held in check-this will not be easy with excessive union demands-there could be a significant fall in unemployment in Australia. The OECD is predicting an unemployment rate in Australia in 1982 of 4.5 per cent compared with the June level this year of 5 per cent and 6 per cent in 1980. Against this, the OECD predicts a worsening of unemployment in the rest of the world and is expecting a world unemployment rate of nearly 7.5 per cent by 1982.
Although the firm anti-inflationary policies of this Government have reduced Australia's inflation rate for the year 1981-82 to 8.8 per cent; the strong growth in Australia's economy will, the OECD predicts, come at a cost of higher inflation which, if left unchecked, could rise to 11.25 per cent in Australia in 1982. This, of course, is still well below the figure when Labor was in office. It is clear that there will be a rapid expansion of the Australian economy centred on the development of energy and resource-based industries. Present information suggests that the value of investment spending in mining, energy and basic metals industries might double in the two years to 1981-82.
Even if we allow a margin for OECD optimism, the Australian economy is poised for strong growth, dramatic by comparative standards, and thus a bigger cake will be available for slicing. This should mean real improvements in wage levels, but there is no way the current round of excessive wage clams will be able to be accommodated, particularly as real wages rose by 4 per

cent in 1980-81. If the current level of industrial turmoil continues that growth, which can supply jobs and higher wages, will be put at risk. If I can say as an aside, it is clear that the example set by members of this Parliament in recently rejecting half their salary rise recommended by the independent Remuneration Tribunal will not be followed by the unions or certain other sectors of this community. It is in the light of these economic circumstances, I believe, that the Treasurer has brought down the Budget which we are discussing tonight.
This Budget has been framed in the light of economic imperatives which have predominated over short term political considerations. It is a Budget put forward by a responsible government which is steadfastly planning for the future economic growth and stability of this country. There are few measures in this Budget which could be regarded as vote catching concessions. Even though the economic climate in Australia has been changed dramatically by the projected resources boom, the economic imperative is to curb inflationary pressures and to dampen inflationary expectations. The Melbourne Age editorial, on the morning after the Treasurer brought down the Budget, said:
Recovery is underway, led by the emerging resources boom. The cruel irony is that the surge of foreign investment has expanded the money supply, shortage of skilled labour has boosted wage demands, and expectations have risen to such an extent, that the Government is forced to restrain the very growth it has long sought. Hence the Budget is once again . . . deflationary in its intended impact. Regrettable though this may be, it is necessary.
An article by Kenneth Davidson, the Age economic editor, bore the heading 'Unpopular, but the only way'. An article by Terry McCrann, the business editor of the Melbourne Age, described the Budget as 'impressive-one of the best'. It is not so long ago that people were talking of projected Budget deficits of something like $5,OOOm. Such a deficit would, of course, have highly inflationary effects on the economy. Deficit budgeting is an inflationary factor. This year the overall deficit will be reduced to $146m, a mere 0.1 per cent of gross domestic product, compared with a peak of 4.9 per cent in 1975-76, the end of the Whitlam era. There will be a domestic surplus this year of $1,542m compared with a domestic surplus of $429m last year. Outlays in this Budget are increased by 12.6 per cent over last year-up 1.9 per cent in real terms-and revenue is up 15.8 per cent largely because of the increase of 2+ per cent in sales tax and an increase in personal income tax collections as people move into higher tax brackets.

1238 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriati~n Bill (No 1)

It is only natural that as people earn more

money they pay more tax, despite half indexation

applied to personal income tax. The 2t per cent

sales tax increase has been attacked by the Labor

Party and questioned by the Australian Demo-

crats. But there their arguments must ring hollow

indeed if the high Government profile in social se-

curity and other areas is to be maintained and

improved and yet inflation is to be kept in check.

Without increased revenue these objectives could

not be achieved. Social security and welfare will

cost a massive $11,357m in the coming year, an in-

crease of 14.5 per cent over last year. Social secur-

ity represents 27.8 per cent of all Budget expendi-

ture. The Department of Social Security will cost

$415m just to administer next year alone. There

are now two million Australians over 60 years of

age, a quarter of the adult population. As Aus-

tralia's population is aging, this figure will con-

tinue to increase from year to year. So too will the

heavy liability of increasing and maintaining

social security. It is estimated that the new sales

tax will cost consumers between $1.50 and $2 a

week per family. I think that is a small price to

pay for the assistance given to those in need to be

maintained and upgraded.

.

Particularly pleasing was the provision in this Budget to increase family allowances by 50 per cent for the third child and subsequent chilren and for children in institutions. The children of today are the Australians of tomorrow. They are
the best migrants we can obtain and I applaud this measure. The automatic adjustment of basic pension and benefit rates introduced by this Government was a great initiative and this year pensions will continue to move in line with the consumer price index. I believe it is a pity that automatic adjustments do not apply to pensions for the over 70-year-olds who do not meet the means test. The granting of taxable pensions to 70-year-olds and over was a great step forward towards the goal of a national superannuation scheme. I pay credit to the Whitlam Labor Government for introducing
it. A national superannuation scheme would be a scheme paid for by all during their working lives and received by all during retirement.

The fact that the Government has stopped indexation of these pensions is, I believe, regrettable to say the least. I welcome the effective support which will be given through rental assistance to pensioners and long term sickness beneficiaries. The unemployment benefit is to be increased by $4.65 a week for those 18-year-olds and over without dependants. Those under 18-year-olds who live at home are, probably one could argue, provided for as the family concerned should accept some responsibility for their upkeep. However,

those who through no fault of their own do not live at home will still find it difficult.

This is the International Year of Disabled Persons and it is pleasing to see that the Government has allocated $1, 134m for the handicapped. This is an increase of 140 per cent over the provision made in the first year of office of this Government in 1975-76. Whilst there are many in our community who would argue that charity begins at home and that we must look after our own people
first, it is pleasing that the Government has seen fit to increase foreign aid expenditure by over $lOOm, an increase of 18 per cent. Foreign aid should not be viewed, as some people would advocate, as a tool of diplomacy. I se~ it as a humanitarian gesture, inadequate though our resources in Australia may be, to solve the gigantic problem of poverty in other parts of the world ..

One matter of concern to all' honourable members is, I believe; the recent rise in interest rates, particularly its effects on home buyers. The major expansion of 20 per cent in real terms in private sector demand for investment funds over the past year has put pressure on the capital market and forced rises in interest rates. Even with
the increase' in interest rates the demandfor finance remains strong. This in turn reflects the improvement in the general level of economic activity. Bank interest rates on home loans are now 12t per cent and the rate of some building societies is 14+ per cent. Perhaps we in Australia have been spoilt in the past when we consider interest rates. in other countries but meeting this added cost in interest rates has sorely tried most home buyers' budgets. The Government is aware of the need to contain interest rates. The Treaslirer stated in his Budget Speech:

I can think of no cause more ;.important to Australian

families . . .

"

The Government has contributed to easing the pressure on interest rates by virtually eliminating the Budget defi<;:it and in addition ,has acted to re-
strain the botrowing requirements of public sector spending, through the Loan Council. ,As the Treasurer told a business luncheon in Hobart last week:

There is real evidence that interest rates are stabilising.,

He said that there are promising signs that we
have started to turn the corner in this regard. The final matter to which I wish to refer is the pressure coming from some quarters for lowering tariffs throughout Australia. However humanitarian the claims may be for lowering tariffs, I feel that with an unemployment rate in the vicinity of 5per cent this is an area in which Australia must ,hasten slowly. We do not want to see the typeof situation

Appropriation Bill (No 1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1239

which occurred during the time of the Whitlam Labor Government when so many Australian workers were thrown out of employment due to hasty action on 'behalf of the Government in lowering tariffs. '
In summing up,. I would just like to say that I think this Government in this Budget has grasped the nettle. It has ,not endeavoured to bring in a popular Budget, a Budget that gives handouts to everybody. Such action would have been irresponsible' and I am ,sure the Treasurer, who is at the table, would be the first to agree with me. I think this has been a Budget which a responsible government' has brought' in to keep our ship of state-Australia-on a steady and even keel economically. I commend the Treasurer for his courage and the way in which he has brought forward t~hi~ Budget because I am sure it is in the long term interests of this wonderful country of Australia which we have inherited.
" Mr LES McMAHON (Sydney) (9.16)-After
listening to the honourable member for Deakin (Mr 'Jarman) deliver his speech on the Budget and protecting the Government I wonder sometimes how.long the honourable member and the Government can blame the Labor Government of
1972 to 1975 and the trade union movement and
the old people for taking too much pension-the million of them ,receiving social security benefits. I am ple~syd that the honourable member for Deakin did say that he believes the family should be looked after. I think he also saip that we should have tariff protection and I agree with him.
I rise to add my comments to this Budget debate. This is a dishonest unjust Budget which does no more than benefit big business interests and certain minority groups while it ignores the plight of the" unemployed, the pensioners, the average family, the home buyers, the people wishing to buy a home and the disadvantaged-literally millions of Australians. I have said before and I will continue' to say that Australian people are what we are talking about-human beings, not facts, figures and statistics;not numbers in a ballot box. We are talking about people who I doubt whether the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), the Treasurer (Mr Howard), who is sitting at the table now, and many Government members realise exist out in the real world, outside the Lodge. We are talking about people who would not even know what a Boeing 727 jet or a grand prix racing car looks like, although the people in my electorate know only too well what a Boeing 727 looks like, especially the undercarriage as it is lowered before touchdown at Mascot Airport.

We are talking about pensioners and other reCipients of social security benefits trying to live on their pittance of an allowance and who in my electorate pay $40, $60 to $100 a week rent, at a very conservative estimate. In some cases they share fiats, homes and dwellings. We are talking about young home buyers facing ever increasing loan repayments. Many of them are forced out of their dream home because they cannot afford to keep up with the spiralling interest rates while their wages remain stagnant. We are talking about people who once dreamt of fulfilling the great Australian dream of owning their own home but who now find that prices are far beyond their reach or that finance is simply not available to them. We are talking about homeless people living in caravans and tents and the homeless and destitute people living in parks, on park benches, along canals around Sydney and on the streets. But for the untiring efforts of the workers of the Central Methodist Mission, the Matthew Talbot Hostel, the Sydney City Mission, Mission Beat, the Salvation Army, and countless other charitable organisations these people would be left to die. The Matthew Talbot Hostel, for instance, nightly caters for over 500 homeless men. All of these organisations are performing a vital service, many in my electorate of Sydney. All of these organisations are starving for funds due to the spending cutbacks of this uncaring Government. They deserve money. They do receive some from Federal and State governments but not enough.
We are talking about unemployed young people who have not worked in months or who have never worked in their lives because there are simply no jobs, not through any fault of their own but because of the policies of this Government. We are talking about unemployed bread winners who have to try to explain to their young children why there is not ample food on their plates or why they cannot even have a little pet even though little Jimmy or Johnny down the road has one. I am told by a constituent that he wanted to buy a pet for his young son but that he could not feed the animal because of financial difficulties. These are the people who the Government refuses to recognise. In this Budget this Government has turned a deaf ear to them whilst they are screaming for justice. They are the people to whom this Government promised prosperity just 10 months ago. The Government promised prosperity to the Australian people and the only ones to benefit so far have been a select few-big businesses, foreign investors and the multi-national corporations. It is

1240 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No 1)

about time that this Government stopped pandering to the interests of big business and multinational corporations and lived up to its promise to millions of Australian people.
The Government has cunningly avoided increasing the excises on alcohol and tobacco at this stage. As many honourable members are aware, many members of the public gauge a Budget handed down by a Federal government by the change to the alcohol and tobacco excises. I am sure that many people breathed a sigh of relief when they heard that the excises on alcohol and
tobacco had not been increased. I only hope that those people are not too relieved, for it is most likely that this Government will bring down a mini-Budget in the not-too-distant future with a resultant increase in both alcohol and tobacco excises, and a further increase in the Government's new sales tax rates-another burden on the small businessman.
I must admit that this Budget which we saw handed down in this Parliament by the Treasurer is a clever one. I am surprised at his efforts; he must have had a lot of help. In this Budget the Government has avoided the crisis of a horror Budget. In the last six years we have become
accustomed to this Government attempting to hide its increased taxes. However, when this Budget is closely examined one can see that the price of spirits, including whisky, brandy and vodka, has risen by at least 2t per cent due to the Government's increase to the sales tax schedules. Earlier this year-12 March to be exact-after much speculation about the taxation system in Australia, the Treasurer. announced that the Government had decided not to proceed with the introduction of a new broadly-based indirect tax and that it was anxious to 'minimise the infla-
tionary consequences of collecting additional revenue'. The Treasurer also stated that the Government did not wish to 'move towards greater reliance on indirect tax without providing a noticeable offset in personal tax reductions'. Five months and six days later we saw the Treasurer
hand down a Budget that introduced a new broadly based indirect tax, a new sales tax of 2t per cent to apply to items previously exempted from sales tax. It applies to basic items necessary to all people, regardless of income-not luxury items but necessary items. I refer to such items as
clothes, baby napkins, baby napkin liners, baby bibs, shoes, bed sheets, cot covers, pillow cases, tea towels, blankets and sponges. The Treasurer should be ashamed. His wife should show him how much such items cost.

,
also increased all previously existing sales tax rates by 2t per cent. All this has been done-I quote the Treasurer once again-'without providing a noticeable offset in personal tax deductions'. In fact, for many people the reality is an increase in personal tax due to the failure of this Government to fully index taxes. This year a person who earned $115 in 1980-81 would be paying over 33 per cent more tax, compared to an estimated rise in incomes of only 13.5 per cent. Like many of my honourable colleagues on this side of the House the side of the House on which the next Prime Minister of Australia sits-I have no doubt that this Government, which clutches so strongly to the apron strings of so-called mother England, will follow her lead in squeezing people for every drop of blood with indirect taxes. This new 2t per cent sales tax is only the beginning. In the next Budget, if not sooner, this new indirect tax will increase, as did England's value added tax, which was introduced in 1973 at a rate of 10 per cent. Now, eight years later, it has risen to a staggering 15 per cent.
One should not be too harsh on the Government for this Budget. After all, family allowance rates have been increased. I thank the Treasurer very much. The rates will rise as from 1 January 1982-the effective date of the new sales tax-by 50 per cent for families with more than two chil~ dren. The fact is that this apparent gift from the Government is a con which, on the surface, appears to show that the Government cares about people and the quality of life they live in Australia. The Governor-General, in his address at the opening of Parliament last year, said:
My Government sets out to establish that it cares deeply about the quality of liFe lived in Australia and that it is determined to give practical expression to that care.
That statement was nothing more than a con. It is yet another example of the hypocrisy of this Government. The fact is that only 26 per cent of Australian families will receive the increase in the allowance. The trouble is that the Treasurer will receive the increase but I doubt that he really needs it. The people in need of the increase are the pensioners; the unemployed, including those under 18 years of age; the families with less than two children on low incomes; and, no doubt, many families with three or more children. This pittance of an increase of $13 a month to one of every four Australian families will be negated by the increase in sales taxes. Whilst the Government takes $550m from all Australian families with its new sales tax increases it will give back only $62m in limited family allowances.

Not only has this Government slugged the AusThis Government is the most dishonest and tralian taxpayer with this new sales tax but it has hypocritical Federal government that this nation

Appropriation Bill (No 1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1241

has had to endure since Federation. It is unjust and inhumane. It is a government of broken promises. This Government is not fit to govern. Australiaha,s,a future only under a Labor government.. This Government is without doubt the highest taxing government in the history of Australia. It promises in the next 12 months to take close on $38 billion in taxes from Australians. This is a government which campaigns each election with promises of tax reductions and tax reforms. It has certainly lived up to one promise-the promise to reform taxes. It has not introduced tax reforms that assist the people but tax reforms that further plunder people's incomes while tax avoidance runs wild.
I ask honourable members: Why is it that at a time when the Government is so preoccupied with cutbacks and saving money, it is raising this extra revenue? For what is this additional revenue to be used in these times of so-called small government? The answer is that it will be spent on the Prime Minister's pet projects and hobbies. These include the $80m Casey university, the Canberra grand prix racing track, a certain college of advanced education in an electorate named Wannon in Victoria whilst 30 CAEs are being rationalised, the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet in which staff levels have risen by 17 per cent during the Prime Minister's tenure, private VIP Boeing 727 jets, et cetera. This is what is happening to the taxes paid by the Australian people. This new Government sales tax system is an iniquitous system. A system which provides that the Prime Minister, on his salary of $100,000, pays the same sales tax on goods as does an unemployed under-18 year old receiving $36 a week is intolerable.
I am proud to be a member of the Australian Labor Party-a party which cares about people, which would immediately scrap the proposed sales tax increases and which will fight the introduction of these new increases in both Houses. The Australian Labor Party has its priorities right. Unlike the priorities of the Government parties, our priorities benefit the people of Australia-not big business interests and selected minority groups. As the honourable member for Oxley (Mr Hayden), the Leader, of the Opposition, stated in his address, under the Labor Government six years ago, our major spending priorities were health, education, housing, welfare and urban and regional development. Under this Government housing has been thrown almost to the back of the queue. Expenditure on housing has fallen drastically from 3.9 per cent of total Budget outlays-in 1974-75 to a staggering one per cent in 1981-82. I remind honourable members

that these are the actions of a government that cares so deeply for the Australian people and the quality of life lived in Australia. Pity help Australia if this Government did not care about the people and the quality of life they live.
In real terms, spending on housing by the Federal Government has decreased by a shattering 59 per cent in six years. This is an average decrease of just on 10 per cent a year. in real monetary terms this decrease is translated to a drop of $1,014m; from $1,413m in 1974-75-the last year in which Australia had a caring government-to $399m in 1981-82. As all members of the Opposition are aware, the Prime Minister and many other Government members are not concerned with housing. They do not have to worry about whether they will have a roof over their heads tomorrow and a place to sleep tonight. However, unlike the Prime Minister and his colleagues, millions of Australians do have to worry about such matters. I refer to such people as the 40,000 families on the New South Wales Housing Commission waiting list. One per cent of Australia's population in urban and rural areas comprises the homeless living in refuges, hostels and doss houses and on park benches and beside canals. They are the 150,000 people for whom this Budget provides nothing. Yet another 200,000 people-the ones who can afford it-are living in caravans and tents.
This Government is responsible for the highest home loan interest rates in our history. Currently, Australia rates No. 2 in the world on the list of real rates of interest, narrowly topped by the United States of America-yet another country which the Prime Minister seems to be ready to bend over backwards to please. It is funny that Ronald Reagan, the President of the United States, is never .quite sure of the Prime Minister's name or identity. Because of this Government's policy of opening the floodgates to foreign investors, home loan interest rates have risen to the extent that the great Australian dream of owning one's own home, for many Australians, has become just a dream. The prospect of ever owning a home is now far beyond the means of 85 per cent of single income families. That means that four in every five families can forget about ever owning their homes while a Liberal-National Country Party coalition is in power in Canberra.
As all honourable members are aware or-let me rephrase that after taking into consideration some government members-as all honourable members should be aware, it is a fact that housing loan approvals are rapidly decreasing. Ask any young couple trying to buy their own home. In 1978-79 real terms, loans approved by permanent

1242 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No~l)

building societies, nation-wide, for the May quarter fell by $120m from $575m in 1978-79 to $455m in 1980-81. Similarly, loans approved by savings banks, nation-wide, for the May quarter fell by $76m from $675m in 1978-79 to $599m in 1980-81. This represents a total decrease in two years in loans approved by both permanent building societies and savings banks of close on $200m, which represents 4,000 homes at $50,000 if one is lucky; that is, 4,000 people cannot buy their own hom~s because of the policies of this Government.
Not only does this Budget not provide increased funds for housing, or any relief for people with home loans who are facing spiralling interest rates or for people trying to obtain home loans; but also, the Government's new sales tax will mean an increase of at least $500, which is one-quarter of the homes savings grant, in the' price of a modest brick veneer cottage. I seek . leave to have incorporated in Hansard a quotation from Mr W. K.irkby-Jones, the Executive Director of the Housing Industry Association.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
The Budget contains no" relief whatsoever for potential first-home buyers or for families experiencing financial hardship with greatly increased mortgage repayment burdens.
The absence of even a token interest subsidy scheme shows the Government's insensitivity for thousands of Australian families who have been forced out of the market place by the current record level of interest rates.
The failure to revitalise the home savings grant scheme and the further cuts in the level of funding for welfare housing programs indicates that the Government now places a low priority on the housing aspirations of ordinary Australians.
The impost of a 2.5 per cent sales tax on building materials used in the construction of new houses flies in the face of the Government's stated priority for home ownership and is in complete contradiction to the findings and recommendations of the housing costs inquiry, set up by this Government.
It is now clear that although the Government appears to be a willing listener, it will not heed industry advice and nor will it act to restore home ownership opportunities.
Mr LES McMAHON-I thank the House. The Master Builders Federation of Australia has also attacked this Government in a similar way. I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard a statement by the Master Builders Federation of Australia on the 2.5 per cent sales tax on building materials.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
NO TO HOME SEEKERS' TAX
(the 2.5 per cent sales tax on building materials)
This tax has not been justified It will impose further burdens on those less able to alford it It follows savage interest rate hikes It will incr'ease costs:
by the tax itself, and

by the administrative burden it will have to be built into

the final price

It will alfect the viability of many capital investment

projects

It is specifically intended to hit an industry that does not

enjoy the incentives or bounties or other protections given

to manufacturing and primary producers

_

It must result in a further fall in the number of houses built

It will increase the cost of houses, hospitais, schools as tlie

increased costs cannot be absorbed and will have to be

passed on to consumers.

Oppose this tax on building materials. Write, phone and tele-

gram your Federal Members and Senators today.

," '

Authorised by:
D.Andrew Executive Director Master Builders' Federation of Australia 4 September 1981

Mr LES McMAHOl'l-1 thank the House,
will The truth is that this Goveri-tment will not list~n
to advice from industry, nor it.li~ten to the cries for assistance from thousands of Australians who wish to fulfil their drea~s of home ownership in this so-called lucky country. Australia may be the lucky country for foreign investors who wish to exploit our people and our 'resoun,:es. However, it is the unlucky country for millions of 'Aus~
tralians as long as they have to endure the actions and policies of this Government. .

Education is yet another area where this

Government has fallen down. On the surface edu-

cation seems to have fared a little better than one

would have expected with a total outlay of

$2,871.2m for 1982-one of the very fewallo-

cations which has increased in real terrhs over

1980-81. However, who will benefit from this in-

crease? It will certainly not be the university

students from middle to lower income back-

grounds, those who are worst hit by the razor

gang's proposals to reintroduce fees and to tighten

the eligibility for the Tertiary Education Assist,

ance Scheme allowance. It is expected that there

will be a drop of 2,000 in the number of students

receiving the full rate of the TEAS benefit as a re~

suit of the Government's policies of tightening the

eligibility. Although the allocation for education

in all three tertiary sectors' and' schools has

increased over the 1980-81 allocations, spending

on education is still down by 2 percent on 1975 in

real terms.

.

.

Health, the first priority of the Whitlam Government, hardly rated a mention in the Treasurer's Budget Speech, the only mention being:

The Government has already announced important changes to the funding of health services in 1981-82.

That announcement was the death knell for Medibank. Health spending in real terms is down 22 per cent since 1975. That shows how much a

Appropriation Bill (No 1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1243

priority health is to this Government. This Government's health scheme is as inequitous as is the new sales tax. A system which means that the Prime Minister pays as much for his health as does the lowest paid public servant is unjust. Good health should be enjoyed by all Australians, not just by those who can afford to line the purses of the private health insurance companies and the Australian Medical Association.

Basic health and medical insurance is now costing the average family an extra $10 a week. So much for the increase in family allowances on 1 January 1982. 'Oh, but it is taxable deductible,'
says the Government and the health insurance companies. Six years ago the same basic cover was provide from general revenue as a basic right to all Australians, and in 1984 it will be so once gain. The Australian Labor Party is committed to a universal health insurance scheme based on each family's ability to pay, not to a system as inequitous as the one this Government has forced on Australians-a system under which one does not have to be rich to be healthy. 1 seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard a letter from the New South Wales Combined Youth Support Scheme
Committees.

Leave granted.

The letter read as follows-

Dear Mr McMahon

N.S.W. Combined CYSS Committees C/o Rozelle CYSS 754 Darling Street
Rozelle, N.S.W. 2039 Phone: 818 2329

We are sure you are as concerned as we are at the Government's decision to close the Community Youth Support Scheme. On behalf of the members of the Local CYSS Committees of N.s.W., we ask that you do all in your power to ensure that funding for CYSS is reinstated.

No doubt you are aware that the Minister for Employment
and Youth Affairs has acknowledged that CYSS is the most
cost-effective Manpower Program administered by his Department. One of the major reasons for the relative cheapness
of CYSS, and its success in effectively reaching and helping over 50,000 unemployed young people in the last twelve
months, has been the time and expertise of Local Committee members, given voluntarily to the management of CYSS projects. Particularly in the light of the Minister's recent mislead-
ing statements suggesting the continuation of CYSS, we are affronted by the baldness of the budget announcement about CYSS. Particularly in the light of the Minister's assurance
that he was deferring the introduction of new CYSS guidelines to allow for 'further community consultation', we are appalled that it was apparently not considered worthwhile
consulting us, the people devoting our time and skills to unemployed youth at no cost to the Government.

Mr Brown has suggested that the hole left by the disapperance of CYSS will be filled by increased spending on the School-to-Work Transition Programme and the Special Youth Employment Training Programme. We reject that, for the following reasons:

1. Of the 82 CYSS projects in N.S.W., 21 are in towns where there is no Technical College. Twenty are in
towns without a C.E.S. office. To these communities, SYETP and SWTP are an irrelevant farce.
2. Even where TAFE and CES facilities are available, it has been conclusively demonstrated (by CYSS) that the vast majority of unemployed young people do not take
advantage of the services offered by those organisations without the prior intervention of a CYSS project. There are literally thousands of young people who lack the
basic skills to approach institutionalised services systems. It has been proved that they can and do approach CYSS, and move from CYSS to more formal training
and-in the case of the lucky ones-to jobs.

If the Government persists in its decision to close CYSS, it risks losing the goodwill of unemployed young people, their parents, vast numbers of people in local communities which are aware of the problems faced by unemployed youth, and
ourselves. We are aware that Mr Brown is relatively new to the Ministry, and feel that he may be the vicitim of poor
advice from his Department. Whatever the case, we ask you to help us have the decision revoked.

As a representative of your electorate" be it a collection of small rural communities, an urban concentration, or the
whole State, we urge you in the strongest terms to respond to the dismay and distress that has been evident in the last ten days in communities all over N.S.W. in response to the
proposed closure of CYSS. Specifically, we urge you to publicly demonstrate your opposition to the decision. Short of that stance, we expct you to argue vigorously and repeatedly
in the Party room until CYSS is re-funded.

This letter was authorised by a meeting of the chairpersons ofN.S.W. Local CYSS Committees.

Yours faithfully Damian Cobley-Finch for the Combined Committees

Mr LES McMAHON-I thank the House. The abolition of CYSS will further add to the plight of young unemployed and lead to an even
greater social problem for someone else, such as the local community organisations, the State governments and families to cope with. The ceasing of the Community Youth Support Scheme is yet another example of this Government opting out of its responsibilities and passing the problems on to someone else.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-

Order! The honourable member's time has

expired.

.

Mr CADMAN (Mitchell) (9.36)-1 rather despair at the comments by my colleague the honourable member for Sydney (Mr Les MacMahon). 1 will deal with them briefly and then pass on to other matters. I am really concerned
that the honourab,le member for Sydney, a member from New South Wales and a member of the Australian Labor Party, fails to recognise that New South Wales has the highest cost housing in the country, it has, the highest cost land in Australia and it has the highest rate of monthly repayments of any State in this nation for young people building their first homes. To any member here who belongs to the same party as that in

1244 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No 1)

Government in New South Wales and says that things are bad Australia-wide, I suggest that he return to Sydney and tell the Labor Party to get things right in Sydney and in New South Wales generally before he comes into this Parliament criticising a Federal government which has done more for home buyers for the past ten years than any other government.
Mr Milton-What a lot of humbug.
Mr CADMAN-What I say is absolutely right. The honourable member should look at the figures. Tonight I will deal with resource-based development and the demands that it will place on our community and on the Australian Government. I would like to set out some of the achievements and some of the problems that resourcebased development will bring to us. The most authoritive source of detailed .information on resource-based development plans is a document entitled 'June 1981 Schedule of Major Manufacturing and Mining Projects' compiled by the Department of Industry and Commerce. This is something of an index and a register. It is not necessarily a complete picture of what will occur. Projects which are identified by the Department of Industry and Commerce may be mutually exclusive. That means that if a project goes ahead in one part of the country another may be excluded in another part of the country. But this index is the best indicator that we, as a government and as people interested in Australia's development have to work with in order to assess what resourcebased development may bring to Australia.
The latest schedule which was produced for the Parliament and the people of Australia on 6 September by the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) indicates that 366 projects are at a committed or final feasibility stage compared with 306 in December 1980. So within six months there has been an increase of 60 final stage or committed projects. This trend goes against the comments made by observers who have said that there will be no resources boom. In fact, the figures are beginning to demonstrate that there is a resource boom, that we are into the processes of expansion and development, and in such a way that there is confidence and a large commitment to a resource-based development. The outstanding expenditure for these projects has risen from $33.4 billion at the end of December to $35.5 billion. So in the last six months there has been a further increase of over $3,000m in relation to projects that are committed or are at the final feasibility stage.
An assessment of these projects according to commodity groupings readily identifies that in the

latest schedule coal is by far the most significant area for resQurce development. It represents an investment of about $10.4 billion; oil and gas, $8.3 billion; aluminium, alumina and bauxite, $4 billion; iron ore, $3.3m; and base metals, $3.2 billion. It is easy to see on a quick assessment of those facts that the major area of investment is energy related resources. Most resources which are attracting the attention of investors and development are coal, oil and gas. The commodities that are further listed often are related to a favourable, steady and comparatively cheap source of energy. In fact it can be said that 75 per cent of planned investment is related to energy.
It is interesting to compare a table of the various States where this resource development will take place. Honourable members will be aware that the claims of Queensland and Western Australia are significant. Approximately 50 per cent of the development is taking place in the States of Queens~and and Western Australia, with other States developing to a less substantial extent. Commentators predicted a fall-off in interest in resource-related development. This has been proved to be untrue, and the schedule which has recently been upgraded indicates very strongly that that forecast has not been substantiated. The Government has distinct policies in this area, and the investment policies of the Government are to encourage new investment that will be efficient, internationally competitive and export orientated. Specialised manufacturing industries are encouraged when they are based on Australian resources and when the degree of processing or transformation is the maximum consistent with international competitiveness. National benefits are attached to resource development and they are not always easily understood, nor are they presented by sections of the community as being advantageous. I should like to reiterate some of the national benefits of resource related-development.
The foreign investment that will be needed to augment domestic capital resources can be provided only on certain guidelines and with the approval of the Australian Government. Australia's foreign investment policy aims to encourage foreign investment on 'a basis that recognises the needs and aspirations of Australians. The foreign investment provisions laid down by the Government ensure that at least 50 per cent of equity and control of resource-based ventures are held by Australians. This has been quite rigidly adhered to. Foreign investment contributes to the financing of major exploration and development projects and, of course, will raise the level of real resources available to Australia. It will bring new

Appropriation Bill (No 1)

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1245

management skills, technology and know-how into this country and, most importantly, it will open up new markets and employment opportunities.
If we look at the size of this development, the cost of it and the capital that will be involved and the benefits it will provide we need to look at what Australians will have to do to be able to adjust to take advantage of resource-based development. In fact, a working party was set up by the Premiers Conference in June 1980 to identify the shortages in skilled labour in particular industries and in given regions. There was also a reference from the Premiers Conference for the working party to identify the skilled labour requirements of current and projected development projects and the extent to which existing sources of supply, including traditional apprenticeships, upgrading and immigration were needed to assist and also to assess the needs for change in the present trade training system, including possible new arrangements.
The principal findings of the working party, established by departments of labour throughout Australia, were that there would be a shortage of tradesmen-that is already evident in some trades-and that these tradesmen would be in great demand from 1981 until 1983. In particular, the working party to which State governments were committed indicated that there would be a shortfall of 14,000 skilled tradesmen in the metal trades, a shortfall of 5,000 skilled trademen in the electrical trades and a shortfall of 3,000 in the building trades. The shortages were obvious in particular regions throughout Australia. The basic regions where there are shortages of skilled labour were identified as the Hunter region of New South Wales, the Bowen Basin-Gladstone area of Queensland and the north west region of Western Australia. If we are to fill the shortfall identified by the Departments of Labour Advisory Committee, training programs and changes in the training by trade colleges and technical and further educational authorities will be required.
In regard to the shortages of skills the report made 27 recommendations, including the development of programs for upgrading suitable semiskilled workers in shorter periods than those applicable to normal apprenticeship indentures. It recommended the introduction and expansion of pre-apprenticeship courses leading to trade occupations and also the encouragement of shorter indentures for people with appropriate educational qualifications and experience. Those recommendations having been made, I think it is interesting for us to consider what is happening in technical and further education areas to meet these demands for an identified development

which is of a massive scale. The Commonwealth has only partial responsibility in the technical and further education area, whereas the Commonwealth is fully responsible for university and advanced education. The Commonwealth supports in a supplementary way those efforts which are made by the States in the TAFE area. However, since 1974 the Commonwealth has become more substantially involved in technical and further education. The Commonwealth's involvement has been largely responsible for a redistribution of resources within the education sector.
Year after year in this House members of the Opposition criticise the way in which the Government has dealt with education, but they have failed to recognise the significant and large ongoing support which the Government has given to technical and further education. For instance, in 1982 Commonwealth grants for technical and further education capital works and equipment will total $122m. That compares with $55m in 1975-a doubling within 5 years. That is a good record and it is something that was not thought of or matched by the Australian Labor Party. In fact the Leader of the Labor Party in 1974, the Prime Minister of the day, wished to have the technical and further education field excluded from the Tertiary Education Commission. He would not give it the proper pride of place which it deserves in the field of tertiary education. The current Minister for Education (Mr Fife) and previous Ministers for Education have recognised the importance of technical and further education. Commonwealth grants now represent more than 60 per cent of the total capital expenditure from both Commonwealth and State sources in technical and further education. In 1982 TAFE will receive 54.5 per cent of total Commonwealth capital and equipment grants for tertiary education. That gives some indication of the emphasis being given by this Government. That figure compares with a figure of 13.8 per cent in 1975. What an appalling record the Labor Party has.
Commonwealth recurrent grants for TAFE in 1982 will total $84.6m. More concern and more commitment to the importance of skills and trades is expressed by this Government than any previous government. The figures are there to prove it. The role of TAFE will need to change but the most important identified area is the traditional role of training tradesmen. Whilst the way in which tradesmen are trained may need to change, the role of TAFE will be basically its traditional role. The technical and further education area will be required to help people acquire, maintain and develop their vocational skills. Particular

1246 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No It)

emphasis must be given to the expansion and development of retraining, refresher courses and recurrent education courses across the whole range of TAFE skills training responsibilities. Flexibility in undertaking this role is needed and TAFE has already demonstrated a good deal of flexibility. That flexibility must continue to achieve the objective of training thousands more people in skilled areas to be able to assist and take advantage of resource-based development.
The Commonwealth already has in place many manpower and training programs. Those programs are understood by honourable members of this House. I do-not believe they are understood or taken advantage of, both by employers and employees, to the extent that they should be. The Commonwealth's policy on the employment aspects of major development projects has been developed by State and Commonwealth officials to improve trade training systems.
I would like to mention the six functional areas which are now supported by the Commonwealth Government in trade and vocationally based training programs. The programs include the trade training program, the skills training programs, youth training programs, special training programs, employment services and youth services. Approximately $76m is being spent on trade training programs in 1981-82 to help train skilled tradesmen and tradeswomen. The Commonwealth Rebate for Apprentice Full-time Training, the CRAFT scheme, is a major program which has assisted in the training of many thousands of apprentices through their full apprenticeship indentures. The group apprenticeship support program is an extension of the indenture process and has, in fact, been responsible for the training of many more apprentices. The funding for that program will increase from $20,000 in 1980-81 to $400,000 in 1981-82.
The one year training program for groups provided by the Commonwealth, the skills training programs by which the Commonwealth seeks to work with private enterprise, makes up another key and important area. That area will be one of the key features in lifting skills in areas of heavy demand such as in the Hunter Valley of New South Wales. Industry training service programs are designed to aid and stimulate the systematic development of training programs through all sectors of industry and commerce. They support the National Training Council and activities of more than 80 tripartite industry training committees. A total of $79m has been set aside for youth training programs for young unemployed with work experience and training and for allowances for

school to work transition and pre-apprenticeship programs.
There is the Special Youth Employment Training Program which seeks to give young people experience in the work place to provide them with minimal skills so that employment may be ensured. There is the school to work transition allowance which fills the gap in the present range of allowances and subsidies available to young people and overcomes the previous impediment of their loss of unemployment benefit when undertaking education or training. It is estimated that in i981-82 60,000 young people will avail themselves of school to work courses in TAFE institutions at a total cost of $l1m. There are special training programs, employment services and services to assist young people. These programs have been laid down by the Government. The increasing demands on these programs which will be made by our community indicates that we all must be prepared to be flexible in our approach to assist in training and the development of skills, and new skills within our young people. This program has been started by a far-sighted and sensitive government in a way that was not recognised by its predecessor.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (9.57)-ln joining this debate on a Budget which is a disgrace for any government which claims to represent the Australian people, I want, first of all, to draw attention to the falseness of the arguments of Government members in supporting the Budget. They welcome the decisions of that infamous forerunner of the Budget, the committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions,. as though the review had been conducted by a team of expert professional advisers. As we all know, the review committee comprised five Ministers who, in several short months, proceeded to make recommendations, the greater majority of which dealt with matters outside their own sphere of ministerial responsibility and knowledge and which bore little relation to the carefully considered findings of the Government's own exper.t commissions and parliamentary committees.
As if this was not enough, as if this was not the height of irresponsibility, Government members, including Ministers, have now become adept at avoiding the economic and social realities which affect the living standards of the Australian people by quoting selective statistics to support a false picture of a dynamic and prosperous society, just as the honourable member for Mitchell (Mr

Adjournment

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1247

Cadman) did. The truth is that Australia is only

dynamic and prosperous for the wealthy and the

privileged. We are a society in which the top 2,000

wealthy people own as much as the poorest 2.2

million and where 50 per cent of Australians own

less than 8 per cent of our national wealth. For

the three million people who are classified as

disadvantaged it is not a prosperous and dynamic

country. For them life has never been so bad. For-

tunately, the people are not fools and they realise

that over the past six years of Liberal-National

Country Party government their standard of liv-

ing has steadily dropped. This is not surprising

when one remembers that it is the declared policy

of the Government to transfer resources from the

apurbeldicisstericbtourtioton

the of

private sector; in resources away

other from

words, wages,

salaries and government expenditure towards

business profits. In consequence, since 1975 the

real purchasing power of workers has dropped by

round $1,000 a year. At this point it is relevant to

look more closely at some of the aspects of this

Budget which, together with the razor gang de-

cisions, will be most harmful to the well-being of

the Australian people.

I refer now to unemployment. The Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown) consistently quotes employment figures but conveniently ignores the unemployment
figures. He talks about a growth figure of 109,000 but he does not want to talk about the 117,000 teenagers who are unemployed. This represents a teenage unemployment rate of 15 per cent, but the Minister's answer is to abolish the Community Youth Support Scheme, one of the main support systems for the young unemployed. Knox and Sherbrooke are two CYSS groups in my electorate, with Lillydale CYSS on the border. On the Minister's own admission the Sherbrooke CYSS was a group which was giving young people valuable experience in a wide range of activities. Yet the scheme was abolished as part of this diabolical Budget. I ask the Minister: What will happen to the many young first offenders who are being referred to the Knox CYSS group?

Debate interrupted.

ADJOURNMENT
Estimates Committee: Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting-Industrial Dispute: Kwinana Shipping Terminal-Air Traffic
Controllers: Brisbane Airport-Commonwealth Games-Agent Orange
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.

Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (10.0)-ln this adjournment debate I want to raise matters which emerged in the House of Representatives Estimates Committee concerning expenditure of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. The matter I wish to raise relates to the outlay which is proposed by this Government and this Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in sponsoring the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne in October. I am pleased that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) is sitting at the table because when that conference was first mooted-I am perfectly happy to see that Australia takes its turn in sponsoring a heads of government conference-the Prime Minister's Department estimated, presumably after consultation with the Treasurer, that the cost of this giant conference would be about $l.3m. That is a lot of money but it is appropriate that we do this thing reasonably well. What emerged at the Estimates Committee meeting today was that the cost of this extravaganza will now be closer to $14m in terms of estimates for the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet only. There will be additional costs which will be absorbed in other departments such as the Department of Administrative Services. They do not show up. I remind the House, and perhaps remind the other heads of State who will be attending CHOGM, that if they travel 100 yards from the place where they are meeting to my electorate they will find large areas of unemployment, Australian families living in poverty and kids who are parts of Community Youth Support Scheme groups which are being abolished because this Government cannot find--
Mr Viner-You were present at the Estimates Committee meeting this afternoon. You know the facts of the matter.
Mr Howard-The amount of $1.3m was for last year only.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will remain silent.
Mr HOLDING-I was present at the Estimates--
Mr Viner-You are misleading the House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will remain silent.
Mr HOLDING-If the Minister for Industrial Relations wants to say that I am deliberately misleading the House I will not ask him for a withdrawal. He is a Minister who would say anything.
Mr Viner-You are misleading the House because you were there.

1248 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Adjournm(mt

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will remain silent.
Mr HOLDING-The Minister indicated to the Committee a level of expenditure. The Minister knows that the original estimate was $1.3m.
Mr Viner-It was not. You know it. You were there.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will remain silent.
Mr HOLDING-That was not denied. It was in a Press release.
Mr Viner-It was not.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Melbourne Ports will resume his seat. If the Minister continues to defy the Chair, the Chair will have no alternative but to deal with him.
Mr Viner-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. The honourable member was present this afternoon during the Estimates Committee hearings.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-That is not a point of order.
Mr Viner-It is a point of order if you will allow me to point out the circumstances.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Minister will quickly proceed to his point of order.
Mr Viner-The honourable member was present when his colleague the shadow Minister for Industry and Commerce asked me a question about this matter. I answered him by pointing out that the figure of $1.3m was the estimate for the expenditure in 1980-81.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Minister is debating the matter. There is no point of order.
Mr Viner-The honourable member was present and knows the facts of the matter.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Minister will resume his seat. There is no point of order.
Mr HOLDING-I know what emerged. I do not blame the Minister for being embarrassed. This Government refuses to find a measly $11m to continue with CYSS groups. It would not cost $11m. But the Prime Minister, the Minister for Industrial Relations who is sitting at the table and the Treasurer will entertain heads of state. They will bring them to Canberra for a two-day retreat. I thought a retreat was something spiritual, a place where people could contemplate and think their way through the heady problems of state. Apart from the accommodation costs, which are reasonable, $27,000 will be spent on hospitality to

entertain 42 heads of state. I do not know theircapacity but it must be better than any member of the Australian Parliament. An amount of $27,000 is to be spent on hospitality. If the hospitality gets too much for them, $3,000 is set aside for medical attention. The residents of Canberra who have just had their services at Royal Canberra Hospital reduced very significantly by this Government are entitled to know why this money is being spent when the Prime Minister tells every other section of the community to make sacrifices. Sacrifices will not be made at this level.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (10.5)-On 4 September the Full Bench of the Austnilian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission gave a decision that an award should issue for members of the Waterside Workers Federation working the Cooperative Bulk Handling Grain Shipping Terminal at Kwinana in Western Australia. The history of this application, which is primarily a demarcation dispute with the Australian Workers Union, goes back approximately two years when the WWF commenced industrial action at Kwinana in pursuit of this award. The industrial action closed the Kwinana terminal for nine weeks and eventually stopped all Australian wheat shipments for nine days. The return to work was not the choice of the CBH or the AWU. The Western Australian facility, selected as the soft spot for this campaign by the WWF, was proving a tough nut to crack. The WWF became concerned when approximately 1,000 of CBH's 12,500 farmer shareholders met and voted to support the co-operative's handling of the dispute and requested that farmers be trained to run the terminal. Charlie Fitzgibbon consequently contacted a strange but useful ally in Sir Leslie Price, Chairman of the Australian Wheat Board. Sir Leslie obliged with alacrity, accepting that to throw the poor old Western Australians to the wolves was a small price to pay for industrial peace on his side of the country. He promised to send no more ships to Western Australia until the CBH capitulated. Sir Leslie, of course, overlooked the hunting characteristic of the wolf, which is to scout the edges of the flock, consuming the weakest one by one until all are consumed.
Sir Leslie might claim that the recent decision of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission has justified this stand. This is not so: The WWF, by an earlier decision of the Federal Court of Australia and by seeking a Federal award, was obliged to serve a log of claims on more than one State facility. This it did, choosing Western

Adjournment

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1249

Australia, South Australia and New South Wales. By some mira.culous shuffling of evidence, the Commission managed to ignore New South Wales and reject the application as it applied to South Australia. The WWF got what it asked for and paid the price Sir Leslie asked, namely to layoff the eastern States for the time being at least.
What does this do for the Western Australian and eventually for the Australian wheat grower? He needs the attentions of one of Australia's most featherbedded and industrially militant unions like he needs a hole in the head. Overseas countries buy grain to feed their populations. They expect to get it on time, often to avoid starvation. They do not expect that food will be delayed whilst it enhances the prospects of an Australian worker achieving a 30-hour week and $300 a week, which is part of the claim for this award. Already an Australia-wide strike, which laid up 60 ships and $50m of wheat exports, has occurred because CBH had the temerity to seek to transfer four grain handler members of the WWF to country installations. Why did it do this? It did it because it had no gainful work for them at Fremantle.
The strike is resolved, and the men now loaf at home on full pay. How long now will it be before the wheat industry, like the coal industry, will find it necessary to build a $6 to $7 per tonne loading into its pricing structure for demurrage and related stevedoring industrial problems? The solutions for the farmers of Western Australia are, nevertheless, simple and attractive. All shipping facilities are located in areas where the men of the inland choose to holiday. CBH need only construct some holiday cottages at, say, Kwinana and invite their shareholders to run the terminal permanently. The farmers' own work pressures do not coincide from north to south and sufficient of the 12,500 shareholders should always be available for part time work. As 1 see it, the farmer should have a welcome and relaxed 30 days at the seaside and come home with $1,000 in his pocket. Should other unions decide to impose secondary boycotts, farmers have the facilities, such as trucks, to fill the gaps, or they are big enough and strong enough financially to buy a tug and man it with ex-Navy farmer personnel. If Sir Leslie cuts off their ships again, they can contact the Russians or the Chinese, who appear to have little solidarity with the workers of Australia if the price is right. After all, who worries about the laws of Australia today? All they really have to realise is that the strength of unions such as the Waterside Workers Federation of Australia is directly in proportion to the public's unsubstantiated fear of them.

Mr HUMPHREYS (Griffith) (10.10)-1 wish to draw honourable members attention to the working conditions of an endangered species at the Brisbane Airport. The endangered species 1 refer to are the air traffic controllers. So that honourable members will understand the situation more fully I shall read a letter which I sent to the editor of the Courier-Mail in Queensland. It reads:
Dear Sir, The dire shortage of air traffic controllers and the inevita-
bility of an earlier nightly Brisbane Airport closure has been reported almost daily over the past week in your newspaper.
Apart from my suggestion 'that we recruit from the pool of 11,400 unemployed air traffic controllers in the USA., the Federal Minister for Transport; my Opposition colleagues the Australian Federation of Airline Pilots and the Civil Air Operations Officers Association have all commented that there is cause for concern.
There is cause for concern, I would suggest, in the fact that in the immediate future at least 16 Rights (domestic and International) will need to be rescheduled or perhaps cancelled. There is also cause for concern in the long term due to the fact that at least 48 additional air traffic controllers are required in Brisbane alone.
Meanwhile, even as our Air Traffic Controllers are almost daily abandoning undesirable pay and working conditions in Australia for better paid jobs and conditions in Hong Kong, the Middle East and the USA., our Queensland Premier believes we should pass over the 11,400 air traffic controllers recently sacked by President Reagan.
Perhaps it ought to be pointed out that the Premier, unlike 99% of Queenslanders, enjoys his private commuter servicethe Kingaroy Komet. That the mass of ordinary mortals are not so privileged, is lost on the Premier. So too, are the consequences for the Queensland tourist industry if the 300-odd passengers who nightly fly from Sydney and Melbourne to Brisbane after 9 pm are unable to travel at that time.
r would like to suggest that the consequences for the tourist
industry in terms of inconvenience to tourists and empty hotel beds can be ignored at our peril.
Getting back to the endangered species, 1 mention in passing that in certain quarters tourists also are being called an endangered species because of the desperate situation we now find ourselves in in Brisbane. When Brisbane Airport closed to jet traffic at 9 p.m. tonight it meant that at least two daily domestic flights and four of our five weekly domestic flights will have to be rescheduled to an earlier time, while one international flight is to be discontinued. As a consequence of that, we are speaking not only of the inconvenience to 3,000 air travellers who will be forced to fly at an earlier time but also of something more imperative, that is, the fact that all air travellers flying in and out of Brisbane will be subjected to reduced safety standards.
All air travellers will become an endangered species because air traffic controllers are being forced to use radar equipment that is 14 years out of date. That equipment will be unable to handle the increased density of air traffic when jet flights

1250 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Adjournment

are rescheduled in order to accommodate a reduced flying day. In peak periods, Brisbane air traffic controllers will effectively be handling the same volume of air traffic as Sydney and Melbourne air traffic controllers, but without the benefit of more reliable radar equipment such as that employed in those airports. In addition, en route radar, which gives five-mile surveillance, is employed in Brisbane. Sydney and Melbourne employ terminal radar, which gives three-mile surveillance. Brisbane's air traffic controllers state quite categorically that Brisbane's obsolete en route radar is totally inadequate to meet the task of separating higher density traffic which will follow the earlier closure of Brisbane Airport.
Here we have yet another extreme example of the inability of the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) to handle the problems of air transportation in Australia. He has ignored and is continuing to ignore the fact that air traffic controllers in Brisbane are using technology which was 14 years out of date when it was installed in 1968. We must find this Government culpable in its pennypinching attitude. It is not merely a case of failing to provide its employees with up to date technology; it is also a case of placing at risk the safety of the travelling public. This is an alarming situation. Mr Deputy Speaker, I am sure you are well aware of the situation because you come from Queensland too. I am sure you will be doing everything you can to relieve the situation. The Minister is a member of your party and I hope you will tell him of the great problems associated with the aviation industry in Queensland.
Mr BRAITHWAITE (Dawson) (1O.15)-My adjournment address tonight covers the subject of the 1982 Commonwealth Games. What at the outset was an effort by me to encourage and enthuse Australians concerning the Commonwealth Games I find now is an attempt to restore the faith of the Games officials in the Games, in the face of political attacks from both outside and within Australia. What has to be understood is that the Commonwealth Games 1982 are Australia's games-not Queensland's and not Brisbane's games. The sooner Australians regard them in that light the better. Any attempt to use the Games to correct alleged State prejudices or injustices is petty, mischievous and damaging. It is Brisbane's and Queensland's privilege to stage the Games, but unless we get the full support and cooperation of every Australian, black and white, the Games will not be a success.
There are problems. Whilst I consider the politicising of the Games by the intrusion of the Springboks' New Zealand tour to play against the

All Blacks, to be entirely unwarranted, nevertheless it is a reality. Other nations and even people within our community making the Games a target of racial argument has not helped the committee in the preparation of events. It must be an exasperated committee that has to face the difficulties arising from world opinion against a series of games held externally, such as the Springbok New Zealand tour, over which neither Australia nor the Games committee had any control.
How does a committee, charged with the staging of that world-wide Commonwealth event, counter the threats made in this week's Bulletin by a senior public servant? I doubt whether there has ever been a more deliberate political attempt to sabotage a national event than that one article. It can only discourage the committee members, participants and visitors at a time when those people need every encouragement and maximum enthusiasm. A public servant calling Australians to violence and confrontation is hardly the example normally set by an Australian public servant. If the outburst is, in effect, a means of calling for a reprimand or the dismissal of the person concerned, this Government should immediately oblige that person with both options.
I support the comment of my colleague the honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom) that sportsmen and sportswomen ought to be allowed the privilege, in a democratic society such as Australia's, to participate and compete in the ancient tradition and codes of sportspersons throughout the ages. They should not have to suffer the interference or the political consequences of issues not of their making. There is a need for all Australians-again, black and white-to ensure that the Games are successful by reason of all of us offering our co-operation and assistance to those people who plan, stage and participate in the Games.
There are other ways in which the Games need assistance. In fact, I have already written to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) requesting his consideration of the Commonwealth Parliament going into recess for ,the period during which the Games will be held n,ext year. It is also acknowledged that the QueeQsland Government, the Brisbane City Council and the Federal Government have contributed equally funds for accommodation, housing and preparation for the Games. However, I am advised that if maximum participation from all eligible nations results, in spite of the boycotts being called for, additional accommodation will be required. I am further advised that if funds approved for plans for longer term building at the University of Queensland are

Adjournment

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1251

advanced earlier, in fact now, to provide for long term accommodation needs, the possibility of an accommodation problem for the Games participants could be overcome. I recommend that course to the sympathetic consideration of the Commonwealth Government, particularly the Minister for Education (Mr Fife).
The cost of conducting the Games has been estimated at a further $22m, which initially it was intended would be raised from ticket sales, the sale of promotional material, the sale of specially minted coins, corporate and public subscription and other self-help activities. The Commonwealth has been of considerable assistance in bearing its part of the cost for this national event, but further action in certain ways would ensure the success of the money raising. in particular, a modest amount of approximately $800,000 in public subscriptions is being budgeted for. Tax deductibility for such gifts would encourage people to give more than they would otherwise. Relief from sales tax on purchases for the Games would offer further relief to the fund raising committee.
I end with a plea for all Australians to see this as their games, to see the event from a visitor's point of view-as a window to a great Australia, a country which is free and fair and from which good will and friendliness will be guaranteed to those people who come in the name of peace and sportsmanship.
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (10.20)-The Vietnam veterans are calling for a judicial inquiry into the toxic effect of agent orange. The Opposition's amendment to the second reading of the Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Bill 1981 that was debated and defeated in this House on Tuesday clearly made the point that there is a need for a thorough judicial examination and assessment of the medical and scientific evidence already available in large quantities. I will read to the House part of a Press release from the Vietnam Veterans Association which was circulated yesterday. It states:
All Vietnam veterans are extremely disappointed that neither Mr Hodgman nor Mr Good luck honoured their written undertakings to support a judicial inquiry into our claims.
These undertakings were given in October, 1980, prior to the last election.
On the first parliamentary opportunity to honour their commitment-debate on the Epidemiological Studies Bill in the House of Representatives yesterday-they voted against a judicial inquiry.
On 21 January 1980 the Australian newspaper carried a full page article under the heading 'The war they can't forget'. The introduction to that article adequately summarised the issue. It stated:

The 28 men pictured have a common enemy. They don't know its name. Neither do scientists. Nor bureaucrats. But it exists, and it's ugly. It can trigger towering, irrational rages or cause grown men to cry helplessly for hours, or attack their bodies with weeping sores that itch furiously. The men who share this enemy share at least one other link: a small slice of their life spent at war in an Asian jungle while a chemical mist called Agent Orange drifted down over them, devastating vast tracts of vegetation. Today they worry not only about themselves-but about their children.
I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table from that article which details the individual problems being suffered by those 28 men and their families.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-
How they are suffering
Arnie Vrieling, 34. Vietnam 1967-68. Skin rash, loss of coordination. Daughter, six months, cleft palate, missing toes, fingers.
Len Conway, 42. Vietnam service in 1967. Recurring rash, anxiety, depression, insomnia, headaches, loss of weight.
Terry Dillon, 29. Vietnam service 1970-71. Suffers severe depressions, anxiety, fits of temper.
Bob Ford, 32, Vietnam service 1969-70. Suffers recurring rash, anxiety. Son, 2, weak eyes, deafness, rash.
Ralph Caddies, 35. Vietnam service 1968-69. Suffers fits of temper, poor memory. Daughter, 7, weighs less than 16 kg.
Peter Donnelly, 33, Vietnam service in 1967. Suffers from constantly recurring rash on both hands and feet.
Maurice Gillick, 32. Vietnam 1968-69. Vomiting, temper fits, depression. Son, 2, has hole in heart, allergies, bronchial trouble.
Peter McCallum, 42, Vietnam service 1968-69. Suffers nausea, vomiting, temper fits, headaches, sores that do not heal.
Gary Adams, 32. Vietnam service \968-69. Suffers skin rash, depression, nausea, vomiting. Daughter, 6, underweight, vomiting.
Gary Chenhall, 31. Vietnam 1971. Suffers recurring skin rash, stomach ailments. Son, 7, is spastic, deaf, weak eyes.
Michael Scrase, 32. Vietnam 1968-69. Groin and body rash, nausea depression. Daughter, 5, has club feet, deformed fingers.
Michael Millar, 32, Vietnam service 1967-68 and 1970-71. Suffers severe depressions, skin rash, fits of temper.
Robert Thomason, 35. Vietnam 1970-71. Suffers skin rash, anxiety, fits of temper. Son I, ingrown toenails and fingernails.
William Assange, 34. Vietnam 1966. Groin rash, headaches, insomnia, temper fits. Daughter, 7, has skin rash, underweight.
Dennis Nolan, 32. Vietnam service 1968-69. Suffers from a recurring skin rash on his body.
Michael Grech, 32. Vietnam 1968-70. Suffers allergies. Daughter, 3, has kidney complaint. Wife has had three miscarriages.
Bill Mercer, 31. Vietnam service 1968-69 and 1971. Suffers from stomach cramps, vomiting, occasional diarrhoea.
Trevor Munce, 31. Vietnam 1969-70. Suffers unexplained ailment akin to arthritis. Daughter, 2, has genetic disorder.
Richard Crabb, 32. Vietnam 1969-70. Suffers rash, anxiety, numbness. Son, seven months, has deformed toes on both feet.

1252 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Adjournment

John Green, 48. Vietnam service in 1968. Suffers from rash on face, nausea, dizziness, and lethargy.

Ian McDowell, 34. Vietnam 1968-69. Nervous, skin rash. Son 9, born with jaw out of place. Son, 7, defective hearing.

Warren Campbell, 36. Vietnam service 1965-66. Son, 9. hyperactive, suspected brain damage. Son, II, defective
hearing.

Allan Nolan, 29. Vietnam 1971-72. Suffers from nerve ailments. Son died at birth from spina bifida and hydrocephalus.

Barry Wilkinson, 37. Entertainer in Vietnam for three months. 1970. Son, 4, born with missing bone in leg and deformed foot.

Brian Carson, 29. Vietnam service 1971-72. Suffers skin complaint, regular bouts of vomiting-and diarrhoea. Wife has
had five miscarriages.

Pat Black, 31. Served in Vietnam from 1970-71. His son, now 7, was born with club feet.

Rick Antley, 36. Vietnam 1967-68. Suffers from anxiety,
nervousness, fits of temper, deafness. Daughter, 2 has deformed toes.

John Pidgeon, 34. Vietnam service 1968-70. Bronchial asthma (receiving pension). Son, 3, has fused toes.

Roy Watts, 29. Vietnam service from 1970-71. Discharged because of violent fits of temper. Now receiving psychiatric
help.

Kevin Stockley, 48. Vietnam 1965-66. Hearing loss. nausea,
skin rash, diarrhoea, tingling in arms, headaches, fits of temper.

Mrs CHILD-I thank the House. On 11 January 1980 the Canberra Times reported the problems of a Canberra veteran and his two-year-
old son, Mark. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a portion of that article.

Leave granted.

The document read as follows-

"You go there and do your bit for your country and this is what you get for it. It's not good enough".

Vietnam veteran Michael Woods, of Kambah, put down
the plastic tube through which he has had to feed himself for the past six months and sat by his two-year-old-son Mark, who has a hole in his heart.

He spent two years on active service in Vietnam, and it was

during this time that he first complained of acute pains in his

chest while and after eating.

.

"When I came back, other symptoms developed and, after tests, the doctors diagnosed an ulcer in my oesophagus" he
said.

In 1971, after two operations. Mr Woods made a claim for
compensation, but he has not received any, for this claim or for the others he has made since.

He has not been able to work since the middle of last year
and will soon have to have another major operation or remain on a liquid diet for the rest of his life.

He said he had come into contact with Agent Orange in Vietnam, and blames it for his conditions and his son's.

Mark, like his father, has had to have surgery.

Neither Mr Wood's family nor his wife's has any history of such coronary disorders.

In a year's time "when he is strong enough" Mark will have to undergo open-heart surgery to try to rectify his condition.

Meanwhile, his father is going to keep making claims on the Government.
Mrs CHILD-I thank the House. On 26 January 1980, the Sydney Morning Herald carried an editorial about Mr Bob Gibson of Sydney. It is most unusual for a major newspaper to editorialise in this way about one individual who is not a public figure. Again, I seek leave to have that editorial incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
Bob Gibson was a fit, healthy young man when he went to Vietnam in 1967. Mr Gibson was conscripted but he went into the army without complaint. For a country boy from Warren in western NSW, the army sounded like an adventure. That adventure cost Mr Gibson dearly. At 33, he is no longer healthy. Like some other veterans, he is plagued with rashes, insomnia and hypertension. Mr Gibson sprayed defoliants for the Australian army. He lived and worked beneath the American planes which dropped the 'withering rain'-Agent Orange-on the jungle.
Two months ago, he had never heard the name Agent Orange. Like the others, he believed his illnesses were his own, individual problem. When he heard that other veterans had similar symptotns, he joined their campaign for an inquiry into the effects of Agent Orange. Mr Gibson is concerned for his job but he believes he has an obligation to tell his story and to look for evidence from other men whose families have been affected.
Mr Gibson and his wife have given up the idea of having children, now that the link between Agent Orange and birth defects has been postulated. He feels he has been shunted around by the Government and he has been through two unsuccessful appeals for an entitlement for nervous disorders. It was left for the veterans themselves to draw the link between their cases and the similar cases of veterans in the United States.
Now, an investigation has been announced. Research will be undertaken. These are welcome moves. The research should establish whether men such as Bob Gibson are entitled to compensation. If they are they should receive it, promptly and ungrudgingly. If there is any doubt, they should be given the benefit of it.
Mrs CHILD-I thank the House. I seek leave also to have incorporated in Hansard correspondence from a constituent of mine to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), his answer to her, two letters from Sir Richard Kingsland and another letter from my constituent together with a Press release from the Melbourne Herald.
Leave granted.
The documents read as follows-
Flat 1/1447 Dandenong Rd Oakleigh 3166 Victoria 24.7.80
To the Prime Minister, Mr Fraser,
Dear Sir, I am writing to you, out of sheer exasperation; hoping that
you may be able to help.
My ex-husband, REX VOLTZ; (a New Zealander) was conscripted into the Australian Army, and sent to Vietnam

Adjournment

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1253

late '68. Discharged at Watsonnia Barracks '70. He came back, a changed man.
My belief, has always been; that the Heidleberg Repatriation Hospital, is for Returned Service-Men.
My problem, (or Rex's!) is that I cannot gain admission for Rex; to the Repat. Hospital. I find it incredible!
This is the first application, that he's ever made; and although it is a acknowledged that he has a psychiatric problem amongst others; he is continually turned away; whilst Veterans Affairs decide whether to approve, or not to approve; that his problems are War-related.
Rex; served in the Nui Dat base camp area; and of course, we are now aware, of the Agent Orange chemical damage. On this point and of this moment, that is not foremost in our minds; although it does answer, for numerous events, that have taken place in Rex's life; (?) since his return from Vietnam.
The upper most relevant decision at this time, is that Rex needs help; and is being continually turned away.
He spent 5 weeks in Larundel, (State Mental Health) of which proved fruitless. They admitted that they, "could do nothing for him; and had achieved nothing". So he was discharged from there. To where?!! There is nowhere left, for Rex to go; the doors continually close, one after the other.
I am fully aware, of the Political issues involved; but surely that should not even come into account, when the man concerned is a Veteran; one whom was sent overseas to defend Australia. Then; when he breaks down, obviously suffering psychologically, from his service in Vietnam; he is not looked after by, the same Government, which sent him to War. An unreal and astonishing parallel; wouldn't you agree?!!
Our marriage and home life; has been shattered. We are now divorced, as quite frankly; I could not take anymore of the violence, rages, suicides, (or attempts at!) and the underlying tension. The children, we have 3; were too young to understand, thank goodness; and now, all they know is that their Dad is sick. Could you, yourself; cope with a situation, that so many of the Vietnam Veterans wives, and families; are faced with. I think not Mr Fraser; or else, you would have helped out the Veterans.
The only people; that can fully understand the Veterans (Vietnam) plight, are the Vietnam Veterans themselves!!
For this reason; those bunch of good hearted guys, formed Vietnam Veterans Action Association! Without any funding whatsoever! Even if you decide not to help Rex, Mr Fraser; how about Government funding, for the Vietnam Veterans Action Association? The same guys, that were sent overseas, to fight for Australia; the same country that in the Veterans time of need, does not wMt to help the Veterans themselves.
I've endeavoured to gain admission for Rex to Repat, for months; it seems like years! He; as many of the other Vietnam Veterans are; is going through a private Hell, and there is no help; through all of the Red tape involved.
I've tried, with the help of the V.V.A.A.; approaches to many, and supposedly influential "top" people; all to no avail. My last plea of perhaps hope; is to you, Mr Fraser. Please can you help at all?!! You see Mr Fraser, I stand to gain nothing from this; I only wholeheartedly believe; that as Veterans, all of these guys deserve the best. It's not only on a Personal level; they (V.V.A.A.!) have helped Rex, in his time of need. So why; shouldn't you re-examine their need, for funding? To provide the best, for their fellow Veterans!
If, you have read this letter; and considered all aspects regarding Rex, himself; and funding for his fellow Veterans; then I thank you.
And if, you decide to act positively; regards the above mentioned funding, and for Rex; then I am endebted to you.

You'll find that quite a few people know of REX VOLTZ's name, and situation; because as I said before, I have tried all other avenues!! Being:
Mr Adermann-Minister for Veterans Affairs. Dr Keith Fleming-Sir Richard Kingsley-Holt McMinn talked to these 2 men. Senator Dame Mary Guilfoyle-Social Security. Mr Pace Mathews, M.P.-Member for Oakleigh. Mr Bernie McPhee-Deputy Commissioner Veterans Affairs. Drs Rose & Gidley-Medical Supt & Chief of Psychiatry at Repat. Dr Barlow-Medical Supt. of Larundel, respectively. So as you can see, 7 to 2; the odds are against Rex.
Why? Mr Fraser, why; is it all so damn hard?! As you've said before, quote; "Life, wasn't meant to be easy!" But; is it supposed to be so hard?!
There are people's whole lives involved here; the suicide ratio is terrifically high; as the Viet. Veterans, just cannot get help! It takes so long, for the 'System,' to see the light!
No-one; is prepared to take Rex in, as a boarder, nor keep him in Larundel; until the Repat. & Veterans Affairs decide just what, they will do! So I had to let Rex stay here; what or where else can he go?
But believe you; it is having it's effect on myself, and the children. When will someone see; that your 'System', is offloading it's problems onto the Community, or relatives in general?! It is as totally unfair to us, and the Veterans; as they cannot help their reactions.
My ex-husband, knows his limitations; and has appealed for help, continously; never receiving it psychiatrically.
Mr Fraser; sure, you can dismiss my letter and appeal; but sooner or later, as the suicide rate rises; you'll have to answer to someone. If not here, then to God.
Yam a christian; and was brought up to respect authority, and people in status generally. But; after having ground myself down, to earth level; trying to achieve Peace, and help for Rex; I too, will now re-think my living code.
Rex; is not even the same man, that I loved and married. I may see the "old Rex", in flashes; but since his return from Vietnam, there is a "new Rex". Rex; as he is now, is totally confused and lost. He can not relate to your Society; and neither can your Society, relate to him.
Yet; for the man he once was; I fight on, Mr Fraser. And for all the other, Vietnam Veterans; especially the ones that could no longer take the pressure, and therefore suicided. I hope and pray, that Rex and his fellow mates; can hang on, until a humanatarian decision is made for them, in their favour.
Yours Sincerely, Paula I Voltz.
Prime Minister, Canberra,
\3 October 1980
Dear Mrs Voltz, Thank you for your letter of 24 July 1980 concerning your
ex-husband's situation. I apologise for the delay in replying to you.
The Government is aware of, and sympathetic to, the problems faced by Vietnam veterans who believe they and their children are suffering from exposure to herbicides and other chemicals used in Vietnam.
The Minister for Veterans' Affairs announced in Parliament on 31 March 1980 a major epidemiological study, to be carried out by the Commonwealth Institute of Health, into the effects of herbicides and other chemicals on Vietnam veterans. The Government believes that the epidemiological

1254 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Adjournment

study is the only way to resolve the uncertainites about whether exposure to herbicides and other chemicals used in
Vietnam has affected the health of Australian veterans and
their children.

I am advised that the decision not to admit your ex-husband
to the Repatriation General Hospital, Heidelberg, was based on the advice of medical officers who believed he would not
benefit from admission to Heidelberg.

The request from the Vietnam Veterans' Action Association for a grant-in-aid to establish a welfare program for
Vietnam Veterans was carefully considered. In deciding not to accede to the request, the Government recognized that exist-
ing health and welfare programs adequately covered the needs of veterans.

Thank you for writing to me on this matter.

Mrs P. Voltz, Flat 1/447 Dandenong Road, Oakleigh, Vic 3166

Yours sincerely, (Malcolm Fraser)

21 October 1980 De.ar Mrs Voltz,
Mr Robert Coleman of the Melbourne Herald spoke to me
last week about your husband's claim for compensation and suggested I should ring you.

I tried to telephone you on Friday and failed, and tried again yesterday, Monday, and today, with no success yet.

And on Monday and Tuesday I tried to contact you through the Vietnam Veterans Association of Australia office in Melbourne.

If you would like to have a word to me about your husband's case I should be pleased to hear from you. You might like to telephone me to suit your convenience on 89 6736 in
Canberra, reverse charge, if I don't manage to contact you before this letter arrives.

I am sending a copy of this note to Mr Coleman.

Mrs Paula Voltz, Flat I, 1447 Dandenong Road, Oakleigh, Vic. 3166

With kind regards, Yours sincerely,
(R. Kingsland) Secretary
31 December 1980

Dear Mrs Voltz, I was very sorry indeed to learn of Mr Voltz's death.

Having spoken to you on those occasions when you tried to get some help for him you must take some comfort in the fact that you did all that you could to lead him towards the psychiatric treatment which we were offering at Heidelberg and which may have helped his unhappy condition.

I hope time will soften your grief.

Mrs Paula Voltz, Flat I, 1447 Dandenong Road, Oakleigh, Vic. 3166

Yours sincerely, (R. Kingsland)

To the Prime Minister, Mr Fraser,

1-1-81

Dear Sir,

I wrote to you, quote; "out of sheer exasperation," on the
24th July 1980; to try to obtain help for my ex-husband (Vietnam Veteran), Rex Edward VOLTZ.

You answered my letter; and I received it, on the 14th October 1980; 2t months later!

My ex-husband, Rex Edward Voltz; is now DEAD! He
hung himself from a tree. Because of your total apathy,
another Vietnam Veteran is now dead. How many more, do you want Mr Fraser; before, you realize just what these Veterans went through, and are still suffering from?

You speak of, "existing health and welfare programs;" "in your decision not, to accede to my request for a grant-in-aid."
There are NO health and welfare programs. And unless the Vietnam Veterans Association of Australia, receive a grant-inaid soon; you will have more deaths to answer for.

I find this all unbelievable! I appealed for help everywhere;
and finally, to you Mr Fraser; but Rex never received it, and now he is DEAD! 32 years old; and yet so tormented, by Viet-
nam Service for Australia; he killed himselfl How much more, do you want?!

What's even more a disgrace; is that Australia couldn't even
bury him! I've been told, that from Veterans Affairs, if I'm lucky; we may receive $300! Big deal! The funeral costs; and
by no means, as expensive as yours would be when the time comes; amount to $1 053!

The Government conscripted these guys, to fight for Australia in Vietnam; and then the families and or relatives have to bury them! It really is a shameful disgrace; and I'm not proud of Australia.
Do you know Mr Fraser; that in Ne~ Zealand (Rex's birthplace), the Government bury their returned servicemen. Why, is Australian so mean?

I've gone over and over; the things I did to try and help Rex,
Mr Fraser. And although I did my hardest; it can not have been good enough, or else he would be alive. I can't sleep; as I
see Rex hanging from a tree, whenever I close my eyes. Our children are broken hearted.

Surely now Mr Fraser; that it has been proven to you, first
hand; you must be able to see and acknowledge, the Vietnam Veterans Association's need for a grant. They need help!

Please; do not let any more Veterans feel as though they
have nothing left for them, and they then therefore Suicide. These Men defended you! I loved Rex; and now I have nothing. For God's sake, make his death at least worthwhile; and let no more follow him! There have been too many, already.

Christmas and New Year, will hold very little for us ever again. Our children and I, are crushed.

The Vietnam Veterans helped me, to make arrangements. Mr Fraser please help them.

My beloved Rex is gone;~ and I still cannot believe nor accept it. I also now, have nothing to live for; we ask for nothing of you, other than to ~elp his fellow Veterans.

Flat 1/1447 DandenongRoad, Oakleigh 3166 Victoria

Yours Sincerely, Mrs Paula J. Voltz,

'WAR SPRAY DROVE MAN TO SUICIDE'
A woman claims her husband, a Vietnam veteran, was driven to suicide after being exposed to defoliants during the war.

Adjournment

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1255

The woman said her husband died on Boxing Day after suffering severe bouts of depression and savage violent outbursts since returning from Vietnam.
Melbourne police found Rex Edward Voltz, 32, hanging from a tree in a park on Boxing Day.
His wife Paula said last night: 'Before leaving for Vietnam, Rex was a quiet gentle guy-but after he got back the attacks started.'
Mrs Voltz said many of her husband's attacks were directed at her.
She said that before their divorce in 1978, her husband told her of an experience at his camp in Nui Dat when a spray was used to kill mosquitoes.
Her husband said: 'There was a blue smoke haze. There was a horrible taste in my mouth and at the back of my throat-it was green and slimy.
" felt nauseous, dizzy and wheezy. There was no getting away from the spray.'
Mrs CHILD-I thank the House. One could give a long list of well-documented problems suffered by Vietnam veterans and their families. I urge all honourable members to examine the thick files on this subject which our own Parliamentary Library's Current Information Service holds. Those files demonstrate conclusively the amount of media and public interest in this issue. More importantly, they demonstrate also the length of time in which there has been public concern about the effects of chemicals used in Vietnam.
In the 2t years since this issue became public, the Government has continued to cover it up and has tried to ensure that no public debate will take place. The Government has continued to refuse to establish the judicial inquiry requested by the veterans, yet it has also continued to maintain that there is no evidence. If there is no evidence, what has the Government got to hide? On 27 August 1981, in a statement to the Senate, the present Minister for Veterans' Affairs (Senator Messner) openly admitted that no results will be available from the scientific study until 1983 at least. Informed scientific observers have long maintained that the study will take much longer than that. The Government now has no choice. It must institute the judicial inquiry immediately or lose all credibility in the eyes of thousands of Australian servicemen and ex-service-men and women around Australia. Such an inquiry would be far less costly, less time consuming and have far more integrity than the present study. The Government must also show much more compassion for the Vietnam veterans and their families by granting ex gratia payments to them for the considerable medical and other expenses which they have incurred and are still incurring:
Mr GILES (Wakefield) (10.25)-This afternoon I chaired one of the most successful Estimate committee meetings I have had the pleasure

of chairing for some time. The scrutiny given to the estimates of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, the Ombudsman and a wide range of bodies was absolutely first class. It was a pleasure to chair the meeting. But if an honourable member comes out of an Estimates committee meeting and into this House and deliberately and maliciously makes a humbug of himself in order to misdirect the whole of an inquiry of an Estimates committee, as took place this evening, there is something wrong with the system. I believe members of this House ought to take into account very firmly the fact that they owe responsibility to the parliamentary system to operate efficiently as a check and balance on the Executive. Tonight we experienced a performance that was not in any way a facsimile of that situation. I will give two examples. Firstly, the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet spent $1.3m in the last financial year on expenses incurred in the planning of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. Tonight the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) tried to show that that figure was a total original estimate. He knew very well that it was not. That figure was for the cost incurred last financial year. The figure of $14.5m which, if my memory serves me right, the honourable members described as an escalation was also described as expenditure by the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet in relation to CHOGM. He knows that that was totally incorrect. The estimate was for the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and for the Department of Housing and Construction. That is the second point I wish to make.
The third point I wish to make is that a question was asked-I thought it was a good questionabout whether any move had been made to share the sort of cost incurred when CHOGM meets in one of the Commonwealth countries, of which the' majority are poor so that countries less affluent than this country could aspire to hold CHOGM without feeling totally disadvantaged by the high cost of such an exercise. The honourable member chose to ignore that. Instead, he chose to try to make political capital out of the incurring of expenditure which is no more than was spent on CHOGM in Zambia, on the previous occasion such a meeting was held. I do not expect the people of Zambia to know what it cost their nation to hold the meeting. I do know that in our free democracy people know what the meeting is costing. I think it is totally unfair and rotten for a member of the Opposition to try to make political capital out of something that should in due course be put on in the developing nations despite all the

1256 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Adjournment

costs they would incur in running the meeting. I deprecate the actions of the honourable member for Melbourne Ports, who asked the question, as I remember, about the $1.3m and who chose later to misrepresent that situation totally.
Because I believe that the adjournment debate should approximate a free-ranging debate from time to time, I would like to refer now to the speech by the honourable member for O'Connor
(Mr Tuckey). Of all the stupid remarks and stupid speeches I have heard in this House, his speech just about takes the cake. As I understand it, the Western Australian bulk handling committee chose to sack four members of the trade union when a question was under review because the chief of the bulk handling committee in Western Australia is a member of the same party, or an associated one, as the Premier of Western Australia, Sir Charles Court. The bulk handling committee took this action and threw into jeopardy the entire export shipment of wheat for this nation for its own petty purposes. I have no time at all for people who take such politically inspired action to the detriment of every wheat farmer in Australia. I object to hearing this sort of one-eyed approach in Western Australia put to this Parliament as a rational act; it was not. If honourable members do not believe me, they should ask the National Farmers Federation, which represents the farming communities of this country. It took a very different point of view.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
House adjourned at 10.30 p.m.
REPLY TO REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Department of the Parliamentary Library On 19 August 1981, Mr Barry Jones asked Mr Speaker:
(1) Is there any substance to the recent Press reports regarding the pending retirement of the Parliamentary Librarian, Mr Harold Gibson Weir.
(2) If so, when will the Predding Officers make a statement to the Parliament about this matter.
(3) What are the details of the procedures to be followed in the recruitment, selection and appointment of Mr Weir's replacement.
Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Commonwealth Parliamentary Librarian, Mr Harold Weir, is at present on extended sick leave. He has been advised by the Commonwealth Medical Officer that he should retire and at Mr Weir's request proceedings have been initiated that will give effect to this in due course.
(2) When the normal procedures are completed.
(3) Steps have been taken to transfer Mr Weir to the unattached list and when that process is complete the Presiding Officers will be free to initiate recruitment procedures.

Answers to Questions

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1257 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Housing Loans
(Question No. 2483)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:
(I) How many housing loans were approved in each State by (a) terminating building or housing societies, (b) State lending authorities, (c) State housing authorities, (d) other approved co-operatives and (e) other sources within the terms of the Commonwealth State Housing Agreement for each year from 1974-75 to 1979-80.
(2) How rnany loans were approved in each case at the different ranges of interest rates charged.

(3) What were the (a) numbers and (b) values of loans in each case approved for (i) construction of dwellings, (ii) purchase of private dwellings, (iii) purchase of State housing authority dwellings and (iv) alterations and additions or rehabilitation.
(4) What were the weekly incomes of end borrowers at the time ofloan approval in each case.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Table I shows the number of loans approved, by type of lending authority, under the terms of the 1978 Housing Agreement in each State during the 1978-79 and 1979-80 financial years. This information is not available for previous years and 1980-81.

TABLE I

NSW(a)

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

Total

1978-79 Terminating building or housing
society
State lending authority
State housing authority Other approved co-operatives Other agencies

1947 100

1514 1779

179 1045

362 2594
197
41(b)

49

4051

336

3030

3021

41

Total

2047

3293

1224

2832

362

385

10 143

1979-80 Terminating building or housing
society
State lending authority
State housing authority Other approved co-operatives Other agencies

2041 185

1260 1272

85 1347

267

2305

20

28(b)

96

3749

286

2796

2619

28

Total

2226

2532

1432

2333

287

382

9192

(a) The New South Wales figures relate to the 12 months ending 31 May 1979and 31 May 1980. (b) Permanent building society loans funded from revolving funds resulting from allocations made to those societies prior to 30 June 1973.
(2) Table 2 shows the number of loans approved for four ranges of interest rates charged at the time of loan approval during the 1978-79and 1979-80 financial years. This information is not availablefor previous years and 1980-81.
TABLE 2

Interest rate (per annum)

NSW(a)

Vic. (b)

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

Total

1978-79

Less than 6 per cent

1267

1774

1465

4506

6 per cent but less than 7 per

cent

780

4

f 7 per cent but less than 8 per

1355

170

17

2326

cent

1224

2

105

101

1432

8 per cent and over

10

87

267

365

Total

2047

1779

1224

2832

362

385

8629

1979-80

Less than 6 per cent

669

1272

I 125

6 per cent but less than 7 per

cent

1457

1060

135

7 per cent but less than 8 per

cent

1432

117

65

3066

43

2695

89

1703

1258 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Answers to Questions

Interest rate (per annum)

NSW(a)

Vic.(b)

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

Total

8 per cent and over

31

87

250

368

Total

2126

1272

1432

2333

287

382

7832

(a) Figures for New South Wales relateto the 12 months ending 31 May 1979 and 31 May 1980. They exclude 100 loans approved through the Rural Bank of New South Wales during the six months to 31 December 1979.
(b) Figures for Victoria do not include loans made by co-operative housing societies.
(3) (a) Table 3 (a) shows the number of loans approved in each State under the terms of the successive Commonwealth State Housing Agreements for categories (i) construction of dwellings, (ii) purchase of private dwellings, and (iii) purchase of State housing authority dwellings during the years 1974-75 to 1979-80.
In regard to category (iv), the number of loans approved for alterations and additions for 1978-79 and 1979-80 totalled 19 and 15 respectively, all of which occurred in Victoria. This information is not available for previous years and 1980-81.

1974-75 Construction Private purchase Purchase S.H.A. dwelling
Total
1975-76 Construction Private purchase Purchase S.H.A. dwelling
Total
1976-77 Construction Private purchase Purchase S.H.A. dwelling
Total
1977-78 Construction Private purchase Purchase S.H.A. dwelling
Total
#1978-79 Construction Private purchase Purchase S.H.A. dwelling
Total
1979-80 Construction Private purchase Purchase S.H.A. dwelling
Total

TABLE 3 (a)

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

981 2,962
3,943

1,175 2,199
3,374

300 753
1,053

808 2,181
42
3,031

903 269
1,172

367

721

234

721

496

1,477

1,376

434

2,148

35

1,844

2,097

668

2,869

531

797

815

281

501

297

2,068

1,362

390

2,324

53

22

2,865

2,177

671

2,825

372

506

663

290

343

282

2,113

1,138

374

2,472

60

315

2,619

1,801

664

2,815

657

274

604

391

354

323

1,837

897

618

2,281

39

1,773

215

197

2,111

3,274

1,224

2,832

362

282

385

396

514

211

1,724

860

783

1,802

76

1

1,272

253

17

2,007

2,517

1,432

2,333

287

Tas.

Total

192

4,359

487

8,851

26

68

705 13,278

.185

2,724

288

5,758

38

38

511

8,520

165

2,856

229

6,426

29

51

423

9,333

159

2,243

230

6,702

389

8,945

109

2,055

237

5,909

39

2,224

385 10,188

85

1,873

288

5,533

9

1,552

382

8,958

3 (b) Table 3 (b) shows the value of loans approved in each State under the terms of the successive Commonwealth State Housing Agreements for the years 1974-75 to 1979-80. Division of these figures into categories (i) construction of dwellings, (ii) purchase of private dwellings, and (iii) purchase of State housing authority dwellings, is only available for 1978-79 and 1979-80.

In regard to category (iv), the value of loans approved for alterations and additions, all of which occurred in Victoria, totalled $111,100 in 1978-79 and $82,200 in 1979-80. This information is not available for previous years and 1980-81.

Answers to Questions

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1259

TABLE 3 (b) ($'000)

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

Total

1974-75
1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79-
(i) Construction
(ii) Private purchase (iii) Purchase SHA dwellings

64960 33122 56094 56129
5249 44500

51467 38680 45943 41225
14630 20841 52868

15957 11565 11975 11875
9298 14728 4964

45080 48142 49724 -52601
7328 46813 6133

17465 8893 7345 15489
8510 951

<} 500 7231 8681
n.a.
2. 540
5163 895

204429 147633 179762
n.a.
47555 132996 64860

Total 1978-79

49749 88339 28990 60274

9461

8598 245411

1979-80(i) Construction
(ii) Private purchase (iii) Purchase SHA dwellings

6908 42522
20

9420
20628 37867

9759 19001 5895

11290 41759
481

5703 1905

2070 6420
180

45150 132235 44443

Total 1979-80

49450 67915 34655 53530

7608

8670 221 828

(4) Table 4 shows the number of loans approved, by weekly income of the end borrower at the time of loan approval,during 1978-79 and 1979-80. This information is not available for previous years. An analysis is not available which relates weekly income to loan approvals separately for (i) construction and (ii) purchase of private dwellings (iii) purchase of State housing authority dwellings and (iv) alterations and additions.
TABLE 4

Income group

NSW(a)

Vic.(b)

Qld

SA(c)

WA

Tas.

Less than $150 $150-$179 $180-$209 $210-$239 $240-$269 $270 and over

-I income
-2 incomes -I income -2 incomes -I income -2 incomes -I income -2 incomes
-I income -2 incomes -I income -2 incomes

1978-79

192

87

n.a.

39

33

9

12

57

n.a.

4

595

896

n.a.

217

187

69

17

132

n.a.

\0

2

463

563

n.a.

131

74

75

32

9

n.a.

21

I

22

26

n.a.

26

6

35

61

n.a.

20

6

2

9

n.a.

4

10

86

n.a.

6

15

n.a.

2

565

n.a.

21

157

Total

-I income -2 incomes

1274

1581

n.a.

413

304

200

773

198

n.a.

22

58

185

Grand Total

2047

1779

1224

435

362

385

Less than $150 $150-$179 $180-$209 $210-$239 $240-$269 $270 and over

-I income -2 incomes -I income -2 incomes
-I income -2 incomes -I income
-2 incomes -I income -2 incomes
-I income -2 incomes

1979-80

165

68

n.a.

18

23

7

12

2

n.a.

I

400

417

n.a.

124

121

18

3

n.a.

3

3.7.

604

403

n.a.

169

91

61

39

16

n.a.

7

I

167

69

n.a.

48

10

46

42

18

n.a.

10

II

7

21

n.a.

6

3

7

54

36

n.a.

II

II

I

20

n.a.

3

2

617

199

n.a.

10

7

199

Total

-I income -2 incomes

1344

998

n.a.

368

248

160

782

274

n.a.

\0

39

222

Grand Total

2126

1272

1432

378

287

382

n.a. not available.

1260 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Answers to Questions

(a) The New South Wales figures are For the twelve months ending 31 May 1979 and 31 May 1980. They exclude 100 loans approved through the Rural Bank oFN.S.W. during the six months to 31 December 1980.
(b) Victorian Housing Commission only.
(c) Results of surveys of 435 oFthe 2 818 applicants to whom loans were approved in 1978-79 and 378 oFthe 2 333 applicants to whom loans were approved in 1979-80.

Petroleum Products: Use by Departments
(Question Nos 673 to 698)
Mr Bradfield asked the Minister representing the Minister for Nati.onal Development and Energy, upon notice, on 4 March 1981: .
What was the total usage of petroleum products (a) by product and (b) by volume, by the Department of National Development and Energy For the years (i) 1978-79 and (ii) 1979-80 and what is the estimated consumption For 1980-81 ?

Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has supplied the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The honourable member has asked identical questions of all Ministers, as indicated by the above Question Numbers. My Department has collated the inFormation provided by the other twenty-five departments, and with that of my Department has listed them in the table hereunder.

PETROLEUM PRODUCTS, IN KILOLITRES, USED OR ESTIMATED BY GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS

FOR YEARS NOMINATED

-

Department

Year

LPG

Motor spirit

Lighting Power Avgas kerosine kerosine

Avtur

Prime Minister and Cabinet Trade and Resources (i) Industry and Commerce Communications National Development and Energy Foreign Affairs (iii) Primary Industry (iv) Treasury (v) DeFence (vi)
Fina.nce (vii) Industrial Relations Attorney General's Social Security Education Transport Health (xiii)

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

1978-79

327.1

241.8

9.1

14.4

38.5

247.9

1979-80

324.4

201.9

11.0

15.4

30.5

263.3

1980-81

417.3

185.9

12.3

19.5

32.7

227.0

1978-79

(ii)

(ii)

1979-80

(ii)

(ii)

1980-81

(ii)

(ii)

1978-79

3.6

465.1

44.3

308.7

1979-80

4.1

378.8

61.4

314.2

1980-81

4.2

394.6

84.5

365.5

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

1978-79

128.0

8.0

1979-80

154.5

30.9

2.0

1980-81

170.0

29.0

1978-79

17.0

4.0

193.7

1979-80

15.7

3.2

206.9

1980-81

15.5

6.0

180.0

1978-79

30,000

(see

208,000

1979-80

33,000 Avtur

203,000

1980-81

36,000 figures)

264,000

(includes

Avgas)

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

197879

14.9

1979-80

17.6

1980-81

26.2

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

1978-79

635.0

1979-80

753.0

1980-81

962.0

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

1978-79

3,230.0

207.3

84.0

88.0 5,345.5

1979-80

3,373.0

195.3

80.0

75.0 6,694.9

1980-81

3,430.0

204.0

70.0

75.0 6,270.0

1978-79

3.3

63.6

0.8

Answers to Questions

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1261

Department
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (xiv) Science and Technology Administrative Services
Employment and Youth Affairs Business and Consumer Affairs Capital Territory (xix) Veterans Affairs Aboriginal Affairs Housing and Construction Home Affairs and Environment

Year
1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81
1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

LPG
2.0 1.9

Motor spirit
85.1 77.3

Lighting Power Avgas kerosine kerosine
0.6 1.4

Avtur

9.4 22.7 23.2 54.6 95.7 147.7
210.0 219.0 230.0
9.9 9.9 9.2
0.13 0.06 10.3 71.9 319.6 46.1 49.7 57.1

16.2 37.6 47.8 11,664.0 12,800.0 14,567.0 (xvii)
387.6 480.5 616.8 232.8 216.0 240.9 4,787.1 5,101.3 4,231.0
8.0 7.9 8.3 260.0 343.9 359.5 3,930.3 4,103.1 3,947.9

(ii)

123.2

(ii)

281.6

(ii)

308.7

(xviii)

18.0

18.9

19.0

0.4

0.8

0.4

0.6

0.5

oj

(ii)

0.1

15.2

1.2

13.2

1.6

16.9

1.5

PETROLEUM PRODUCTS, IN K1LOLITRES, USED OR ESTIMATED BY GOVERNMENT DEPARtMENts FOR YEARS NOMINATED

Department

Year

AutoIndustrial

Heating motive diesel

oil distillate

fuel

Fuel oil

Lube oil Solvents

Prime Minister and Cabinet Trade and Resources (i) Industry and Commerce Communications National Development and Energy Foreign Affairs (iii) Primary Industry (iv) Treasury (v) Defence (vi)

1978-79 1979-80
1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80
1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-8i 1978-79 1979-80

3.6 3.7 3.5 J.J 0.6 1.0 18.0 17.0 17.5
7.0 8.5 309.8 211.9 200.0

105.1 71.3 107.0 69.2 80.8 95.9
24.8 27.4
36..5.

3,117.6
2,834.5
1,997.7 J.J 1.1 J.J

4,954.1 4,803.7 4,505.3

88.0
94.1 84.0 75.0 (see 109,000 IDF 121,000

307.1 331.8 320.0
(see IDF

98.8 99.7 114.4
0.2
OJ OJ
1.9 1.8 2.0
..
3.8 4.0 4.3 12.2 12.1 17.0
(vi)

40J.J 470.2 496.7
(ii) (ii) (ii) 0.2
OJ
OJ
(ii)
(ii) (ii)

1262 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Answers to Questions

Department

Year

AutoIndustrial

Heating motive

diesel

oil distillate

fuel

Fuel oil

Lube oil Solvents

Finance (vii) Industrial Relations Attorney General's Social Security Education
Transport Health (xiii) Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (xiv) Science and Technology
Administrative Services
Employment and Youth Affairs Business and Consumer Affairs Capital Territory (xix) Veterans Affairs Aboriginal Affairs
Housing and Construction Home Affairs and Environment

1980-81
1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81
1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81
1978-79 1979-80 1980-81
1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81
1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

figures)

182,000
(includes ADO &
FjO)

figures)

(viii) 91.0
19.8 25.0 25.0 60.8 26.0 24.0

5,240.0

5,918.0

6,000.0

7.3

11.4

6.7

14.7

7.0

13.5

220.0 265.0 258.0
358.5 299.1 352.0

666.0 876.1 951.3
(xi) 1,960.0 1,998.0 1,900.0
1.0 0.2 0.2

23.1 19.4 23.0
(xvi)
123.3

75.0 1,068.7 107.8 1,221.4 116.0 1,549.0 (xv)
2,077.0 6,486.0 2,076.0 5,311.0 2,439.0 5,600.0
(xvii) ACT only (xvi)

1,687.9 2,843.2
2,877.5

1.5

164.3

3.9

1.3

377.5

5.0

0.8

497.3

1.3

16.0 5,600.0 1,230.0 1,000.0

15.9 6,416.5 3,903.9 1,030.9

16.0 6,500.0 4,100.0 1,100.0

6.8

6.8

68.8

220.7

9.0

6.4

70.9

235.0

7.5

7.2

177.8

217.8

746.7
855.5 318.0
245.9 216.0 207.3

1,623.1 1,200.2 1,127.4
7.0 8.0 8.5

5,684.1 3,835.3 3,141.2
5.0

760.0 910.0 685.0

(ix)

(x)

(xii)

(xii)

0.9

0.3

0.9

0.3

1.0

0.4

12.0 26.9 18.0
52.7 58.9 65.9 (xvii)
1.7 2.4 2.8 18.6 17.3 16.0 100.0 119.0 110.0 0.7 0.7 0.7 7.2 5.2 5.3 (xx) 161.9 78.3 81.3 0.9 1.0 1.0

8.5 7.6 8.8
(xviii)
0.8 0.6 0.6
6.3 6.9 7.5

Notes:
(i) All vehicles are supplied, serviced and refuelled by Department of Administrative Services.
(ii) Consumption is less than 0.05 kilolitres. (iii) As for Note (i); also all offices of this Department are in multi-tenant buildings and use no petroleum products for heating. (iv) Figures for 1980-81 are estimates based on known current usage rates.

Answers to Questions

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1263

(v) All vehicles used by Treasury are supplied, serviced and refuelled by the Department of Administrative Services. Heating oil for the Treasury building is also supplied by the Department of Administrative Services. The figures quoted are those used at the Royal Australian Mint in the production of coins and for heating in Australian Taxation Office buildings located in Melbourne and Adelaide.
(vi) Because of the differing units of measure with lubricants (e.g. litre, kilogram, etc.) it is neither practicable nor meaningful to aggregate the quantities of more than 100 different lubricating oils and greases used by Defence. In addition, domestic petroleum products for the Department (including the services) covering the three years, total in dollars million: 1978-79-3 point 463, 1979-80-5 point 391, 1980-81-8 point 428 (estimate). Domestic petroleum products, calculated by category and volume, would entail an unwarranted level of administrative research in the light of the relatively small share of the total Defence outlay on petroleum products, i.e. Division 234-2-03 dollars million, 113 point 464 (mobility fuels) versus Division 233-1-04 dollars million, 8 point 428 (domestic fuels).
(vii) Use of petroleum products by this Department is restricted to permanent hire vehicles, without drivers, from the Transport and Storage Division of Department of Administrative Services who pay for all petroleum products. Only very occasionally are fleet hire cars used and petrol costs are estimated to be less than $100 per annum. Separate costing is not kept.
(viii) As all accounting operations for this Department between the time of its creation in December 1978 and 30 June 1979, were carried out by Department of Employment and Youth Affairs (formerly Employment and Industrial Relations), details of heating oil consumption in 1978-79 are included in that Department's figures.
(ix) Details as to value and volume of lubricants are included with repairs, maintenance and service charges. Individual details could not be readily identified.
(x) While this Department would purchase some items of solvents, kerosines, etc., individual details cannot be readily identified. However it is felt that value and volume would be insignificant.
(xi) These figures represent amounts spent on fuel oil used in A.C.T. TAFE institutions. (xii) No records of these are kept as very small quantities are used. (xiii) Where purchases by value only are known, conversions to volume have been made using an estimated average price for that year. (xiv) This Department does not normally make direct purchases of petroleum products. The only exception over the last three years was the purchase of $67 worth of petrol in Sydney in 1979-80 for use in a migrant resource centre. D[EA, of course, is a user of fuel through Department of Administrative Services supplied services (vehicle and accommodation). [n addition other DIEA appropriations result in the indirect use offuel (e.g. payments to migrant resource centres, grants-in-aid, etc.). (xv) Diesel usage is mainly in Antarctica where it is used for power and heating (Antarctic blend distillate). (xvi) Records are not kept of the usage of industrial diesel oil and heating oil by volume, for the States; expenditure figures (including industrial diesel fuel expenditure for the A.C.T.) are, however: 1978-79-$781,000, 1979-80-$1,254,300, 1980-81 (estimate)-$1,706,300.
OVERSEAS
Industrial Diesel Fuel/Heating Oil etc. Funds are appropriated to cover the cost of utility services (water, rates, electricity, oil, coal, gas, etc.) consumed at chanceries and many residences overseas. Under the present accounting arrangements it would be impractical to extract this data as significant costs would need to be incurred and staff diverted from higher priority tasks. (xvii) Records are not kept of the overseas usage of petrol, automotive distillate and lubricants, by volume by motor vehicles at Australian overseas posts. Expenditure figures for these items are: 1978-79-$459,000, 1979-80-$570,000, 1980-81
(estimate)~$768,000.
(xviii) The level of usage of kerosine, solvents etc. within this Department is so small that available records do not disclose the required information.
(xix) The details for 1979-80 are based on a comprehensive investigation previously carried out for the Department of National Development and Energy (Oil Supplies and Products Section) in 1980. Because of the large number of separate installations and the accounting stock record system in use, it has been necessary to estimate the usage for 1978-79.
(xx) Lubricants represent service and repair and maintenance at garages. Bulk quantities (in containers) are not purchased.

Nitinol
(Question No. 2409)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 3 June 1981 :
(I) Further to his answer to question No. 649 (Hansard, 26 May 1981, pages 2583-84), relating to Nitinol, will he give further consideration to the relevance of his answer in relation to the use of Nitinol in solid state heat engines, which he concedes in answer to part (2) of question No. 649 have not been explicitly investigated in Australia.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that in 1973 Dr Ridgeway Banks of the University of California at Berkley, USA., set up a Nitinol engine which has worked continuously ever since, having undergone 28,000,000 revolutions and that it appears to be the most thermodynamically efficient engine in existence.
(3) Has his attention also been drawn to the fact that the World Bank considers that Nitinol heat engines have an enormous potential in Third World countries with limited access to prime fuels.

(4) Does Nitinol have significant uses in space technology, optical fibres and precision construction techniques, for example, in laboratory equipment.
(5) If so, will he ask CS[RO to take a more positive role than merely maintaining a watching brief on overseas developments as mentioned in his answer to part (5) of question No 649 and raise the total research allocation for nitinol for 1981 to a higher figure than $9000, in view of Australia's very strong position as a supplier of nickel and titanium, the elements which constitute Nitinol.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Nitinol heat engines are not considered to have high enough priority to warrant any diversion of our limited research funds from areas of more immediate relevance to Australia's energy needs.
(2) I am aware that Dr Ridgeway Banks' Nitinol heat engine has operated continuously since 1973 and has completed some 27 million revolutions at 60-80 rpm. However, its power output is only about 0.2W (See 'Shape Memory Effects in Alloys', Ed. J. Perkins, Plenum Press, NY, pp 537-545) and it cannot be assumed that it will be possible to

1264 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Answers to Questions

scale up such a heat engine to deliver a useful output; indeed, Dr Banks has not claimed otherwise. However, this engine, and others described in the 'Proceedings of the Nitinol Heat Engine Conference' (as referred to in Question No. 649), are very small and have reached the proof of concept stage only. Details of their true working efficiency are imprecise and Dr Banks has stated that practical and efficient engines have yet to be designed.
(3) I have not seen the World Bank opinion to which the honourable member refers; however, in view of the high cost of research and development necessary to realize the potential of Nitinol heat engines, it seems unlikely that such devices would be other than expensive luxuries for Third World countries in the foreseeable future. As mentioned in my answer to question No. 649, Nitinol is, at present, expensive and difficult to machine which tends to restrict its use to specialized applications only. In comparison, brass alloys with the 'shape memory' property are much cheaper and easier to fabricate.
(4) As the potential for Nitinol becomes better understood from overseas research, a variety of applications is likely to emerge.
(5) See answer to part (I).
Private International Migrant Services
(Question No. 2634)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) What are the agents or services described as migration agents or private migration services.
(2) Are there any of these private agencies operating in Australia; if so, where do they operate.
(3) How many private international migrant services operating overseas handle Australian immigration matters with the knowledge of Australian immigration officials and in what countries do they operate.
(4) What is the average fee charged by (a) Australian and (b) overseas immigration agencies for handling immigration applications or other normal inquiries.
(5) What projects are there to restrict the activities of these unscrupulous operators both in Australia and overseas.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Section 46 of the Migration Act 1958 provides that a person shall be deemed to act as an immigration agent if he demands or receives a fee, commission or other reward for or in relation to services rendered or to be rendered by him in relation to-
(a) an application or representations to a Minister, Department or authority of the Commonwealth with a view to the entry of a person into Australia as an immigrant; or
(b) arranging or securing the passage of an intending immigrant to Australia.
These provisions of the Migration Act relate only to the entry of people into Australia and the provision of passages for that purpose. I am informed that the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs is aware that some people and organisations act on behalf of persons who, having entered Australia, seek permanent residence or extensions of their visit. These activities are not governed by Section 46 of the Migration Act.
The provisions of the Migration Act relating to immigration agents were introduced when the majority of people travelling to Australia did so for settlement after screening and selection overseas. At that time the volume of visitor traffic to Australia

and consequently the number of people seeking extensions of stay or residence after arrival were not of major proportion.

As far as I am aware there is very limited activity of the
kind that required regulation when this provision was introduced. As a consequence the continuing need for the pro-
vision is being examined as part of a more general review of the Migration Act. That review will also consider in due
course whether there is a need to regulate the activities of agents emerging in new fields of immigration activity.

(2) A total of 501 persons have recorded with the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs as immigration
agents within the terms of the Migration Act 1958 since that
Act was introduced:

Victoria New South Wales Queensland Western Australia South Australia Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory Tasmania . . . . . .

156 146 90
52
51 .
4 I I

Having regard to the background explained above, the Department is not now checking regularly to see how many of
these people continue to be active immigration agents.

(3) This information is not available and the cost of a survey of the magnitude required is not considered justified.

(4) (a) Section 50 of the Migration Act 1958 provides that
the regulations to that Act may prescribe the maximum charges that may be made for the services of an immigration
agent in Australia as those services are defined in the Act. Migration Regulation No. 29 prescribes the maximum amount that may be charged by an immigration agent for any of the
services as defined in the Act, at two (2) dollars.

(b) Not known. The Australian Migration Act has no application to arrangements between client and agent overseas.

(5) The Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs in-
vestigates allegations of breaches of the Migration Act, cir-
cumvention of immigration policies and practices and organised exploitation connected with immigration matters.
Persons with evidence of malpractice of this sort should inform the Department. Information of a confidential kind may be provided to the Assistant Secretary, Control Branch, in the
Central Office of the Department.

Passports and Visas
(Question No. 2641)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) How many applications for (a) passports and (b) visas were handled by each regional office of his Department for each year since 1979 and during the period I January to 9 June 1981.
(2) How many staff in each regional office have as their full time duty the issuing of passp0r!s on behalf of the Department of Foreign Affairs.
(3) How many passports were issued by each regional office during the same period referred to in part ( I).
(4) Is there any reimbursement by the Department of Foreign Affairs for the handling of documents on its behalf; if so, what sum has been reimbursed during the same period.
(5) Why is his Department handling passports on behalf of the Department of Foreign Affairs.
(6) Are the work hours spent on handling of passports to the detriment of other functions of his Department.

Answers to Questions

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1265

(7) What is the total number of (a) staff and (b) counter staff in each regional office.
(8) What security measures are there for the storage and safe keeping of passports in each regional office.
(9) How many passports are presently stored in each regionaloffice.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) Passport applications handled-

Regional office

1981
(1.1.811979 1980 9.6.81)

Darwin Melbourne (airport only)
Newcastle Wollongong
Perth (airport only) Townsville
Other regional offices

4,453
43 15,460
6,487 2
7,103
Nil

5,696 56
11,246 5,927
4 2,229
Nil

2,597
19 5,559 2,867
I 709
Nil

(I) (b) Visas handled on behalf of Foreign Affairs-

Regional office

1981 (1.1.81-
1979 1980 9.6.81)

Darwin Other regional offices

12

13

6

Nil Nil Nil

Note: Newcastle ceased handling passports and visas for the Department of Foreign Affairs on 29.7.81.
(2) Darwin-3 persons, Newcastle-4 persons (see (I) (b, Other regional offices-Nil.
(3) Passports issued-

Regional office

1979

1981
(1.1.811980 9.6.81)

Darwin Melbourne (airport only)
Newcastle Wollongong
Perth (airport only) Townsville
Other regional offices

4,453 43
15,460 6,387
2 5,413
Nil

5,696
56 5,010
1,348 4
422 Nil

2,597
19 1,892
327 I
87
Nil

(4) Sydney Regional Office is the only office which receives

reimbursement. The amounts being for postage were as

follows: 1979-$2,026.05, 1980-$627.74, 1981

(1.1.81-9.6.81 )-$219.91.

.

(5) The grant of Australian passports was administered for a long period within the Immigration portfolio. In March
1975 responsibility for this matter passed to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs. The Department has continued to act as agent in Australia for the Department of Foreign Affairs
where that Department is not represented.

(6) Offices which handle large numbers of passports have reported some strain on their resources.

(7) (a) and (b) asatJune 1981-

Total Counter

staff

staff

New South WalesSydney Newcastle
Wollongong

401

16

7

I

8

2

Total Counter

staff

staff

VictoriaMelbourne
Geelong
Albury-Wodonga Queensland-
Brisbane
Townsville Tasmania-
Hobart
Launceston South Australia-
Adelaide . .
Western AustraliaPerth
Northern TerritoryDarwin
Australian Capital TerritoryCanberra . . . . .

314

12

5

I

2

I

90

4

4

I

23 2

70

3

103

4

30

25

(8) All passports are held in locked safes according to normal security instructions.

(9) At 23 June 1981 the following passports were held in regional offices:

Darwin
Melbourne Newcastle Wollongong
Perth Townsville
Other Regional Offices

3,000 45 575
237 23 63
Nil

Determination of Refugee Status Committee
(Question No. 2642)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) Who are the present members of the Determination of Residential Status (D.O.R.S.) Committee.
(2) How many applications were (a) considered, (b) accepted and (c) rejected by the Committee each year since 1978 and during the period I January to 9 June 1981 and from what countries were the applicants.
(3) How often does the D.O.R.S. Committee meet.
(4) How much time is given on average for the consideration of each case.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Determination of Refugee Status (DORS) Committee comprises representatives from the Departments of Foreign Affairs, Attorney-General, Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Chair) and Prime Minister and Cabinet. As membership is by Department, individual representatives will vary from time to time. In each Department there are two or more officers with experience in refugee matters who rotate their attendance at Committee meetings. The Australian representative of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), attends each meeting of the DORS Committee as an observer with the right of comment and advice on cases.
(2) See Table A.
(3) The DORS Committee meets as required by its caseload. This is usually every two to three weeks.
(4) The time for consideration naturally varies from case to case. On average, the Committee would devote thirty minutes to discussion on each case, with an additional period being spent on preparatory research by members.

1266 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Answers to Questions

Country of citizenship
1978Afghanistan Chile Ghana Indonesia Iran Israel Laos Mozambique Morocco Pakistan Poland Rumania Seychelles South Africa Uganda Uruguay USSR Vietnam Yugoslavia Zimbabwe
Total
1979Afghanistan Chile Ghana Indonesia Iran Israel Laos Mozambique Morocco Pakistan Poland Rumania Seychelles , South Africa Uganda Uruguay USSR Vietnam Yugoslavia Zimbabwe
Total
1980- . Afghanistan Belgium Bolivia Bulgaria Burma Chile Czechoslovakia Egypt Ethiopia Germany (FRG) Ghana Hungary Indonesia Iran

Table A

DORS COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS

Approved

Rejected

Cases

Persons

Cases

Persons

I 2

Total Cases
I 23

Persons I 3

5

67

80

I

5

I

I

67

80

69

86

6

7

75

93

4

6

4

6

I

I

I

I

I

1

I

I

I

I

I

I

2

3

4

5

6

8

I

4

I

4

2

I

2

2

I

2

1

1

I

4

4

4

4

I

1

I

1

I

I

I

I

I

2

I

2

I

I

402

541

6" 9

I

I

86

471

627

I

I

I

I

I

2

I

2

413

557

-86

109

499

666

4

\3

4

13

1

2

"2

1 6

I 6

I 8

1 8

5

5

1

6

6

"1

2

2

"3

3

3

3

3

3

2

3

4

8

6

II

Answers to Questions

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1267

Approved

Rejected

Total

Country of citizenship

Cases

Persons

Cases

Persons

Cases

Persons

Iraq
Korea Laos
Lebanon , Pakistan philippines
Poland Rumania South Africa
Syria Tawin Turkey
Uganda USSR Vietnam
Yugoslavia Zimbabwe

3

3

3

3

I

I

2

2

6

6

6

6

I

I

I

I

2

2

2

3

4

5

I

I

I

I

I

2

I

2

I

I

I

I

I

I

80

121

14

19

94

140

2

2

2

2

4

4

I

I

I

I

Total

102

153

t49

61

151

214

1 Jlln 1981 to 9 June 1981Afghanistan Belgium
Bolivia Bulgaria Burma
Chile
Czechoslovakia Egypt Ethiopia
Germany (FRG) Ghana
Hungary Indonesia Iran
Iraq
Korea Laos
Lebanon Pakistan Philippines
Poland
Rumania South Africa
Syria Taiwan Turkey
Uganda
USSR Vietnam
Yugoslavia
Zimbabwe

2

5

4

20

30

2

5

I

I

I

I

3

3

I

2

2

I

I

I

3

1

3

1

I

2

5

I

1

I

1

2

2

2

2

2

2

1

I

2

2

20

30

2

2

2

2

1

I

1

I

Total

30

46

17

21

47

67

- Of this number 71 cases (89 persons) were permitted to stay in Australia on humanitarian and compassionate grounds, t Of these, 16 cases (21 persons) were permitted to stay in Australia on humanitarian and compassionate gounds,

Electoral: Aborigines
(Question No. 2876)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
(1) Will the Commonwealth Government assist those Aboriginal people of Australia who wish to exercise their right to

vote in State and Federal elections by providing-these people with an opportunity to enrol.
(2) If so, will the Government acknowledge the special difficulties, such as geographical isolation and educational deprivation, facing many Aboriginal people who wish to enrol.
(3) Will the Government also ensure that electoral officers provide to those Aboriginal people who wish to enrol, an opportunity to do so.

1268 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Answers to Questions

(4) Did the National Aboriginal Conference election in October 1980 provide the electoral officers, who were positioned throughout Australia amongst the Aboriginal people, with an opportunity to assist with the enrolment of those Aboriginal people who wish to be enrolled.
(5)[f the Government will not acknowledge nor recognise these points, or fails to provide this assistance to Aboriginal people, does it deserve to be roundly condemned at the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (5) Under current legislation Aboriginals have the right to choose whether or not they enrol as electors for Commonwealth purposes. The law requires that this right is one to be exercised freely and it is an offence under the Commonwealth Electoral Act to interfere with that free exercise of choice.
So far as National Aboriginal Conference elections are concerned, there was no election in October [980. An election is to be held on 17 October next and, in respect of that election, Aboriginals are not required to enrol, but must complete a voter registration card before they can vote. Aboriginals are being encouraged to participate in that election and any attempt to combine encouragement to participate in the N.A.C. election and the voluntary enrolment for Commonwealth legislation at N.A.C. polling booths would undoubtedly lead to confusion. [n these circumstances, the availability of Commonwealth enrolment cards at N.A.C. polling booths could even be seen as part of an official campaign to encourage the enrolment of Aboriginals.
Furthermore, the polling officials engaged to conduct the N.A.C. election are not officers of the Australian Electoral Office. [n accordance with the procedures for the conduct of N.A.C. elections they will, wherever possible, be Aboriginals. Many will be undertaking this activity for the first time and the Australian Electoral Office is endeavouring to keep procedures in polling places as straight forward as possible.
Clearly, N.A.C. polling officials are going to be busy enough conducting that election, without having to try to explain the differences between an N.A.C. election and an election for the Commonwealth Parliament or between the requirement to register in order to record an N.A.C. vote and the purely voluntary nature of the choice of Commonwealth enrolment.
[n a situation, therefore, where the law provides Aboriginal~ with a firm and unfettered choice as to enrolling it is not int~hded to undertake any activity such as the official provision of Electoral Claim forms which could be seen as implicitly affecting that freedom of choice.
The Australian Electoral Office does conduct a continuing program of electoral education for Aboriginals in remote areas, and has done so since 1979 in South Australia, Western Australia, and the Northern Territory. The program is proceeding with the full co-operation of the South Australian, Western Australian and Northern Territory Governments.
I should stress, however, that this electoral education program does not, as a specific outcome, seek to enrol Aborigines. The aim is rather to educate them in respect of the Australian parliamentary and electoral systems so that they are able to make an informed decision when determining whether they should enrol, as current legislation all0'Ys them to do.
Parity and Non-parity Oil
(Question No. 2881)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 27 August 1981:

What was the production of (a) parity and (b) non-parity . oil produced from (i) small, (ii) medium, (iii) large and (iv) new oil fields (A) on Barrow Island, (B) in Queensland and (C) in the Gippsland Basin for the period I January to 30 June [981.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Production of (a) parity and (b) non-parity oil produced from (i) small, (ii) medium, (iii) large and (iv) new oil fields (A) on Barrow Island, (B) in Queensland and (C) in the Gippsland Basin for the period I January to 30 June 198 [ is as follows:
(A) (i) (a) 83.01 megalitres, (b) none.
(ii) (a) 473.04megalitres, (b) 151.80megalitres.
(iii) (a) none, (b) none.
(iv) [4.36 megalitres-the concept of parity and non-parity oil does not apply to the production from 'new' oil fields.
(B) (i) (a) 39.24, (b) none.
(ii) (a) none, (b) none.
(iii) (a) none, (b) none.
(iv) None-not applicable as detailed above.
(C) (i) (a) 177.98 megalitres, (b) none.
(ii) (a) 994.20 megalitres, (b) none.
(iii) (a) 4751.79, (b) 4751.79.
(iv) None-not applicable as detailed above.
Sale of Commonwealth Experimental Building Station at Sydney, New South Wales
(Question No. 2937)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 27 August 1981:
(I) Have expressions of interest or tenders been called for the sale of the Commonwealth Experimental Building Station at Sydney, New South Wales.
(2) What action will be taken to ensure that if the Commonwealth Experimental Building Station is sold to private enterprise, it will not go to vested interests or to a purchaser who is unable to maintain the Station's high record of developing safe building practices.
Mr MeVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
([) No. Advertisements calling for expressions of interest for the purchase or [ease of the Commonwealth Experimental Building Station are expected to appear in September [981.
(2) The Government has directed that the Experimental Building Station should only be disposed of to an organisation which would maintain the ~tation's reputation for impartiality and technical competence and which would continue its role in building systems accreditation and the development of building regulations.
Expenditure Commitments: Department of Business and Consumer Affairs
(Question No. 1226)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981.
([) What specific commitments for expenditure, excluding normal recurring costs of running the Department such as

Answers to Questions

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1269

salaries and administrative costs, does his Department have for (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
(2) What sum is involved in each commitment and what is the purpose of the commitment.
(3) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that when a similar question was answered by a number of Ministers in 1976, it was claimed that obtaining the information would involvve collection of detailed information from a diversity of records and sources, and would therefore require unjustifiable use of staff resources.
(4) Has the development of forward estimates in his Department now been advanced to a stage where a similar reply is no longer valid.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (4) Please see the Minister for Finance's answer to Question No. 1216, Hansard, 10 June 1981.
Annual Reports and other Publications: Minister for Science and Technology
(Question No. 1276)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by his Department in 1979-80; ifso, (a) how many were employed, (b) who were they, (c) for what purpose was each employed and, (d) what payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firm.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
During 1979-80 my Department engaged the services of two private consultants. The first was Dr K. Parker who was engaged in the development and application of an environmental assessment section for an area modelling project. Payments totalling $6,142.15 were made with respect to this conSUltancy. The second was Mr S. H. Midgley who was engaged to conduct a fish breeding program in connection with the work of the Supervising Scientist in the Alligator Rivers region of the Northern Territory-Payments totalling $21,322.59 were made with respect to this consultancy.
Superannuation Liability for Statutory Authorities: Minister for Finance
(Question No. 1320)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What statutory authorities under the Minister's aegis have liabilities to the Commonwealth by way of employer contributions for superannuation which have not been paid or which have not yet been determined.
(2) If these contributions have not been paid, what are the amounts involved and how and when is payment to be made.
(3) If the contributions have not yet been determined, when is the liability expected to be assessed and how is payment expected to be made.
An identical question was asked of each Minister.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's questions:

(I), (2) and (3) Statutory authorities that are 'approved authorities' for the purposes of the Superannuation Acts 1922 and 1976 are liable to reimburse the Commonwealth for the cost of the employer share of any superannuation benefits that become payable under those Acts to or in respect of their staff. Except as noted below, all 'approved authorities' are making the payments required of them.
In accordance with an administrative practice-the origin of which is no longer clear-certain authorities were treated as exempt from this liability. This treatment was continued after the 1976 Act came into effect, and in one or two cases was extended to similar authorities set up at a later date. The intention had been to provide formal exemption by regulation under the Superannuation Act 1976. The Act's exemption provisions, however, make no provision for retrospective exemption and an amendment would have been necessary before that intention could be carried out. Action was initiated early this year to ensure that all these authorities met their liabilities from I July 1981 at the latest.
Statutory authorities that are not 'approved authorities', and whose employees are not normally covered by the Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme, may nevertheless have a liability to the Commonwealth for some staff (e.g. former Commonwealth public servants) who retained their right to remain contributors to the Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme. Separate arrangements are made for recovering the employer superannuation liability in these cases.
The Northern Territory Government is an 'approved authority', as are a number of its authorities, but reimbursements are not at present being received from these bodies. The arrangements for meeting the employer superannuation liability in respect of these authorities are currently under negotiation between the two Governments.
An approved authority may discharge its liability to the Commonwealth either on an emerging cost basis or on an accruing cost basis.
Approved authorities that meet their liability on the emerging cost basis are notified, as necessary, of the amount paid in benefits to or in respect of their former employees for which reimbursement is required. This information is prepared manually; sometimes there may be some delay between a benefit being paid and the authority being informed of the reimbursement required. In such circumstances retrospective adjustments are made. Work is being undertaken on computer-based procedures intended to minimise the incidence of such delays.
In the case of approved authorities which meet their liability on an accruing cost basis, the rates of contribution were set following advice from the Australian Government Actuary. These were intended as interim rates pending review based on actuarial assessment of a reasonable period of experience under the current scheme which was introduced on I July 1976. The Actuary is currently undertaking that assessment, which will permit more precise determination of the rates of contribution appropriate to individual authorities. Pending the outcome of the review, certain authorities which meet their liability on an accruing cost basis are paying a rate of contribution which does not take account of the cost of post-retirement pension increases. After the actuarial assessment is available, a decision will be taken on how any necessary additional contribution is to be made.
The following list shows those statutory bodies within the portfolio responsibilities of Commonwealth Ministers which are 'approved authorities' for the purpose of the Superannuation Act 1976 and have a liability to the Commonwealth under that Act. Those which meet their liability on an emerging cost basis are marked (x). Those which meet their liability on an accruing cost basis are marked (y) or (z) according to

1270 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Answers to Questions

whether the rate of contribution they pay does or does not take account of the cost of pension increases.
MINISTER FOR ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS
Aboriginal Corporation of the National Aboriginal Conference (z)
Aboriginal Development Commission (z) Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies (z)
ATTORNEY -GENERAL Australian Institute of Criminology (z) High Court of Australia (y) Institute of Family Studies (y) Law Reform Commission (z) Legal Aid Commission (ACT) (y) Legislative Drafting Institute (y)
MINISTER FOR BUSINESS AND CONSUMER AFFAIRS
National Compa~ies and Securities Commission (y)
MINISTER FOR THE CAPITAL TERRITORY Australian Capital Territory Electricity Authority (z) Canberra Commercial Development Authority (z) Canberra Theatre Trust (z) National Capital Development Commission (y) Parliament House Construction Authority (y)
MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS Australian Broadcasting Commission (y) Australian Postal Commission (y) Australian Telecommunications Commission (y) Overseas Telecommunications Commission (Australia) (y)
MINISTER FOR DEFENCE Trustees of the Services Canteens Trust Fund (z)
MINISTER FOR EDUCATION Australian Maritime College (z) Australian National University (x) Canberra College of Advanced Education (z)
MINISTER FOR HEALTH Capital Territory Health Commission (z) Commonwealth Serum Laboratories Commission (z) Health Insurance Commission (x)
MINISTER FOR HOME AFFAIRS AND ENVIRONMENT
Australia Council (z) Australian Film Commission (y) Australian National Gallery (z) Film and Television School (z)
MINISTER FOR HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION Housing Loans Insurance Corporation (y) Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation (z)
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS
Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs (z)
MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS Australian Trade Union Training Authority (z)
MINISTER FOR INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE Australian Tourist Commission (z)

MINISTER FOR NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND ENERGY
Albury-Wodonga Development Corporation (z) Australian Atomic Energy Commission (y) Pipeline Authority (z) River Murray Commission (z) Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Authority (x)

MINISTER FOR PRIMARY INDUSTRY
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation (z) Australian Canned Fruits Corporation (z) Australian Dairy Corporation (z) Australian Dried Fruits Corporation (z) Australian-EggcBoard (z) Australian Honey Board (y) Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation (z) Australian Tobacco Board (z) Australian Wheat Board (z) Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation (z) Australian Wool Corporation (z)

PRIME MINISTER Advisory Council for Inter-Government Relations (z)

MINISTER FOR SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY

AnglO-Australian Telescope Board (z) Australian Institute of Marine Science (z)
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Organization (y) National Standards Commission (y)

Research

MINISTER FOR TRADE AND RESOURCES
Australian Overseas Projects Corporation (z) Export Finance and Insurance Corporation (z)

MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT
Australian National Airlines Commission (x) Australian National Railways Commission (z) Australian Shipping Commission (z)

TREASURER Australian Industry Development Corporation (z)

Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 1432)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by his Department in 1979-80;
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c) officers of his Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State statutory authorities;
(3) What officers in his Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures;
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by his Department occur outside Australia during this period; if so what sum was expended.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the Prime Minister's answer to Parliamentary Question 1414 which appears in Hansard of 5 June, 1981,page3315.

Answers to Questions

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1271

The following additional information with respect to my Department is provided:
(i) During 1979-80 expenditure by my Department on entertainment in relation to Commonwealth sponsored international conferences in Australia was nil;
(ii) In the same period expenditure outside Australia was $1,543.71.
Quarantine: Vessels at Australian Ports
(Question No, 1701)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

How many vessels at each Australian port (a) were inspected by quarantine staff, (b) showed evidence of rat infestation, (c) were fumigated for rats, (d) were baited for rats, (e) were ordered to trap rats, (f) were treated by other means for rats and (g) were treated for insect infestation, during 1979-80.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Port
Albany Broome Bunbury Carnarvon Cockatoo Is. Dampier Derby Esperance Exmouth Geraldton Port Hedland Port Walcott Wyndham Fremantle Melbourne Geelong Westernport Portland Port Adelaide Ardrossan Port Giles Port Pirie Whyalla Port Stanvac Port Lincoln Thevenard Wallaroo Rapid Bay Ballast Head Kingscote Proper Bay Sydney Newcastle Port Kembla Brisbane Urangan Bundaberg Gladstone Rockhampton Hay Point Mackay Bowen Townsville Lucinda Mourilyan Cairns Weipa Thursday Is. Hobart

(a)

(b)

(c)

Number

Number of showing

vessels evidence of

inspected

rats

Number fumigated
for rats

146

184

183

23

30

391

12

58

2

235

4

602

2

127

48

1,645

63

3

1,263

25

258

217

71

I

779

30

4

77

24

186

160

119

177

101

46

68

18

34

4

1,588

4

380

2

237

4

2

718

13

66

470

38

185

180

2

4

345

34

31

370

2

251

42

366

(d) Number
baited for rats
4 2 60 18 1 5
4 2 2

(e) Number ordered
to trap rats
2 2 57 9 1 27
3

(f) Number
treated by other
means
for rats

(g) Number
treated for insect
infestation
11
12 1 70 89 18 20 16 93
20 8
5

1272 REPRESENTATIVES 10 September 1981

Answers to Questions

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

Number Number

Number

Number Number treated treated

Number of showing Number

baited ordered by other for insect

vessels evidence of fumigated

for

to trap

means infesta-

Port

inspected

rats for rats

rats

rats for rats

tion

Port Huon Spring Bay Launceston pevonpor\
IJurnie port Latta
Stanley Darwin Groote Eylandt Grove . Port Alma

9

24

139

6

22

3

107

27

2

2

I

751

373

3

3

97

98

2

Note(I) Where evidence of rats if found, fumigation may be undertaken in severe cases. Jn other cases, baiting or trapping, or a combination of both, may be carried out. (2) The majority of vessels found to have rats at Darwin were Taiwanese fishing vessels. Except in exceptional circumstances where appropriate precautions are taken, Taiwanese fishing vessels are not permitted to berth. They are moored at anchorages in Darwin Harbour.

Staff and Functions: Depart...ent of Defence
(Question No. 2127)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 6 M&y 1981:
Will he provide a detailed list of the (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of his Department that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions are implemented.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
J refer the honourable member to the Prime Minister's reply to parliamentary Question No. 2119 (Hansard, 5 June 1981, page 3317).
ANZAC Day Marches: Ravna Gora Chetniks
(Question No. 2330)
Mr Fry asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 27 May 1981:
(1) Has the Yugoslav Government lodged an official protest with the Australian Government about the presence of a group calling themselves the Ravna Gora Chetniks in the ANZAC Day marches in Sydney and Melbourne.
(2) If so, what action does the Government propose to take.
(3) What was the Government's reply to the protest.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. Yugoslav officials have, however, informally registered their dIsapproval of the participation by Chetnik organisations in the marches.
(2) and (3) The Federal Government has no authority to determine who mayor may not participate in ANZAC Day marches, which are tr\lditionally organised by the RSL.

Holsworthy Artillery Range, New South Wales
(Question No. 2678)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) What weapons are used at Holsworthy artillery range, New South Wales.
(2) Are laser rangefinders used at the range; if so, what steps are taken to ensure that neighbouring residents or passers-by do not suffer eye damage or other damage from the use of the rangefinders. '
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Army acitivities at Holsworthy Range include the firing of infantry weapons such as rifles, machine-guns, mortars and anti-tank weapons, artillery pieces including both field and medium guns, and fire support vehicle weapons.
(2) Yes. The laser rangefinder is treated like a weapon and handled accordingly. For each laser firing the laser hazard template is wholly located within the boundary of the Holsworthy Range. In addition to extensive signposting of the boundary, firing warnings are placed in Sydney papers and Notices to Airmen promulgated.
Institutionalised Care for Intellectually Handicapped Persons
(Question No. 2743)
Mr Beazley asked \he Minister representing the Minister for Social ,Security, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) What is the cost per person for institutionalised care for persons who are classified as being intellectually handicapped.
(2) What is the cost of the Government subsidy being received by families who are caring for their intellectually handicapped relatives in their homes.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

Answers to Questions

10 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1273

(I) and (2) The information requested is not readily available as costs are not compiled on the basis of a person's handicap.
National Service Act
(Question No. 2801)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 20 August 1981:
How many National Servicemen serving in the Defence forces on 7 December 1972 left the service prior to the date on which they normally would have been discharged as a result of the provisions of sub-section 35B (15A) of the National Service Act.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
As was the case with a similar question addressed to me by the honourable member, data is not readily available to provide the statistic requested. A lengthy manual search of many thousands of personal files would be necessary.
Officer Training in the Armed Forces
(Question No. 2802)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 20 August, 1981:
(I) What percentage of men accepted for officer training in the Armed Forces come from (a) Government, (b) Catholic and (c) other private schools.
(2) What percentage have had experience in school cadets, air cadets or naval cadets.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Service Navy

Schools attended (percentage)

Govern-

ment Catholic

67

15

Other private
18

Cadet
experi-
ence 13

Service Army
*AirForce

Schools attended (percentage)

Government 65
67

Catholic 18
\0

Other private
17
23

Cadet experi-
ence 32
24

* These statistics have been extracted from a random sampling of the records of a significant number of officers who entered the RAAF since I July 1980. A lengthy manual search would have otherwise been necessary to extract the data.
Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Foreign Affairs
(Question No. 2844)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
(I) Further to the Cabinet Review of Commonv<ealth Functions which called for Ministers to scrutinise all authorities within their portfolio (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1850) which statutory authorities within the Minister's portfolio are to be (a) terminated, (b) continued and (c) reviewed in depth.
(2) If the scrutiny referred to in part (I) has not been completed, when will it be finalised and the results reported to Parliament.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The only statutory authority within my portfolio is the Australia-Japan Foundation. The existence and operations of the Foundation have been subject to comprehensive review in the context of a separate R.C.F. decision on Australia-Japan relations. This review has found that the Australia-Japan Foundation performs a valuable function in developing cultural, social and personal contacts between the peoples of Australia and Japan and in fostering research and exchanges in both countries. The review has concluded that the Foundation should be retained within my portfolio.


