House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 122, 1981 Wednesday, 29 April 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1685

Wednesday, 29 April198J
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2.15 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Acting Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Proposed Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in:
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Holding, Mr Howe, Mr Humphreys, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Milton, Mr Morris and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia, respectfully calls for:
The immediate and unconditional withdrawal of any proposals to deny Unemployment Benefits to unemployed people under 18 years old.
That the level of Benefits for all unemployed people, and including people receiving sickness benefits and pensions, be raised to at least 120 per cent of the poverty line.
That future employment policies be devoted to job creation and the restoration of full employment rather than the evasion of this responsibility by hiding the unemployed in short term training and education schemes.
Public aCknowledgement of the fact that unemployment is the result of insufficient jobs and not the fault of any minority group, the education system or the unemployed themselves.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham, Mr Howe, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Mildren.
Petitions received.
Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned

citizens of the Commonwealth do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
1. Uphold the principle that the seeds and cuttings of plants are a public resource and a common heritage to all and that accordingly seeds should be freely available to all, freely multipliable, able to be sold, exchanged, exported and imported by anyone who wishes. This is seen as a matter of national food security.
2. Recognize that plant breeding is a highly co-operative venture often involving private enterprise at the very last stages after basic seed collection, storage, and research has been publicly funded.
3. In view of the aforementioned paragraphs, recognize that any system giving 'property' or ownership rights over seeds to individuals, organisations or enterprises is inappropriate and unjust.
4. Recognize that legislation establishing plant patenting schemes overseas has had serious adverse e!Tects namely:
(i) a slowing-down of scientific information exchange and exchanges in basic plant breeding materials, that is, germ plasm,
(ii) subordination and/or curtailment of public breeding programmes,
(iii) farmer unrest at seed prices,
(iv) monopoly control of seed production and sales has passed into the hands of giant petrochemical and drug corporations also marketing crop chemicals,
(v) increased uniformity of crop varieties leading to a vulnerability to pest and disease attack.
5. Reject any proposal to legislate for any system such as the drafted Plant Variety Rights Act, which gives exclusive ownership rights over seeds to individuals, organisations or enterprises.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ewen Cameron.
Petition received.
Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth, do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
1. Note that legislation establishing plant variety rights in other countries has had adverse effects, namely:
(a) Virtual monopoly control of seed production bas passed into the hands of a few large international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation.
(b) The varieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and will not grow without the aid of artificial fertilizers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers.
(c) The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, rendering them vulnerable to disease and other environmental threats.
2. Recognise that maintenance of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to prevent exclusive control over plant genetic material from falling into private hands.

1686 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Petitions

3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gardeners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden produce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment of plant variety rights in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kerin and Mr Uren.
Petitions received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
Taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other taxpayers can deduct business expenses from their assessable income.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hicks and Mr Sainsbury.
Petitions received.
Discriminatory Legislation
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament in Canberra assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That currently discrimination in the provision of work, in appointment to jobs and in promotion exists in Australia on particular grounds including, inter alia, grounds of race, ethnic origin, marital status, pregnancy, sex and/or sexual preference; and
That currently discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits is exercised against particular groups of individual-in particular, against married women.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray: That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to
outlaw discrimination in Commonwealth employment, in employment of individuals under federal awards, in employment of persons by statutory bodies and quasigovernmental organisations, and in employment of alI persons in areas over which Commonwealth and Australian Capital Territory equal opportunity legislation should have jurisdiction; and
That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits to all persons without regard to sex and/or marital status. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys and Mr West.
Petitions received.
National Day ofPrayer and Fasting
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that: In view of the spiritual and moral decline of our nation we your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament will call a day of National Prayer and Fasting in 1981.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bradfield.
Petition received.

Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth, do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
1. Note that legislation establishing plant breeders' rights in other countries has had serious adverse effects, namely:
(a) Virtual monopoly control of seed production has passed into th~ hands of a few international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation.
(b) The varieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and will not grow without the aid of artifical fertilisers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers.
(c) The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, rendering them vulnerable to disease and other environmental threats.
2. Recognize that maintenance of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to prevent exclusive control over plant genetic materillls from failing into private hands.
3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gardeners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden produce, by rejecting any proposal to -legislate for the establishment of plant breeders' rights in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cadman.
Petition received.
Toxic Shock Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned by the threats to women's health and lives posed by Toxic Shock Syndrome, and urge the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
(I) Tampons, sanitary napkins, vaginal deodorants and similar sanitary products to be re-classifiedunder Therapeutic Agents (not under "Cosmetics" as at present), in order to bring them under the scrutiny of the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee. We believe manufacture must be under the strictest hygienic conditions.
(2) After re-classification, we urge an immediate government-funded inquiry into all aspects of manufacture and content of these products. This must lead to: (i) contents of product and instructions for correct usage to be shown on packaging; (ii) removal of synthetic fibres, chemicals or ingredients that are potentially or actually harmful to users.
(3) Allocation of extra funding for ongoing research by the National Health and Medical Research Council into these products, results of this research to be made public to ensure all health workers and potential users are fulIy informed. This campaign of public education would necessitate multilingual distribution of the information where appropriate.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert possible threats posed to women's health by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.

Petitions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1687

Petition received.
Aborigines
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the humble petitioners respectfully believe that the Federal Government has the power conferred on it by the 1967 Referendum to intervene on behalf of Aboriginal people in any conflict with any State or Territory Government.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Federal Government will assume its full responsibility for Aboriginal Affairs, and use the powers conferred on it by the people of Australia in' the 1967 Referendum to intervene on behalf of Aboriginals in any conflict with any State or Territory Government;
That the Government respond to the Report of the Senate Standing Committee on Constitution Legal Affairs on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders on Queensland Reserves which sets out precisely the Commonwealth Constitutional and legal position under Section 51;
That in addition the Government fulfil its stated policy of self-determination and self-management for Aboriginal people, by funding all housing, health, education, legal, employment strategy and welfare matters concerning Aboriginal people directly through Aboriginal Community-based Community-controlled organisations.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hayden.
Petition received.
Use of Live Animals in Research
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(I) That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
(2) That no central records exist on such inhumane use of live animals for experimentation purposes, yet research institutions in several Australian States engage in such a practice.
(3) That there exists no uniform legislation between the States concerning responsible standards of research conduct, indeed, in some States there is a complete lack of legislation altogether.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will enact legislation to require:
(a) the Australian Bureau of Statistics to produce annual statistics on the numbers of live animals involved in research, and provide information as to research purpose;
(b) the National Health and Medical Research Council to develop humane and responsible standards of conduct for researchers using live animals in all Government, Industry and Educational Research Laboratories.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That sand mining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed mining leases against the advice of conservationists and a State Government sponsored Public Inquiry.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(1) That merchant seamen have in the past served in theatres of war; they have been decorated for valor following war action; they have been prisoners of war and should therefore be entitled to similar pension rights and medical benefits as regular servicemen.
(2) That by being denied the entitlements, such as pension and medical benefits, which other war veterans receive, they are thereby being discriminated against.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act (1920) Section 100 (d) (iv) to take account of war-related service by merchant seamen during World War 2.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
EISalvador
To the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the present government of EI Salvador has been responsible for the deaths of at least 10,000 people in 1980 alone; and that it has been condemned as one of the worst human rights violators in the world by organisations such as Amnesty International and the US Conference of Catholic Bishops.
Therefore we humbly request that the government of the Commonwealth of Australia:
(i) urge the government of the United States of America to immediately cease all military aid to the government ofEI Salvador;
(ii) support the freedom of the Salvadoran people against the governing military dictatorship.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon.

1688 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Petitions

Petition received.
Diabetics: Insulin
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That in view of the recent standardisation of insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect of increasing the cost of both items to the Diabetic in general, and as every insulindependent Diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily according to medication.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that syringes be made available on the N.H.s. and that insulin prescriptions revert to 10 bottles as previously supplied.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Milton. Petition received.
Immigration
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens showeth:
That we protest at the many unwise decisions of our National Government which have resulted in discrimination against Australians in many ways.
That unwise immigration has introduced into Australia crimes characteristic of some races and which through an environmental impact is influencing the behaviour of some Australians.
That unwise immigration has led to the basing within Australia of a number of foreign terrorist groups such as the Mafia and alleged Liberation groups, all of which are causing the police and citizens great concern.
That the Government act immediately on the wishes of the people as expressed in numerous public opinion polls and bring to a halt the present huge intake of non-Caucasian people, thereby retaining some portion of the fast diminishing goodwill and public confidence in that Australians have not given the Government any mandate to populate the country with people alien to the Australian way of life.
That the Government give practical effect to the views so earnestly espoused by the recent Minister for Immigration, Mr M. J. R. MacKellar (Hansard 30.11.72), ex Minister for Immigration Sir Phillip Lynch (Page 16 Policy book, Evolution of a Policy), Ex Immigration Minister Forbes (Hansard 17.8.72 and press statement 2.5.72), and ex Prime Minister Sir William McMahon (Press statement 4.5.72).
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should take action to have a National Referendum on the subject of immigration.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr O'Keefe. Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of children's services, which has been reduced by almost 40% in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 budget, and further, that annual budget allocations in the area of children's services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrScott.
Petition received.
Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens of New South Wales respectfully showeth that the Federal Government did not make increased funding available for government school programs such as:
I. General recurrent. 2. Migrant education. 3. Disadvantaged schools. 4. Special education. 5. Capital grants. 6. Multicultural education. 7. Disadvantaged country areas. 8. Children in institutions. 9. Services and development. 10. Education centres.
II. Special projects.
But increased the money available to the non-government school sector by 5.9%.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honourable House will restore and increase substantially, in real terms, the allocation of funds for government school programs.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Robert Brown.
Petition received.
Education
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. A petition of the undersigned citizens, residents within the Federal electorate of Barton, respectfully showeth:
Our dismay at the reductions in the total expenditure implemented in 1980 and proposed for 1981 and in particular on government schools and colleges.
Our concern at the immediate and long-term effects such reductions are having, and will have, upon the educational needs and welfare of the children and students within public schools, Technical and Further Education Colleges, Colleges of Advanced Education and Universities.
Our further concern that education, which is a major element in the public sector of the Australian economy, has been consistently down-graded from a position of importance in the development of the National economy as a whole.
Our affirmation that Australia's own development depends upon the development of its most important natural resource, our children, and that education must be restored to a position of major priority for this task by this and all future Federal Governments.
We call upon the Federal Government to immediately restore and increase substantially its allocation of resources to education in government schools and colleges in order to achieve these ends.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bradfield.
Petition received.

Petitions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1689

Education
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of ~hc House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. A petitIOn of the undersigned citizens, residents within the Federal electorate of Hunter, respectfully showeth:
Our dismay at the reductions in the total expenditure implemented in 1980 and proposed for 1981 and in particular on government schools and colleges.
Our concern at the immediate and long-term effects such reductions are having, and will have, upon the educational needs and welfare of the children and students within public schools, Technical and Further Education Colleges, Colleges of Advanced Education and Universities.
Our further concern that education, which is a major element in the public sector of the Australian economy, has been consistently down-graded from a position of importance in the development of the National economy as a whole.
Our affirmation that Australia's own development depends upon the development of its most important natural resource, our children, and that education must be restored to a position of major priority for this task by this and all future Federal Governments.
We call upon the Federal Government to immediately restore and increase substantially its allocation of resources to education in government schools and colleges in order to achieve these ends.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Robert Brown.
Petition received.
Education
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. A petition of the undersigned citizens, residents within the Federal electorate of Macquarie, respectfully showeth:
Our dismay at the reductions in the total expenditure implemented in 1980 and proposed for 1981 and in particular on government schools and colleges.
Our concern at the immediate and long-term effects such reductions are having, and will have, upon the educational needs and welfare of the children and students within public schools, Technical and Further Education Colleges, Colleges of Advanced Education and Universities.
Our further concern that education, which is a major element in the public sector of the Australian economy, has been consistently down-graded from a position of importance in the development of the National economy as a whole.
Our affirmation that Australia's own development depends upon the development of its most important natural resource, our children, and that education must be restored to a position of major priority for this task by this and all future Federal Governments.
We call upon the Federal Government to immediately restore and increase substantially its allocation of resources to education in government schools and colleges in order to achieve these ends.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrF'ree.
Petition received.
Education
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. A petition

of the undersigned citizens, residents within the Federal electorate of Dundas, respectfully showeth:
Our dismay at the reductions in the total expenditure implemented in 1980 and proposed for 1981 and in particular on government schools and colleges.
Our concern at the immediate and long-term effects such reductions are having, and will have, upon the educational needs and welfare of the children and students within public schools, Technical and Further Education Colleges, Colleges of Advanced Education and Universities.
Our further concern that education, which is a major element in the public sector of the Australian economy, has been consistently down-graded from a position of importance in the development of the National economy as a whole.
Our afi1rmation that Australia's own development depends upon the development of its most important natural resource, our children, and that education must be restored to a position of major priority for this task by this and all future Federal Governments.
We call upon the Federal Government to immediately restore and increase substantially its allocation of resources to education in government schools and colleges in order to achieve these ends.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.
AirFares
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Australian Capital Territory respectfully showeth:
I. That we oppose the massive increase of 30.7 per cent in air fares from Canberra to other capital cities compared with the average increase of 7.4 per cent.
2. That this will cause serious hardship for many Canberra families who will not be able to afford to see their relatives from other parts of Australia.
3. That the ordinary families of Canberra should not be singled out for such massive increases and should receive equal treatment with the rest of Australia.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Federal Govern- ,nent take immediate action to adjust air fares to and from Canberra in line with the average increase of 7.4 per cent or to compensate the citizens of Canberra for this massive increase in air fares.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Kelly.
Petition received.
BIOTECHNOLOGY Notice of Motion
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(1) Is concerned at the failure of the Government to comprehend the economic significance of recent developments in biotechnology;

1690 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

(2) Draws the attention of the Government to the March 1980 report to the British Government entitled 'Biotechnology' made by a joint working party of the Advisory Council for Applied Research and Development, ACARD, the Advisory Board for the Research Councils and the Royal Society, chaired by Dr Alfred Spinks, the report to the Prime Minister of France entitled 'La Biotechnologie, Demain?', made by JeanClaude Pelissolo, on behalf of the General Delegation on Scientific and Technological Research, and the various reports made to the United States Administration by the National Institute of Health; and
(3) Calls on the Government to set up a joint parliamentary committee on science and technology with terms of reference, inter alia, which would empower it to investigate the significance of biotechnology in Australia, including(a) its economic potential in manufacturing, (b) its economic potential as a supplier of raw materials, (c) its employment impact on the pharmaceutical and chemical industries, and (d) related ethical problems such as the implications of genetic engineering, aging and cloning,
TASMANIA: AIRLINE DISPUTES Notice of Motion
Mr BURR (Wilmot)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House(1) Urgently requests the Governnient to use Royal Australian Air Force transport aircraft to move mainland residents stranded in Tasmania due to the current industrial dispute; and

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
NORTHERN IRELAND Mr YOUNG-I ask the Prime Minister, in the absence of the Minister for Foreign Affairs: Has the Government made any representations to the British Government, either through the High Commission in London or through other channels, concerning the case of Gerard Sands, generally known as Bobby Sands, the recently elected member of the British Parliament, who is currently on a hunger strike in Maze Prison, near Belfast? If so, what was the nature of those representations? If not, will the Government urge a policy of moderation on the British Prime Minister in an effort to avert Bobby Sands's death and the inevitable civil strife that it would provoke? Mr MALCOLM FRASER These matters are properly the responsibility of the United Kingdom Government. I think we in this House all know that the difficulties in Northern Ireland have been extreme for many, many decades. I do not see that we would advance the cause of peace and stability in Northern Ireland by seeking to intervene from Australia. The United Kingdom Government would have total concern for the well-being of all the people of Northern Ireland in its considerations and these matters ought to be left in its hands.
AIRLINE HOSTESSES DISPUTE

(2) Is of the opinion that the Government should have contingency plans to use RAAF aircraft promptly if Tasmania is isolated by future industrial disputes.
PRIME MINISTER Notice of Motion
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-

Mr DEAN-I address my question to the'Minister for Transport and refer him to the large number of people in some of the outlying regions of Australia, particularly the Northern Territory and north Queensland, who are severely disadvantaged as a result of the continuing flight attendants dispute. I ask the Minister: Has the Government developed any plans to try to assist the people in such regions?

(l) Condemns the Prime Minister for the authoritarian and arbitrary methods he uses in running the Cabinet and in achieving Cabinet decisions; and
(2) Calls on all Ministers to ensure that proper democratic procedures are used in Cabinet and that due weight is given to alternative views to those held by the Prime Minister.
AIRLINE HOSTESSES DISPUTE Notice of Motion
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House condemns the air hostesses strike and calls on the Government to introduce legislation to declare air travel an essential service free from all strikes.

Mr HUNT-The Government is very concerned about the continuation of this dispute and the hardship and suffering it is causing people right throughout Australia, particularly those people living in the outlying areas who have not available to them any other means of transport. The Government has, therefore, decided that the Royal Australian Air Force services will be made available to those people living in the outlying regions of Australia, such as the Northern Territory and north Queensland, who are in urgent need of travel for medical, compassionate and other special reasons. If this dispute is not settled today the Government will locate RAAF aircraft at Townsville and Darwin to service the surrounding

Questions Without Notice

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1691

regions and will cover such routes as DarwinAlice Springs-Adelaide and Townsville-Darwin and Townsville-Brisbane. Steps will be taken immediately to implement the necessary arrangements.
Both the Premier of Queensland and the Chief Minister of the Northern Territory have been in touch with me, expressing their very deep concern about the difficulties that some people are experiencing in some remote locations. They have sought assistance. It is expected that the RAAF can provide a range of services on a continuing basis within 24 hours. In the event of any breakdown in the services presently being provided by Trans-Australia Airlines and Ansett Airlines of Australia to Tasmania and by MacRobertson Miller Airline Services to the north-west coast of Western Australia, which have been given a limited dispensation by the hostesses, the RAAF resources will also be utilised in the same way as they will be for the Northern Territory and Queensland.
It is my hope that this dispute will be settled as soon as possible. It is causing a tremendous amount of damage to this country, including to tourism. The losses of revenue that have been occasioned both TAA and Ansett are of the order of $11m. Of course those losses will be recouped through future fare adjustments. I think it is high time we saw a sense of responsibility in the leadership of the hostesses' union and a number of other unions around this country that are causing a lot of discomfort to people generally.
KAMPUCHEA Mr MORRISON--My question is directed to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. 1 refer again to my question to the Minister on 27 November 1980 concerning Kampuchea. Will the Minister now admit that the Government continues to give respectability to the Pol Pot regime by Ministers of this Government sitting at international conferences with representatives of that regime as a consequence of its hypocritical vote in the United Nations on 13 October 1980 in favour of the Pol Pot regime?
Mr SPEAKER-Before I call the Minister 1indicate to the honourable member for St George that the question is in order but he should eliminate from his questions such words as 'hypocritical' .
Mr STREET-I recall the honourable gentleman's previous question. At the time. I made a distinction between recognition of a government and the question of credentials at the United Nations. To the best of my knowledge, the honourable

gentleman's party, when in government, adopted the same attitude as this Government has in relation to credentials. The Credentials Committee brings forward technical recommendations as to whether the credentials presented on behalf of a country are in accordance with the -procedures and so on of the United Nations.
Mr Morrison-I raise a point of order. The Minister's statement is completely incorrect. We did not accept the Credentials Committee report on the People's Republic of China--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for St George will resume his seat. He can make a personal explanation at a later time.
Mr STREET-The Australian Government has always drawn a distinction between the recognition of a government and the question of credentials as brought forward by the United Nations Credentials Committee. The Australian Government has made its position quite clear. At present it recognises no regime in Kampucheaneither the installed Heng Samrin regime nor the previous Pol Pot Administration. That is where the situation is at the moment. When the issue of credentials arises in the United Nations we will take an attitude according to the circumstances at the time.
DOMESTIC AIRLINE PASSENGERS: CARRIAGE BY INTERNATIONAL AIRLINES
Mr SHACK-I ask the Minister for Transport: Is it a fact that the recent approval for international airlines to carry domestic passengers in the course of their normal scheduled services has demonstrated that any administrative and practical difficulties associated with such services have been and can be easily overcome? Will the Minister allow international services to remain available to domestic passengers after the current air hostess dispute has been resolved?
Mr HUNT-I think the events of the last few days have indicated that the proposition put forward by the honourable member is certainly a feasible one in terms of administration. In the longer term, however, I understand that there would have to be additional facilities for Customs, quarantine etc., in order to cope with the mix of passengers on such aircraft. I have initiated discussions between the airlines to ensure that there is a way through the problem that has been concerning the Western Australian people for some considerable time. Where we can use excess capacity on international services from Perth to the eastern States, we should endeavour to do so, so long as we do not disrupt the regular scheduled

i692 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

services that the Western Australians have come to expect. That is the only concern I have in trying to achieve that objective which has been sought by a number of people from Western Australia.
FILM INDUSTRY: TAX CONCESSIONS Mr CHARLES-I refer the Treasurer to answers that he gave in this House on 10 and 11 March concerning the cost of tax concessions promised to the film industry, which had jumped from the $2m cited during the election campaign to $lOm and finally $20m. Is the Treasurer aware of reports that these tax concessions may now cost as much as $30m a year, or 15 times more than originally estimated? Is this estimate correct? If so, does the Treasurer agree that these measures are extremely generous and unprecedented in Australia? In the light of their rapidly escalating cost, does the Treasurer still propose to proceed with these measures in their promised form? Mr HOWARD-I do recall the questions referred to by the honourable member. The honourable member's recollection of the revenue cost amounts coincides with mine. I have seen reports suggesting that the revenue cost will be higher than I said it would be in those answers. I agree with him that these concessions are particularly generous. I do not venture a view about precedent without taking the matter on notice. The legislation covering this matter is due to be introduced into Parliament before the House rises for the winter recess. Then it will be possible for the House to know the precise terms of what the Government is proposing. In saying that, let me make it clear that the Government is keen-it was keen at the time the commitment was made, and remains keen-to give significant assistance to the Australian film industry. It is an industry which has been extremely successful in recent years and has been a source of very considerable pride to all Australians.
ECONOMIC ASSISTANCE TO POLAND Dr EDWARDS-Can the Minister for Foreign Affairs say whether the Government has yet decided how to respond to the recent Polish request for economic assistance in that country's current difficult economic situation? Mr STREET-The Government has decided to meet an urgent request from the Polish authorities for credit assistance to enable the continuation of Poland's traditional purchases of wool, skins and hides from Australia. This assistance will take the form of credit guarantees for up to $A40m of export credits which the Polish authorities are currently seeking through the private banking system in Australia. The credits will be

fully underwritten by the Government, using the facilities of the Export Finance and Insurance Corporation. The credits will finance purchases which are urgently required to maintain the operation of key enterprises in Poland. As with a number of other Western countries which have similarly decided to respond to Poland's request for assistance, Australia has taken this action to help Poland in its current difficult economic situation. Assistance at this time is designed to help the Poles resolve their current internal difficulties in their own way and without external intervention.
BELCONNEN MALL Mr FRY-Did the Minister for the Capital Territory agree with his Government's decision to sell the Belconnen shopping mall as a further step in undermining the rights of the citizens of Canberra to have some say in the government of their city? Is he aware that plans have been drawn up by the Canberra Commercial Development Authority, which runs the mall, to use the current profits from the mall to develop recreation facilities at the top of the mall, which are badly needed? Given that the mall is said to have a market value of $7Sm to $80m, is it the Government's intention to put it up for auction or tender, or has some cosy deal been arranged with some of the Government's friends? Did the Minister feel under any obligation to consult with the people of Canberra, through the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly, before agreeing to this further erosion of their rights? Will he consider recommending to the Government that it conduct a referendum of the people to determine whether they wish the Government to sell the shopping mall?
Mr HODGMAN-No decision to sell the Belconnen Mall has been announced by the Government. I will not speculate on any of the matters raised by the honourable member. I resent the implication that this Government in any way, shape or form engages in the same sort of cosy deals as the previous Whitlam Administration engaged in.
ANZAC DAY PARADE Mr KATTER-I direct my question to the Minister for the Capital Territory. I refer to the shameful incidents which occurred during the ANZAC Day ceremonies in Canberra. I ask the Minister: While taking his decisive-and commendable actions, did he unearth or find evidence of any plans for this weird group to indulge in similar activities at similar solemn occasions in the future?

Questions Without Notice

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1693

Mr HODGMAN-I believe that every member of this Parliament and the overwhelming majority of Australian citizens recognise that since 1916 ANZAC Day has been a day of solemn national remembrance for over 102,000 Australian ex-service men and women who laid down their lives in defence of freedom in two world wars in Korea, in Malaysia and in Vietnam. I say to this Parliament for the first time that I, as Minister for the Capital Territory, deeply regret what transpired in the national capital last Saturday. I say further that this is the third successive year that the solemn ANZAC Day commemoration has been so disturbed in the national capital. On each occasion the group claiming the credit for this act has been a group describing itself as Women Against Rape-WAR.
Mr Fry-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. The Minister has claimed that the service was disturbed. All people who attended would agree-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! the honourable gentlemen is arguing the issue. He will resume his seat.
Mr Fry-That the service was not disturbed in anyway.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order.
Mr Fry-It was a mile aWllY from the ceremony, where these disturbances that he caused were taking place.
Mr SPEAKER-I indicate to the honourable member for Fraser that when I give a ruling he must obey the Chair and resume his seat and not continue speaking. If he does otherwise, I will have to deal with him.
Dr KIugman-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. Certain charges have been laid against people arising from this matter. It so happens--
Mr Birney-Where were you in the war?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Prospect will resume his seat. The honourable member for Phillip will withdraw.
Mr Birney-I withdraw. Dr Klugman-I do not wish to take sides on that issue because as it happens I do not support the women who demonstrated. I think it is important to realise that certain charges have been laid and that if the Minister makes certain broad allegations against people they will tend to stick against individuals. Mr SPEAKER-I take the point that the honourable member for Prospect has made. Have charges been laid?
Mr HODGMAN-Yes, Mr Speaker.

Mr SPEAKER-I will not allow the answer to proceed further.
Mr Hodgman-Mr Speaker, I do not wish to. [ simply--
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister will resume his seat.
Mr Hodgman-Mr Speaker, may r have per-
mission just to make-Mr SPEAKER-J have ruled that the matter is
sub judice and should not be proceeded with.
Mr HodgmanMr Speaker, may r be heard on
that ruling because not only am I not going to refer to matters which are sub judice-l have the references from May-but the question which I was asked was whether--
Opposition members interjecting Mr Hodgman-On whose side were honourable members opposite on ANZAC Day? Mr SPEAKER-Honourable members on my left will remain silent. Mr Hodgman-The Opposition is standing well in the eyes of the Australian public. Mr Speaker, the point J simply wanted to respond to-Mr SPEAKER-The Minister will resume his seat. I have given a ruling. Mr Hodgman-I accept that, Sir. Now we know where the Labor Party stands on ANZAC Day!
RUNDLE SHALE OIL PROJECT Mr HAYDEN-I ask a question of the Prime Minister. I remind him that in this House on 9 April he repudiated as 'despicable' a question from me asking for an assurance that no Minister or his family had taken up shares in the two Rundle companies, Central Pacific Minerals NL and Southern Pacific Petroleum NL. I accordingly ask: Is the Prime Minister aware that, 24 hours after his denial, the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs confirmed that shares in one or both of these companies were held in trust for his children? Is he also aware of information that the family of another Minister in this Government traded in shares in one or both of these Rundle partners? Is he prepared categorically to deny this information too? Finally, will he now acknowledge that a public register which declares the pecuniary interests of Ministers and members of Parliament is the only way to reassure the public and dispel this sort of disquiet? Mr MALCOLM FRASER-We have had discussion on these matters. A report was prepared

1694 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

by Mr Justice Bowen and the Government has accepted that report in relation to Ministers. It has applied it in relation to Ministers and public servants. It is in the process of being applied in relation to the Parliament. At the appropriate stage there will be a full debate about the Bowen report. It is worth noting that the Bowen report, having very carefully gone into these matters, rejected the notion of a public register.
I have said on a number of occasions that it is very difficult to know where these things end. I am not speaking now of a particular case. Is it just a question of the member? Is it a question also of a member's family who can have ownership of certain things in his or her own right? When does a child become an adult and have a right to a private life of his or her own? There are many questions here which are questions of privacy for individuals, not all of whom are members of this Parliamen~ but who might be related to a member of this Parliament.
The Bowen report quite clearly went into all these matters in great depth. If the honourable gentleman wants to have a further debate on that report I think, subject to what my colleague who is handling this matter says, we will be able to expedite that more quickly to make sure that these matters can be fully debated.
In relation to the particular instances that the honourable gentleman mentioned, I still regard the original question that he raised as offensive and despicable. I regard the implications that he made in the question on this occasion as it refers to honourable members as despicable.
Mr Hayden-Well, your answer was despicable because it was not honest.
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition will remain silent.
Mr Hayden-He gives an incorrect answer and now he is trying to presume that he has never made a mistake.
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition will remain silent.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-What a person does before he is a Minister is his own affair and entirely his own right. It is how a person behaves as a Minister that is important in relation to these matters. My colleague the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs had indicated quite plainly on that day or the day after that what he or his family had done was entirely in accord with the principles of the Bowen report and with the rules that have been laid down. That has been known publicly for a considerable time.

Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. This answer is inconsistent with the'statement the Prime Minister made in this House on 9 April.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable Leader of the 'Opposition is debating the matter, he is not making a pOInt of order.
Mr Hayden-Either he'misled the Parliament then or he is misleading it now.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat.
Mr Hayden-Either his system does not work or he has covered over an important point.
Mr SPEAKER-OrderI The honourable gentleman will resume his seat.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable gentleman knows quite well that the declarations that Ministers need to make refer to their position at the time they become Ministers. If there is anything in their possession at the time they become Ministers they undertake forthwith to set in train processes to bring them within the guidelines. If there is any need for a Minister to do that, he does. For the honourable gentleman to make suggestions about the ownership of shares which might or might not have been held by a person before he became a Minister and needed to accept those obligations is a total irrelevancy, and the honourable gentleman knows it. I am also aware, and was aware, that some other Minister at some other point had, over a long period of years, owned shares but had divested himself of them long before this particular circumstance arose. Therefore, I was perfectly happy in my mind that the standards set had been maintained. The honourable gentleman would do much better to read the Bowen report and understand that Ministers are entitled to have some privacy for their familiesfor their wives and for their children.
Mr Hayden-The problem is that we have to accept your word, and we know how much value it has in the current market place. We can listen to the honourable member for Kooyong if we want to find out how good your word is.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Honourable members well know that the Leader of the Opposition was in a little trouble in Caucus this morning because he did not allow the honourable member for Wills to speak yesterday. The honourable member for Wills would have done so much better than the Leader of the Opposition. If the Leader of the Opposition wants some diversion from this morning's Caucus meeting, he has chosen a very poor vehicle by which to obtain it.

Questions Without Notice

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1695

GENERAL AVIATION STUDY
Mr EWEN CAMERON-Is the Minister for Transport aware of the concern being expressed by the general aviation industry about some of the recommendations made in the general aviation study he released on 13 March? Will the Government give the industry adequate time to provide an input before decisions are taken?
Mr HUNT-In 1978 the Government set up a study by the Department of Transport and the Bureau of Transport Economics into the general aviation industry and the level of cost recovery that should be obtained from that industry. That report has been made public and is currently in the hands of the general aviation industry. I am well aware of the concern being expressed by sections of the industry about the possible serious impact of those recommendations on the general aviation industry should they be implemented. At a meeting of the Aviation Industry Advisory Council recently I advised the industry that it should endeavour to make a report upon the study by 30 April. I have since had representations from most of the constituent organisations of the general aviation industry seeking an extension of time because they have not yet been able to make a formal response to those recommendations. I have decided that they should be given until at least 30 June to make a formal response to that study.
I would like also to give an assurance that the Government will not be taking any actions at all that will cause serious damage to the general aviation industry. It is a very important element of the civil aviation industry in this country. However, we have adopted the principle of cost recovery. We are applying it to international aviation and to domestic civil aviation. We are cost recovering to the extent of about 30 per cent in regional aviation. Currently the level of cost recovery in general aviation is of the order of 14 per cent. I recognise that there would be very serious problems if we endeavoured to recover the recommended amount. I am sure that the Government will take those considerations and observations of the industry into account before making a final decision on the study.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA: ANTI-TRUST ACTIONS
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-Is the Minister for Foreign Affairs aware that the Australian National Line, a company owned by the Australian Government, is one of four companies being sued in what is called the latest anti-trust actions instituted in the United States? Further, is

the Minister aware that for the first time the sovereignty of the Australian Government has been called squarely into question in a United States court? Accordingly, I ask: What protests has the Government made concerning the attempt by the Americans to impugn our sovereignty and to exercise jurisdiction over Australian companies for alleged offences which occurred outside the United States?
Mr STREET-The detailed carriage of this matter--- the extra-territoriality of United States legislation-is mainly in the hands of my colleague the Attorney-General. I am aware or the problem to which the honourable gentleman has alluded. We have made our concerns known to the United States Government. I will get from my colleague the precise terms in which that has been done and let the honourable member know.
POLITICAL PARTIES: FUNDING
Mr CARLTON-My question is to the Treasurer. I refer to the provisions for public funding of political parties being introduced this week by the New South Wales Government. Will this action affect the availability of Federal funds to the New South Wales Government?
Mr HOWARD- -As honourable members will be aware, some legislation which will provide access to the public purse for the Labor Government of New South Wales for its party political purposes has been introduced into the New South Wales Parliament this week. Whilst I do not believe it would necessarily establish a healthy precedent and therefore would not be something that the Government ought to entertain as a reason to make some adjustment to grants to the New South Wales Government because of the cost of that legislation, I think nonetheless the introduction of that legislation indicates the potential expenditure of several million dollars for blatantly party political purposes. Both the Liberal and National Country parties in New South Wales have declared their total opposition to that legislation and have indicated that they will not register as provided under the legislation and will thereby not receive the benefits of public funding of political campaigns provided for in that legislation. The legislation happens to be significant.
Mr Keating-l raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. If the Government bankrolled the New South Wales Liberal Party with half the Commonwealth Budget it could not beat Wran.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order.
Mr HOWARD-The legislation-this is a very interesting commentary on a party that professes to be concerned about privacy and the rights of

1696 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

the individual-is significantly more draconian than had been believed at the time the in-principle decision was announced. It involves the appointment of inspectors by a commission. Those inspectors will have the power to enter premises belonging to political parties and to inspect records. The inspection of those records will not be restricted to records of donations over and above the threshhold by which people are obliged--
Mr Keating-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. This has nothing to do with the Treasurer's portfolio. It is not relevant to the question. The Treasurer was asked whether the Government would adjust the reimbursements to New South Wales to compensate for expenditures under electoral legislation. The Treasurer is now using this as an opportunity to berate the New South Wales Government which won a mandate for this policy at the last election.

Mr Hayden-Does this mean that a Minister can say anything he wants to say in relation to questions he is asked?
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat.
Mr HOWARD-It is a very interesting commentary on the economic priorities of the New South Wales Government,that, notwithstanding a recent public opinion poll which showed that 75 per cent of the Australian community was opposed to the proposal, including 65 per cent of Australian Labor Party supporters, the New South Wales Government believes that there is sufficient economic priority and urgency to expend the amount of money from the public purse which is involved in this legislation. The whole concept of this legislation puts at risk not only the basic right of privacy involved in voluntary association in political parties--

Mr SPEAKER-I will rule on the point of Mr Holding-Mr Speaker, I take a point of

order. The Treasurer is relevant to the question. order. The Treasurer is consistently referring to

The question was in order and the answer is the funding of political parties. I refer you to your

relevant.

previous rulings when you have ruled out of order

Mr HOWARD-It is a very interesting commentary on the economic priorities of the New South Wales Government--
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I find it rather curious that the subject of New South Wales Government inspectors inspecting books of political parties is relevant to the functions of the Federal Treasurer in relation to adjustment of reimbursement grants. Would you be kind enough to explain how you developed this association?

any question from this side of the House directed to any Minister of the Crown relating to the funding of political parties. Does it follow from the ruling now given that it is improper for members on this side of the House to ask questions of Ministers in respect of political party funding but it is perfectly proper for the Treasurer, being a Minister from the Liberal Party, to enlarge as much as he likes on the whole question of political party funding? I ask for your ruling.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. If he cannot follow the logic

Mr SPEAKER-The Treasurer was asked of the ruling I cannot help him any further.

whether there would be a deduction from Commonwealth funds to New South Wales as a result of the expenditure by .New South Wales for the purposes mentioned. As I understand it, he is setting out those factors which may make an impact on the decision. His answer is relevant to the question.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, with respect, I do not see how the appointment of inspectors for State government responsibilities under State government law has anything at all to do with the Federal Treasurer in relation to the reimbursement of cash to the States. I ask you to develop the justification for your ruling.
Mr SPEAKER-I have given a ruling. The honourable gentleman will resume his seat.

Mr HOWARD-It ought to be understood that the privacy which is threatened by this legislation- -
Mr Holding-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. The difficulty I am having in following your ruling is that I am presuming that in the role of Speaker you attempt to be consistent. I am therefore asking you--
Mr SPEAKERThe honourable gentleman will resume his seat. He is not taking a point of order; he is arguing my ruling.
Mr HOWARD-It ought to be understood by this Housethat the people who are really at risk in terms of an invasion of their privacy are the hundreds of very small contributors to political parties.

Mr Hayden-It is frankly incredible.

Mr Young-Nonsense.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman Mr SPEAKER-The Treasurer should bring

will resume his seat. I call the Treasurer.

his answer to a conclusion.

Questions Without Notice

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1697

Mr HOWARD-It is not nonsense. The BilI that within the next two or three weeks, or at least

provides rights of inspection irrespective of the before the end of May, a decision will be handed

size of contribution involved. The Bill means that down by that Authority. When a decision is taken

Labor appointed inspectors in New South Wales by the United Kingdom Authority, then, of

can go into the offices of any political party to course, we will give consideration to any formal

look at any of its records. If the Opposition says application that Laker Airways might make to

that is an exercise in voluntary association in a engage in activities on the Kangaroo Route. We

free democracy then it has a strange definition of will do so in the course of the review of the inter-

values.

national civil aviation policy, the report on which

will be before the Government we hope well be-

SUPPORTING PARENT'S BENEFIT

fore the end of this year. Of course, an application

Mr LEO McLEAYIs the Minister representthat was approved by the United Kingdom

ing the Minister for Social Security aware that the authorities would be given very serious consider-

Family Law Act recognises for the purposes of ation by this Government at the appropriate time.

divorce that a marriage might have irretrievably

broken down even though the two parties remain

living under the same roof and that in the past the

HMS SAVINGS GRANT SCHEME

Department of Social Security had recognised this Mr UREN-In the absence of the Minister for

by paying supporting parent's benefit to eligible Housing and Construction, I direct my question to

people, usually women, in these circumstances? Is the Minister aware that in recent weeks a directive has been issued from Canberra curtailing these payments? Does the Minister realise that the effect of this directive will be that the supporting parent, usually the mother, will have no option but to turn herself, and in most instances

the Prime Minister. Has the attention of the Prime Minister been drawn to a recent statement by the Master Builders Association Housing Council which described the Federal Government's Homes Savings Grant Scheme as a farce? Is it a fact, as stated by the Association, that eligible first home buyers are experiencing a delay of

her children, out on to the street in order to be eligible for the benefit? Is the Minister aware that many women's refuges are threatened with closure due to the reduction of funding in that area? Is the Government, through the Social Services Act, attempting to apportion blame, contrary to the intention of the Family Law Act? What steps will the Minister take to have this draconian directive repealed and so restore to people the dig-

nine months before receiving payment under the scheme? Is it also a fact that lending institutions have a definite policy that the homes savings grant is not taken into account in assessing the financial status of a potential borrower? What action has the Government taken to overcome the nine months delay before payment is made under the home savings grant scheme?

nity which was intended by the Family Law Act?

Mr HUNT-The action that this Minister will take will be to refer all those questions to the Minister for Social Security and seek to obtain a detailed answer for the honourable member as soon as possible.

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-There is a delay of some months-I think the honourable gentleman is right in saying nine months-in relation to payments under the Homes Savings Grant Scheme. There are also delays, as the honourable gentleman would probably understand, in

LAKER AIRWAYS Mr DRUMMOND-The Minister for Transport would be aware that the British Government will shortly make a decision on the application of Laker Airways for rights into Australia. Has Laker Airways made similar approaches to the Australian Government? Should those rights be granted by the British authorities, when will the Australian Government review the Laker application?

payments in relation to war service home loans. Over the years the period has fluctuated to a greater or lesser extent under all governments. Obviously, if the resources were available-these arguments always get back to the capacity to provide dollars for a particular cause-it would be helpful for any scheme to be able to operate without that kind of delay. The financial priorities in every area have to be taken into account. The information available to the Government would indicate that the Homes Savings Grant Scheme, and

Mr HUNT-Before we can deal with any apparticularly the modifications to that scheme

plication by Laker Airways for services on the which flowed out of election policy where special

Kangaroo Route the British Civil Aviation Authadvantage was being taken of the family situation,

ority has to conclude its consideration of the aphave been a very significant help to a large

plication that has been made to it. I understand number of first home buyers.

1698 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr UreD-That is what they are complaining about. Because of the nine months delay it does not help them. It only pays for the furnishings.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I understand that the honourable gentleman has that point of view. The information available to the Government indicates that the program is widely supported and is of considerable benefit to many people building their first home. The honourable gentleman is entitled to his own judgment which can run counter to that. The Government believes that the scheme is a good one. It was modified as a result of the last election and it is working to assist many families into their first home.
DEREGISTRATION OF BUILDERS LABOURERS FEDERATION
Mr ROCHER-My question is directed to the Minister for Industrial Relations. Does the Government still intend to seek deregistration of the Builders Labourers Federation? If so, will the Minister inform the House what stage preparation of his case has reached?
Mr VINER-I thank the honourable gentleman for his question. I know he has a keen interest in this subject because of his past involvement in Western Australia in the building industry-and very successfully, I might say. I welcome this opportunity to reaffirm the Government's determination to proceed with the application for deregistration of the Builders Labourers Federation. I think honourable members are well aware that the decision which the Government has taken is a most serious one, but it is an appropriate course when we consider the history of this union and its industrial record since it was federally reregistered in 1976. I think that by any standards the community would be appalled at that kind of industrial record of a union which seeks registration under the Conciliation and Arbitration Act in order to obtain the benefits which that Act bestows upon it.
As soon as I took over the portfolio of Industrial Relations I obtained a briefing on where we stand in the preparation of the case. I have since had a more detailed briefing. I expect to be meeting with counsel engaged by the Commonwealth in Melbourne on Friday, when I will go through with them the voluminous evidence which has already been obtained. As the honourable member for Curtin is aware, we are dependent to a considerable degree on the assistance of those employers who have been hurt and damaged by the industrial action of the BLF. Notably, we are obtaining the assistance of the Master Builders

Federation. I had intended to meet with representatives of the Federation tomorrow; but unfortunately, because of the airline strike, that will not be possible. I have been assured by the Federation that it is as anxious as the Government to gather the evidence together and put it before the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission.
In many respects it is a mammoth task. A great deal of detailed evidence has to be analysed, recorded and then put into proper legal form by way of affidavit. I cannot say that the application will be made within the next week or so, but I can assure the House that I will be proceeding with this application as expeditiously as I can and with the utmost seriousness. I conclude by mentioning that the Prime Minister in the last day or so has written to all Premiers seeking their support in seeing that this union is properly isolated in the industrial movement of Australia in the event that it is deregistered.
REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Parliamentary Library Mr SPEAKER-I understand that the honourable member for Burke intends to lodge a request for detailed information in relation to the administration of a parliamentary department.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke)-I seek information in relation to the operation of the Department of the Parliamentary Library.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will give his request in writing to the Clerk. If it is in order it will be included in Hansard and, in due course, I will supply a reply which also will be printed in Hansard.
WATER RESOURCES Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)-Pursuant to section 6 of the National Water Resources (Financial Assistance) Act 1978 I present copies of relevant documents concerning financial assistance to New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Western Australia in respect of projects in conjunction with the development and management of water resources during 1980-81.
URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)-Pursuant to section 8 of the Urban and Regional Development (Financial

Agreement with Mexico

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1699

Assistance) Act 1974 I present an agreement between the Commonwealth of Australia and Tasmania in relation to the provision for financial assistance for Legana Pilot Industrial Estate 1980-81.
MILK AUTHORITY ORDINANCE
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-Pursuant to section 21H of the Milk Authority Ordinance 1971 I present the Milk Authority of the Australian Capital Territory annual report for 1979-80.
SCIENCE AND INDUSTRY RESEARCH
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Techn010gy)-Pursuant to section 57 of the Science and Industry Research Act 1949 I present the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation annual report for 1979-80.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Mr GILES (Wakefield)-Mr Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr GILES-I do. My personal explanation refers to a report in this morning's Australian which quotes my views on the speech made yesterday by the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock). I want to make it perfectly plain, as a matter of personal honour, that I spoke to neither Mr Russell Schneider nor any other member of the Press after the speech made by the honourable member for Kooyong. I therefore made no such statement. If the remark were construed as referring to yesterday's debates, that might be another matter.

Mexican Embassy approached the Department of Foreign Affairs in 1979 to raise the question of a formal science and technology agreement between our countries. With discussions under way, Mexico further demonstrated its interest in the possibility by sending a science delegation to Australia in May 1980, visiting various research establishments in several States. The delegation included a number of high level Mexican scientists, and the visit generated strong interest in and support for closer links with Mexico from the Australian scientific community. The visit was followed up in November 1980 when a member of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation executive visited Mexico to examine areas of mutual scientific interest for exchanges of scientists and for setting up cooperative research programs.
The Australian Government has now agreed in principle to enter into a formal science and technology agreement with Mexico; discussions on the text and substance of the agreement are now in progress. Areas of co-operation can be expected to include solar energy research, agricultural and animal husbandry studies, dry land farming, work in arid zones, marine research and industrial science. It is planned that as the level of co-operation grows between Australia and Mexico, the basic agreement will be supplemented by a series of specialist protocols between co-operating agencies, and these will serve further to strengthen and expand the developing bilateral relationship. The Australian Government welcomes the forthcoming science agreement, the first and so far only bilateral agreement to be concluded between Australia and Mexico, as an indication of the importance attached to closer relationships between the countries.

AGREEMENT WITH MEXICO ON CO-OPERATION IN SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY
Ministerial Statement
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs)-by leave-The governments of Australia and Mexico have agreed in principle to enter into an agreement on co-operation in science and technology. The possibility of concluding a science and technology agreement with Mexico has been under active consideration since late 1979. Before then Australia and Mexico had encouraged contacts at individual scientist and inter-agency levels with the aim of promoting and fostering ad hoc bilateral relationships between the scientists of the two countries.
In recognition of the trend towards closer cooperation between Australia and Mexico, the

Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) -by leave-The Opposition welcomes the announcement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) of the arrangement to enter into an agreement with Mexico on co-operation in science and technology. We note that the matter has been under consideration for more than a year, and accordingly we expect that a detailed agreement could be ready for signature in the not too distant future. I add that the Australian Labor Party pioneered a most active policy of relations between Australia and the Latin American states when it was in office. Those initiatives were based on our realisation of the growing importance of the whole region which stretches south from the United States of America to Cape Horn. In that large area of the world, the nation which has grown faster economically and emerged on to the world scene more rapidly than any other is

1700 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Monetary Policy

Mexico. Mexico is now the fifth largest oil producer in the world and has the sixth largest oil reserves in the world. Like Australia, Mexico is a major energy producer.
Similarly like Australia, Mexico has large areas of tropical and desert regions. It has a population of 70 million, which population is growing rapidly. It currently has an impressive annual economic growth rate of about 8 per cent. Its foreign trade runs into billions of dollars a year. But in that context the two-way trade between Australia and Mexico was only $40m. Clearly there are great economic opportunities in the AustraliaMexico relationship. It is to be hoped that the science and technology co-operation flowing from the proposed agreement will be followed by other bilateral agreements to expand and strengthen relations between Australia and Mexico. Australia has special knowledge in a variety of fields. It could be of benefit to Mexico. There will be many benefits, not the least of which would be solar energy research, arid zone agriculture, the livestock industry and industrial science.
We note with pleasure that Mexican technicians and students are already studying in Canberra, Brisbane and Adelaide in fields such as agriculture, livestock, dairy production, dry farming techniques, astronomy, economics and mathematics. We also note that the Mexican's are interested in upgrading their sheep breeding facilities. Australia could certainly assist in that regard.
We welcome the agreement. We note that there should be opportunities to do more. We hope, for example, that the Minister for Foreign Affairs will instruct his officials to investigate the possibility of establishing a bilateral cultural agreement if he has not already done so. The Labor Party believes that science and technology agreements and cultural exchange arrangements are some of the most effective, if perhaps unspectacular, ways of strengthening the fabric of international co-operation. We urge the Government to be most active in these fields. In conclusion, we welcome the agreement. We wish Australian and Mexican scientists and technologists success in their future co-operation.
MONETARY POLICY Discussion of Matter of Public Importance Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilJar)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The developing credit squeeze resulting from the Government's doctrinaire monetary policy.

I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (3.17)-For some time now interest rates in this country have been at record high levels, the highest in our history. This, in itself, is disturbing enough. But it is tremendously disturbing that in addition, instead of signs that interest rates will fall in the near future, there are instead more and more indicators that the general level of interest rates will rise further in the near future. Indeed, reports of particular interest rate rises occur almost daily. It is increasingly clear that such rises are attributable to the Government's attempt to impose a restrictive monetary policy on the nation. Indeed, for those borrowers without substantial economic power-that is, low and middle income earners, home buyers, small businessmen and consumers-a credit squeeze is very much in place. The imposition of that credit squeeze is not attributable simply to the operation of market forces and therefore beyond Government control. Rather, it is very much the result of this Government's monetarist policies and its associated foreign investment policies.
The evidence of increasing interest rates is undoubted. Over the last year bank home mortgage rates have risen by 2 per cent. Bank interest rates for small overdrafts-that is, for amounts less than $100,000--have risen by about 2.5 per cent to three per cent. Bank overdraft rates for large overdrafts over $100,000 which are not controlled by the Government have risen substantially and are still rising. The prime rate for borrowings by major corporations is up to 15 per cent and may well go further as the seasonal liquidity squeeze accentuates. Building societies and finance companies have also generally matched, if not bettered, the increase in bank interest rates. The prospect of a further rise in home mortgage rates charged by the banks and building societies is indicated by the fact that since the rise of one per cent in the bank mortgage rate last December there have been various further developments.
Bank deposit rates have increased substantially after being decontrolled by the Government in December of last year. Building society deposit rates have tended to rise as a consequence. The rise in the Australian savings bonds rate of 0.75 per cent a month ago has increased the competition for funds. Banks are now in the position where they can lend to a prime corporate borrower at 15 per cent but can charge 'only' 11.5 per

Monetary Policy

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1701

cent for a home mortgage loan. The pressure from banks for a further rise in the mortgage rate is therefore very substantial. There is, accordingly, increasing expectation of such a rise. Indeed, only yesterday a major economic commentator in Australia, Mr Allan Carroll, speaking at the housing industry conference, forecast a further rise of between a half and three-quarters of a per cent in mortgage interest rates later this year.
The impact of increasing interest rates on home buyers in the building industry is substantial. The effect on home buyers is to put lower income earners out of the market. Even the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) got round to acknowledging that fact yesterday in a speech which was read for him at the Housing Industry Association Conference in Sydney. The Housing Industry Association has calculated that 4,000 potential home buyers are put out of the market for every 0.5 per cent rise in interest rates. So the 2 per cent rise in the bank mortgage rate which has occurred over the last year means that 16,000 potential buyers per annum have been put out of the market so far. This, of course, is because the level of repayments has been increased so substantially by the increase in interest rates. On a typical $30,000 loan over 25 years, monthly payments have increased by $43 so far-that is, over the last 12 months with the 2 per cent rise in
interest rates.
Each 0.5 per cent rise in interest rate adds $11 a month to the monthly repayments on a $30,000 loan over that period. So with such substantial increases in repayments, many workers are simply unable to buy a home or maintain payments on a home. 1 am sure that members of parliament have by now received protests from people who have been put in the position where they feel they have to sell their home because of the increase in interest rates that has occurred and their total inability to meet the repayments which have been increased as a consequence. Thus inevitably the number of home loans has already begun to fall. The total number of loans by building societies in February of this year was 36 per cent less than in February of last year. Total lending for home purchasers from all sources was 7.2 per cent less in February of this year than in February of last year. It is clear, therefore, that interest rate rises are having a substantial impact already and any further round of mortgage rate rises will do great damage to the building industry and to the prospects of the average Australian being able to buy a home.
A further development of importance-of course this is a closely associated development-is the slowing in the rate of growth of the money

supply. Since the election in October last year the Government has undoubtedly set about intensifying or applying a monetary squeeze to slow the growth of the money supply considerably. It was therefore found that over the three months to February of this year the seasonally adjusted annual rate of growth of Ml, one of the measures of the money supply, was in fact negative. It grew at a rate of minus 6 per cent. In other words, there was a substantial decline in the actual level of money supply as measured by Ml. In March the rate of growth increased, but that was not because the Government wanted that increase; rather it was because of a large capital inflow in that month which added substantially to the money supply. Even so, for the three months to the end of March the seasonally adjusted annual rate of growth of Ml was still negative at minus 1 per cent and M3 growth, which is another measure of money supply, was only 9 per cent which is anything but rapid growth. Thus, the money supply figures show that the volume of money in the community has been severely restricted in recent months, thus making it more difficult to obtain credit. This creates increased pressure for interest rates and also denies credit to many who would like to obtain it.
The reasons for these developments are principally centred on the Government's policy. It is not something which is attributable to the mystical workings of the market, but it centres directly on the Government's monetary policy and capital inflow policy. The Government has pursued a monetary policy for this year which aims at the rate of growth of money supply being kept in the range of 9 per cent to 11 per cent. It has also pursued, as part of its monetary policy, a process of deregulating interest rates-that is, taking away the regulations which apply to bank interest rates in respect of deposit rates so far. Of course, that occurred last December. In addition, the Government's capital inflow policy has been to encourage unlimited inflow or foreign capital to finance resource development in this country.
The Government has been successful in encouraging a very large increase in private capital inflow. In the nine months to March last year the amount of net private capital inflow was $660m. In the nine months to March 1981 that figure went up to $3,943m. That is a tremendous increase which has implications for the rate of growth of the money supply. It tends to add to the money supply. I say 'tends' because it is otTset to some extent by the balance of payments current account deficit, which has been substantial this year. Therefore, the full impact of that capital inflow has not fed directly into the money supply

1702 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Monetary Policy

because it has been whittled away by that currl'nt Minister for Industry and Commerce acknowled-

account deficit. Had there been current account ged that fact yesterday. A speech that was read

stability and no deficit we would have had a fanfor him at the Housing Industry Association Con-

tastic increase in our money supply through priference in Sydney, stated:

vate capital inflow and that would have had tremendous consequences for monetary policy in

However, the resource development program could bring in its wake additional problems for your industry.

this country. Already it has had significant consequences but they would have been much more

That is, the housing industry. It continued:

horrendous but for that deficit in our balance of In particular, there could be'a substantial increase in com-

payments current account.
The reason for that private capital inflow having such a significant impact is that not only do we have that feeding into the money supply but also it is in the context of the Government maintaining a set monetary target. The Government says we can have the volume of money increasing by only 9 per cent to 11 per cent and even if we have a large increase in money coming

petition for private capital funds and skilled labour as well as the growing demand for public funding of infrastructure.
There the Minister for Industry and Commerce is acknowledging that the funding of this large capital inflow for resource development is taking away the possibility of funds being available for the housing industry, thus providing problems in that area. Of course, this is a tremendously important development.

from overseas we will still have only a 9 per cent to 11 per cent increase. That means we must chop back on the amount of credit which is developed domestically. We then have to apply more intense pressures on banks to limit their lending and we brought about a situation in which interest rate increases are far more likely to occur. The cutback in bank lending and the increases in interest rates are not at all surprising; they are directly attributable to Government policy.

We must also bear in mind that the Government's policy in respect of applying tight monetary targets is based on a belief about the working nature of monetarism which simply is not upheld by the experience of countries which have applied it or, for that matter, by economic theory. No country which has applied the Friedmanite policies this Government is increasingly adopting has been able to point to dramatic economic success as a result. Certainly they have not been able to

The money supply targets which I mentioned of point to a reduction of inflation to the normal

9 per cent to 11 per cent are very tight; that is, levels of the 1950s and 1960s and the restoration

they are tight in the context of the inflation rate of full employment. There is nothing of that kind

and the expected or desired level of economic at all. In fact, the situation is quite the contrary in

growth in this country. At present the inflation countries such as the United Kingdom which have

rate, as measured by the consumer price index, is pursued those policies even more single-mindedly

9+ per cent but the inflation rate, as measured by than the Fraser Government. There we see a dra-

the implicit price deflator of gross domestic prodmatic effect, a disastrous impact, on the economy

uct, is running at 11 t per cent. The Prime Minwith large increases in unemployment and only

ister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has said in the past small compensating reductions in inflation. In

that the implicit price deflator is a more appropriAustralia the Fraser Government also has pur-

ate measure of inflation, and that in looking at the sued this largely monetarist policy since it has

underlying rate of inflation we should use this imbeen in office. But inflation is still running at near

plicit price deflator for the total amount of goods double digit figures and we still have unemployed

and services in this country rather than just conhalf a million people.

sumer expenditure. By that measure, inflation is running at 11+ per cent. So, inflation for the economy as a whole seems to be well into double digit figures. In that situation, to be operating a monetary target of 9 per cent to 11 per cent and insisting on achieving it, as the Government appears intent on doing, certainly is restrictive indeed because it leaves little or no room for the financing of economic growth.

How are we to say that these monetarist policies will work? They simply have not worked anywhere and they will not work in the future. To adhere to them in the rigid and doctrinaire way which this Government is increasingly tending to do means that all we will do is bring about spiralling interest rates, restrictions on the rate of possible economic growth and higher unemployment. The Government, by deregulating bank interest

The maintenance of such a tight money supply rates also as part of its Friedmanite policies, has

target, in the context of a high capital inflow this brought about a further impetus to increased

year, means that the prospects for economic acinterest rates. The deregulation of bank deposit

tivity in certain areas of the economy are not very rates frees the banks to go out in the market and

good at all. One of those areas is housing. The offer higher deposit rates and therefore to spur the

Monetary Policy

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1703

building societies and the finance companies to.increase their deposit rates. They are all competmg for funds. Therefore, a competitive spiral of interest rate increases has developed because of this deregulation of bank deposit rates. All of
those factors have been important.
I note here that if, after the Campbell Commission of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System reports, the Government decides to deregulate bank lending rates, we must expect a very substantial rise indeed to occur in home mortgage rates. If we have deregulation of bank mortgage rates at the same time as bank mortgage rates are way below the rates being charged in the unreg!llated area, then we must expect as a conse quence the banks to take action to increase those mortgage rates considerably. The Government's inadequacy in this area is enormous. Its response to this whole area has simply been to say that the situation is regrettable, that it is concerned, but to claim that no alternative policies are available. Tme prevents me from spelling out detailed alternatives at this stage. Let me say that the pol icy response of saying that what we have to do is to cut back in the public sector to overcome this interest rate pressure is an absurdity, which I hope I will have more time to expound on at some future date. Let me simply say that there is no evidence whatever that increased public sector activity is causing higher interest rates at this time.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)
Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr SAINSBURY (Eden-Monaro) (3.32)-I
agree with the last point made by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis): There is not necessarily a correlation between an increased public sector and interest rates. But this does de pend, as I will no doubt hear the honourable
member for Gellibrand say when he eventually expands on this matter, on the way in which the Government will raise its money. There was quite a lot in the speech of the honourable member who just preceded me in the debate that is worthy of comment. He has made a speech which belies the general attitude of the Australian Labor Party in that he appears to be responsibly looking for sol utions which would enable more money to be available for people for investment and for the development of Australia. If that is really what he wants then that is also what I want. We want to
have enough money around to accommodate the growth that is very strong in this society at the present time. I am not running away from that.
Almost at the end of his speech the honourable
member talked about what he calls Friedmanism.

Of course, we saw Professor Friedman in this country in the past two or three weeks and we lis tened to some of his theories. We are fairly well aware of what they are. Certainly, one of the things that he has said-the honourable member for Gellibrand seems to disagree with this-is that there is a correlation after some time lag between an increase in the money supply and inflation. If there is one thing that has been proved in this country-I think it has recently been proved also in the United Kingdom, despite what the honour able member for Gellibrand has said-it is that there is after a time lag an increase in inflation following an increase in the money supply. I do not propose to go into the mechanisms that bring that about. The mechanisms are documented. What ever they are, the process works. Maybe the honourable member for Gellibrand at some time in the future will be able to show us graphs which demonstrate that on some occasions it does not work. The fact is that it does work. The bitter fact of experience in this country is the prime reason the Government is very keen to see that the money supply does not blow out too far.
We do not want to accommodate rising inflation for all the very good reasons that on so many occasions this Government has enunciated. We see inflation as being a very destructive factor in our economy if it is allowed to run rampant. We saw what happened in the early 1970s when it was allowed to run rampant. I use the word 'allowed' advisedly. We saw inflation creating havoc in this economy, not just because of the way in which it reduced the levels of savings of old people who had put some money away but because of the very reduction in confidence and investment that it brought about. People frankly found that they needed more money every month to invest in pro ductive enterprises for the future production of this country. As I said, inflation is a chaotic indi cator to which we must address ourselves. It is the very first thing that we must get rid of. If we do not, we will never succeed in having the sort of good growth in the economy that we are sustain ing at the present time.
Of course, if one were cynical one would say that the Labor Party wants a higher money supply in order to sustain higher wages. Whilst I do not have any worry about higher wages I say that what we really need is higher wages as a reward for higher productivity. I am not referring just to the wages of wage and salary earners; I am talking about the wages that flow from profits. Surely, that is what we are looking for. Higher wages just in money terms are, in fact, counter-productive. Again, in accordance with those points that I made about inflation they just slow down the

1704 REPRESENTATlVES 29 April 1981

Monetary Policy

economy in the long run, leaving more people worse off, in particular through increased unemployment. Again, that is experience; that is not something that we are theorising about. It is an experience that we in this country can look back on over many years. We can look at the numbers, look at what has happened and look at correlations.

growth going right across the country. It is our policies that are ensuring that that is happening at the present time. The Australian Labor Party has an identifiable policy. Despite the fact that the honourable member for Gellibrand raised this matter today and appeared to want an increase in the money supply for the good of the people, I really do not think that he does.

J just wonder in any case whether the Labor Party is really interested in an increase in the money supply, despite what the honourable member for Gellibrand has said, for the purpose of allowing people to borrow. After all, it is the Labor Party, or certainly a very big section of the Opposition, which deplores profits, deplores people making profits, deplores companies increasing profits. After all, profits are in general use in this country for further investment and the creation of employment. The Labor Party has this great political hang-up in this area. I suppose it arises from the very roots of the party when there was a genuine confrontation between the haves and the have-nots. That situation does not apply any more as one learns when one visits countries such as Japan and Germany.

Admittedly, under our Government the money supply has been relatively tight recently, and the figures show that. It is a seasonal occurrence which we expect every year; there is always a rundown in liquidity. It happened last year, the year before and the year before that. It has happened in most years. Of course things were much more bumpy under the Labor Government. In 1973 the money supply expanded by 26 per cent, whereas in 1974 there was a terrible credit squeeze. Thank heavens, under the present Government we are managing to keep the money supply on a much
more even keel so that people can make decisions with a bit more confidence. But I agree that at the present time there are conditions in the economy
which, if not managed carefully by a responsible administration, could cause problems.

People who work for companies in free societies, first of all, have the choice to get out of that situation and start their own businesses. That is what traditionally has happened in many cases in Australia. Secondly, people ought to understand that if the company for which they are working is making a profit they in turn benefit. They benefit through better job opportunities and through better real wages. It is this productive capacity of the country in which the Liberal Party and the Country Party are so interested. The attitude of the Labor Party seems to differ from ours as has been shown by the actions it has taken. Really the record of the Labour Party just demonstrates that it has in the past-it was in power for three years-discouraged investment. It has not had the feeling that it is good for people to save, that it is good for people to make profits so that investments can be made. That lack of investment in the early 1970s really was one of the very major factors in slowing down this economy.
Thankfully private investment is up very strongly at the present time. In the December quarter last year, for instance-I just cite a statistic-expenditure on non-dwelling construction was 36.5 per cent higher than a year ago and expenditure on other plant and equipment was 17.8 per cent higher. That increase is much higher than the rate of inflation. That is the sort of productive capacity through investment that this Government is looking for. What we are really interested in is full employment with strong

The run-down is accentuated a bit this year because of much higher levels of company taxes and provisional taxes than we expected. Basically that means that that amount of money will go out of the banking area and into the Government's coffers. The Government will be running a very strong surplus, as it has traditionally in this quarter. In that respect, money is being sucked out of the system and into the Government's
coffers.
Against that, there are two or three ameliorating circumstances. First of all, even though provisional and company tax levels have risen strongly this year because of better profits made last year, as of today only about half of what we think will be coming in has been paid across. About $2 billion has been collected and about another $2 billion is to come in. So at least some of it is there. Also, the major trading banks are running at a seasonally high liquid and government securities asset ratio of about 22 per cent, so they have three or four per cent that they can run down under the normal arrangements and that will be available. In addition to that, the private sector overall is fairly well prepared for the June quarter tax payments because in the next four months about $4.5 billion in Treasury notes and Government bonds will mature. That will make some funds available-again on a seasonal basis-- that are not available as of today. We think that, although the money supply will be fairly tight
within these constraints on money supply of a

Monetary Policy

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1705

growth rate between 9 per cent and 11 per cent for the full financial year, there will not be undue strain on the system. Nevertheless, I reiterate that the Government is concerned, as it should be concerned, to ensure that, whilst keeping the ~oney supply tight for the reasons that I mentIOned earlier, enough money is available for people to make reasonable demands for growth.
As I believe I said earlier also, what we are trying to do is to accommodate the strong growth in production in Australia. The latest figures indicate that non-farm product may be rising at a rate of over 4 per cent, which in historical terms is really very good-it is certainly the best figure for quite a long time. We need to accommodate that, but we want to remember that we have to bear down on the inflation problem. The inflation rate is probably under 10 per cent although as the honourable member for Gellibrand just said, the level of the implicit price deflator appears to be a bit higher than that, so perhaps 10 per cent is a bit lower than the true situation. Whatever the true situation is, it is a fact that this Government wants to keep bearing down on inflation. It is something we cannot tolerate, nor do I believe any other party should tolerate it. Of course, the history of the Labor Party indicates that it was quite happy to have rampant inflation.
The honourable member for Gellibrand mentioned the interest rate rise as something which perhaps should not have been allowed to occur. He appears to fear that we may be approaching-I must say I hope we do-a situation in which interest rates are basically deregulated. He fears that because he sees a deregulated interest rate structure necessarily pushing up interest rates. I think he sees banks or anybody else lending money as greedy and having some power over the market. He sees the effects of deregulation leading to higher repayments for people borrowing money. Again, we all agree that we do not want people to have to pay any more than necessary to borrow money, perhaps especially the people purchasing houses, who are committed long term, who usually have limited resource bases-in other words, normally one or two salaries or wages are earned in a family.
We understand quite well that a one or two per cent increase in housing loans interest rates is absorbed with great difficulty by the private sector, but what we do not want to run away from is that when interest rates were increased we were in a situation in which the small fellow, the battler, who was seeking to borrow money through the bank simply could not get any money. The banks were in a situation in which, because of the price

they had to pay for money outside, or the encouragements they had to give people to leave money with them, they could not find money for the small borrower. They were being forced into the higher interest rates area of the banking system of offering loans of over $100,000, or into channelling money through their finance companies so that they could obtain an even higher rate of interest. The sooner we realise in Australia that we should free interest rates, that we should allow interest rates to meet a market level, the better off we will be all round. When one holds out against a change that is obviously necessary it is particularly difficult when it does occur.
One thing that we could do to lower interest rates would be to let the mO'1ey supply blow right out. It is a matter of balance. What should we do? Should we bring interest rates down now by suddenly increasing the money supply and making it far more available, perhaps by printing money, or should we adopt a more responsible approach? Should we say: 'Let's keep bearing down on inflation; let's worry about people's investments; let's worry about jobs in the long term and let's worry about the overall growth of Australia'? It is that latter option that the Government chooses. That is why money is not completely freely available. Bearing that in mind, I reiterate that the Government is keeping a very close eye on the situation. We are in roughly the same situation with respect to borrowing as we were in last year. I could talk about quite a number of other things in relation to who is getting the money and who is not. But, basically, we do not see that there will be undue strain in the system in the weeks ahead, towards the end of June. Of course, that is what is to be expected under responsible management.
Mr ARMITAGE (Chifley) (3.47)-The House is discussing this matter of public importance:
The developing credit squeeze resulting from the Government's doctrinaire monetary policy.
In other words, we are discussing the extreme monetarist policies of Milton friedman, of which the best examples in the world today are the policies of the Thatcher Government in the United Kingdom and the Fraser Government here in Australia. Of course, the Treasurer (Mr Howard) would have known that one of the major issues to be discussed in this matter of public importance would be interest rates, the fact that interest rates in Australia today stand at the highest level ever in the history of this country. Yet, on this very important economic policy issue, the Treasurer has abdicated his authority. He has slunk out of the

1706 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Monetary Policy

House and has left the whole issue to a backannounced in 1977, was to reduce interest rates.

bencher, the honourable member for EdenNo wonder people no longer consider it worth

Monaro (Mr Sainsbury), to protect his back. accepting the word of this Government. It is a

That is a most extraordinary situation. In other government wracked by internal dissension, as

words, the Treasurer is not prepared to come into evidenced yesterday. The words of the Govern-

this Parliament and back up his own policies, the ment cannot be relied on, particularly when they

extreme monetarist policies of Milton Friedman. are enunciated by the Prime Minister. Nobody

As I have said, the issue is the developing credit takes his word any longer.-

squeeze. The fact is-the public. realises this, or is The Government deregulated interest rateS on

beginning to realise it-that this squeeze will be-. deposits. I sat in the chamber when the Treasurer

come more and more extreme as time goes by. For 'made that announcement. He stated that the

example, by 30 June when all' 'of the large Government would depend upon the banks' using

companies start drawing upon the banks to pay their new found power responsibly. If they did not

their tax bills the supply of money will be very use it responsibly interest rates would again be

tight indeed. This will have a tremendous effect regulated. However, the chase is on to get de-

and will create great hardship for the ordinary posits. Added to that, interest rates charged by

people, the small people, the home owners and banks are being steadily increased. As I said be-

the prospective home owners of this country. This fore, there is great pressure to increase them

credit squeeze is widened by interest rate rises, defurther. It is not that the Government does not

clining building society and bank loans for houshave the power to regulate deposit and lending

ing and the continuing contraction of the money rates. It has those powers under the regulations

supply over the last three months, Ml being the contained in the banking Act. Furthermore, it

most sensitive indicator. The latest figures which also has the power under the Financial Corpor-

have just been released show an increase. But that ations Act to regulate the interest rates of non-

increase was purely because of a tremendous banking institutions such as building societies and

inflow of overseas capital to this country in the merchant banks. The legislation was introduced

last month. The position for the general public and passed in the Parliament by the previous

and the economy is all the worse.

Labor Government. This Government has flatly

Let us look at the interest rates issue. We refused to promulgate that legislation and to use

should keep in mind that the Government promised in 1977 to reduce interest rates by 2 per

the instruments it has to protect the public against the excessive, all-time high interest rates.

cent. That is why the Treasurer is not in the Loans from building societies and overdrafts House to answer for his own policies today. At a are declining. As evidence of this credit squeeze,

time when the interest rate on bank overdrafts of special reserve deposits were increased by one per under $100,000 and home loans stood at 10.5 per cent from 5 per cent to 6 per cent from 6 January

cent the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in 1981. I am referring to the funds called up from

his election policy speech undertook to reduce the trading banks by the Reserve Bank of

interest rates by 2 per cent. In other words, he said Australia and held in trust by the Reserve Bank,

that the interest rate on bank overdrafts under thus removing finance from within the system. At

$100,000 would be reduced to 8.5 per cent. What the same time, the Government has increased the

is it today? It is 12.5 per cent. Far from reducing interest rate on Australian savings bonds from ap-

interest rates by 2 per cent, the Government has proximately 10 per cent to 12t per cent. Once done exactly the opposite; it has increased them again, this is drawing more finance from the econ-

by 2 per cent. Before the last election the interest omy. I have already said that liquidity will be

rate on overdrafts over $100,000 was 12 per cent tightened further in June when companies utilise to 12.5 per cent. It has now increased to 15 per overdrafts for tax payments. A very good example

cent.

of the hardship that this will create is the follow-

The Government deliberately carried out a poling statement:

icy of allowing the money supply to blowout A 1% rise in mortgage rates would mean an extra $5.50 a

prior to the election purely for electoral advanweek or $22 a month in repayments for a person with a tage. It is now applying the squeeze in the most $30,000 loan over 25 years.

harsh way which must create a great deal of hardI am speaking of housing loans. A $30,000 housing

ship. Building society interest rates have increased loan today is not large. It is comparative chicken

byone per cent and the pressure is on for them to feed, particularly when one considers the cost of

be increased further, just as the pressure is on for housing in Sydney. The total repayment over the

overdraft rates to be dramatically increased. I say life of the loan would rise by almost $7,000. In ad-

once again that the Government's own policy, as dition, about 8,000 hopeful new home owners will

Monetary Policy

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1707

be priced out of the market by this Government's high interest rate policies and by its deliberate credit squeeze restricting the amount of funds available for home mortgages.
In the last year interest rates on home loans have increased three times. They are now 2 per cent above their level in March last year. This has meant an extra $43 a month or $10.70 a week in repayments by home buyers with very modest loans of $30,000 over 25 years. These are the issues which we are bringing to the House today. It is extraordinary that on these important issues, the interest rates being charged today which are the highest in the history of the country and the draconian credit squeeze dictated by the policies of Milton Friedman which are followed by this Government, the Treasurer has completely abdicated all responsibility. He has refused to come in to the chamber to answer very important charges about the hardship that he is causing through the policies that he has introduced. He has let a minor backbencher protect him.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr CARLTON (Mackellar) (3.58)-It is always interesting to hear the honourable member for Chifley (Mr Armitage) working himself into a lather over economic matters. He criticised my good friend the honourable member for Eden Monaro (Mr Sainsbury) for leading for the Government in the debate. The closest the honourable member for Chifley has ever got to an economic argument is the name of his electorate. I think that the former Labor Treasurer and Prime Minister, Mr Chifley, would turn over in his grave if he heard the extraordinary potpourri of ideas and issues that has been put before the House this afternoon by the honourable member for Chifley. The Labor Party is engaging in its annual seasonal charges about interest rates and the tightness of credit. Opposition members say that the big credit squeeze is coming. The last big credit squeeze occurred in 1974 when the honourable member for Chifley and his friends were in office. It was an enormous credit squeeze. It put many people out of business and caused the biggest lift in unemployment the country has seen since the Depression. It followed an expansion of the money supply in 1973 in a manner which was totally auncontrolled and which led inexorably and inevitably to an increase in inflation and unemployment.

Currently the situation is well under control despite an alarmist headline in the Australian Financial Review yesterday which stated 'Government losing the money battle'. If that headline were anywhere near true it would make a total nonsense of the suggestion in the matter of public importance that the Labor Party has put up today. The article in the Australian Financial Review accuses the Government of moving in precisely the opposite direction by increasing the money supply far too quickly. The honourable member for Gellibrand and the honourable member for Chifley say that we are squeezing credit and we are squeezing the money supply in a doctrinaire manner allegedly dictated by Professor Friedman. The Government's policy on money supply has been quite consistent over the last five years. There has not been a credit squeeze since the 1974 credit squeeze of ill-fated memory. It is absolute rubbish to say, as the honourable member for Gellibrand said, that everybody is about to fail to get a loan. Last week, in the property section of the Sydney Morning Herald the Property Editor, Mr John Rich, said:
However, a spokesman for the Australian Bankers Association said that it was not true to say that money was tight.
Australian banks had loaned $359m to owner-occupiers of houses in February compared with $328m in February 1980. This $39m extra had more than offset the $16m decline in home loans by building societies during the month.
What did the building societies say? The article continues:
A spokesman for the NSW Permanent Building Society said there was no doubt that less finance was available from societies because of the drain on their deposits as users fulfilled tax commitments.
This was seasonal. All the indications were that it would soon be easier to obtain money.
Every schoolboy knows that at this time of year businesses have to pay large amounts of money in tax. They go to their bankers and they say: 'We want to use up some of our overdraft because we have a big tax bill'. Obviously that puts a bit of a squeeze on the borrowing system. Many borrowers always find it harder at this time of year to get money, to get their overdrafts extended. That is as it should be because other borrowers are coming in ~easonally and it is necessary to try to maintain an even control over the flow of money. This Government could take the advice of the Opposition and panic at this stage as the. Labor Government panicked in 1973. We could let a,lot more money out to meet this seasonal demand. If we did this we would be doing it at the same time as there is a big union campaign to get wage increases much higher than productivity increases. Our friends the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union and others are pushing for a

1708 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Monetary Policy

35-hour week across the whole of industry. If A point made even today by the honourable

there were an expansion of the money supply at member for Gel1ibrand was that we have this un-

this time it would be totally irresponsible. It conscionable, extraordinarily and unnecessarily

would mean that that extra money would not be going into real development and real new projects for new job creating activities but it would go into excessive increases in wages-which occurred in 1973; it has all happened before-which would result in higher prices and inflation and we would be back in the same sort of trouble that we were in before.

large inflow of foreign capital. It is the old story of hate the foreigner. If there were not an inflow of foreign capital to assist us with our development does the Opposition think we would have as much money as we now have for housing projects? Where would the money come from? The Government has quite sensible controls over foreign investment. There are rules as to how

The whole business of controlling the money supply is not a doctrinaire matter; it is a matter of practical experience where we have to keep judging it carefully all the time. In the last Budget the Treasurer (Mr Howard) set down a target for the increase of money supply in Australia of between 9 per cent and 11 per cent. That was the target range. Because of the increasing rate of development in Australia which is showing up in more jobs and in more people doing things we are at the upper edge of this range. The Government is certainly finding it difficult to stay within that range of 9 per cent to 11 per cent. Bear in mind that we are at the upper end of that range because it is recognised that there is a lot of extra activity and there is a need not to bring in what the Opposition

much foreign investment there can be in any company. There are rules over property purchases by foreign investors. There are sensible rules designed to ensure that Australians retain a stake in the ownership of this country. If we want to cut that off even further we would have to find more local capital for these projects; we would have to squeeze heavily on the housing sector; and we certainly would not be able to buy as many houses or get as much money for housing as we can now. The honourable member for Gellibrand comes up with a whole lot of disconnected requests. There are contradictions in them. If the Opposition wants to stop foreign investment, fair enough, but we will not get development, we will not get more jobs and we will not have as much

calls a squeeze. This is fully recognised by the money for housing which will lead to a generally

Government and by the Treasurer. It is a good depressed economy. That is a squeeze of another

idea to have in the Financial Review the following kind which we certainly do not want.

warning headline 'Government losing the money

battle'. That will make people more concerned about controlling the money supply and will make absolutely certain that we do not make the mistakes of 1974-let the money supply out in a

There is just one other aspect of this irresponsible attack by the Opposition to which I want to draw attention. In every debate we have had in

panic and let all these wage demands come in and this House on industrial relations-the honour-

be met by employers who would find it easy to able member for Wills (Mr Hawke) is at the table

extend their overdrafts and their borrowings, easy at the moment so it is a good time to bring this

to give in to union demands and easy to allow matter up-the Opposition has argued the case

those people in key areas, who can squeeze extra for the organised trade union movement. It has

money out of the system without producing extra always argued that case regardless of its merits. It

goods, to destroy the economy at the expense of has come in as advocates. While pressing for ex-

more unemployed and at the expense of those on cessively high wages and a 35-hour week at the

fixed incomes and those who do not have the insame time it is pushing for increases in the money

dustrial muscle to squeeze out that extra amount. supply which will make the campaign successful.

So it has a double-edged campaign to destroy the

That is at the heart of this whole argument. The Australian economy. It does both things at the

points that have been put up by speakers from the same time. It argues the case for organised trade

Opposition have included the usual collection of unionism in all its forms and at the same time it

whinges about particular issues without linking says that we should push up the money supply to

the whole lot together. That is something which the Opposition never did when it was in government. It agreed with a whole lot of people who came along wanting things, but it never did its

accommodate those demands. The end result of
that is economic and financial disaster of a kind we have already seen in this country.

sums. If one does not go through the whole thing

and do one's sums and know what one is finishing Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-The

up with then one will get into real trouble.

discussion is concluded.

Designs Amendment Bill

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1709

DESIGNS AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Second Reading
Debate resumed from 7 April, on motion by Mr Thomson:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill, the Patents Amendment Bill 1981 and the Trademarks Amendment Bill 1981 as they are associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these three measures? There being no objection, Twill allow that course to be followed.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (4.9)-1 would like to pass on my abundant thanks to whoever was responsible for bringi?g on thc::se Bills. th!s afternoon instead of at 10 0 clock tomght whIch IS what I was told. That saves me and the House from the danger that the subjects will be stale when I speak on them. At least I will have the advantage of freshness in dealing with the matter now. The Designs Amendment Bill 1981 follows the recommendations of the Designs Law Review Committee chaired by Mr Justice Franki. I assure the House that there has been no precipitate haste in rushing into this legislation. There has been haste in bringing it on this afternoon, but not in preparing it. The commission was given to the Franki Committee by the Gorton Government on 13 October 1970. The Committee reported to the then Labor Government in February 1973. Now, a mere eight years later, legislation is brought into the House. The parent Act is the Designs Act 1906. The Act has been amended from time to time since 1906, as recently as 1979. No substantial amendments have been made since 1968 and this Bill constitutes a fairly comprehensive revision of the Act. Its purpose is to extend patent protection to designs. Since 1906 the whole concept of design had broadened but on the whole the Committee reported in a fairly conservative fashion. For example, in the 1906 Act the definition of 'design' was as follows:
. . . an industrial design applicable, in any way or by any means, to the purpose of the ornamentation, or pattern, or shape, or configuration, of an article, or to any two or more of those purposes;
The definition adopted in this legislation is an amalgam of the recommendation of the Franki Committee and the words found in the United

Kingdom Registered Designs Act 1949. The proposed definition in the Bill is as follows:
- "Design" means features of shape, configuration, pattern or ornament applicable to an article, being features which in the finished article can be judged by the eye . . . but does not include a method or principle of construction.'
In the original Act 'article' means 'any article or substance'. In this Bill 'article' will mean:
any article of manufacture and includes a part of such an article if made separately.
There is a slight broadening of the definition. It has to be made clear that the legislation covers only manufactured articles-that is to say, design in a comparatively narrow sense. It does not cover artistic designs such as television logos that are not capable of being affixed to a specific article. That is covered by section 17 (2.) of the 1906 Act, which provides:
. . . that the regulations may exclude from registration designs for such articles or for articles included in such classes of articles, being articles that are primarily literary or artistic in character, as are specified in the regulations.
That, of course, would cover much of design, as we commonly use the term, for example as found in television or in computer software operations and so on.
The main purpose of the legislation is to bring up to date the Act of 1906 in conformity with the changes in the law that have been partly brought about in Great Britain as a result of case law. The most important, I think, has been the judgment of the House of Lords in the case of Utilux Pty Ltd v. Amp Inc., reported in (1972) R.P.C.l03. In that case it was held in effect that if an article was made in a certain shape, not in order to make it appeal to the eye of a customer, but solely to make the article work or to perform functional requirements, no design exists within the meaning of the definition in the Registered Designs Act. The Franki Committee report stated:
It seems likely that these events will induce more manufacturers in the United Kingdom to seek to rely on copyright protection rather than design protection wherever a design incorporates any functional features. We have taken account of the judgment of the House of Lords in our recommendations with respect to the definition of design and the recent decisions of the Chancery Division have had a material effect on our views with respect to the problem of dual protection.
The report went on in paragraph 255 to state:
It seems to us that a person should be able to make whatever use of an article he pleases if, in accordance with the usual practice in the industrial field, he finds on a proper examination of the records that the article is not covered by any patent or design protection in Australia. We think it ,:"ould be highly undesirable for a manufacturer to be placed In a position where, having found that no current letters patent or registered design would prevent him from manufacturing an article it would nevertheless be unsafe for him to proceed because there might be in existence an artistic work in which copyright might subsist. In addition, at least in most countries, there is no copyright register that can be searched and so there

1710 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Designs Amendment Bill

is no way a manufacturer can ascertain the position concerning copyright. This position is made even more unsatisfactory by the fact that copyright might continue to subsist for a very long period, if not indefinitely in the case of engravings and photographs, where the period is dependent upon the date of publication. In cases where the date of publication is relevant, it may be very difficult or, for all practical purposes, almost impossible for a prospective manufacturer to ascertain whether copyright subsists or not, particularly in view of the requirement that a publication that is merely colourable shall be disregarded. In our view a manufacturer should be able to ascertain with a reasonable degree of certainty whether he is free to manufacture an article or not. The existence of the problem of uncertainty has been forcibly brought to our notice by certain comparatively recent cases in the United Kingdom, and several people drew our attention to the problem during public sittings of the Committee.
The major subjects dealt with in the report of the Franki Committee have been, firstly, the definition of design and the treatment to be accorded to functional features; and secondly, the requirements for registrability of a design, the extent of protection afforded by the expression 'fraudulent imitation' and the protection if any under the Copyright Act which designs applied to industrialised articles should enjoy. This is often referred to as dual protection.
There is an important addition to the Act in proposed new section 18, which is found in clause 11 of the Bill. It states:
An application for registration of a design shall not be refused, and a registered design is not invalid, by reason only that the design consists of, or includes, features of shape or configuration that serve, or serve only, a functional purpose.
Mr Deputy Speaker, you will be diverted to hear that this amendment comes out of a decision of the English Court of Appeal in what is known as the rocking horse case. There was a shifting of one rocking horse from one base to another. It was held that nevertheless it was appropriate for it to be covered by the design legislation, despite the change of base.
I turn with mild relief to the Patents Amendment Bill 1981, which amends the Patents Act 1952. Its main aim is to amend section 160 of the 1952 Act to provide for extensions of time to be granted where there is a failure to file within the 12 months priority period which is described by international Convention. This, it is hoped, will cover situations such as the disruption of mail by airline strikes or by the mail hold-ups such as the legendary delays at the Redfern Mail Exchange.
The issue of absolute priority in granting patent rights is an extremely important subject. I draw the attention of the House to an article in the Scientific American for January 198 I, by David A. Hounshell, entitled 'Two Paths to the Telephone'. It records the extraordinary coincidence,

something which abounds in the history of invention, where virtually identical inventions of enormous significance were filed in the patent office on the same day. I refer, of course, to the telephone. Alexander Graham Bell and Elisha Gray both submitted the telephone-that invention which has had such an enormous impact on us all and made the life of politicians miserable-within hours of each other on 11 February 1876.
Mr Bradfield-Was it the same office?
Mr BARRY JONES-Yes, the United States Patent Office in Washington, D.C. That case can indicate more dramatically than anything else, I think, the enormous significance there is in obtaining a priority in patenting. The name of Alexander Graham Bel I has been immortalised and the name of Elisha Gray is one of those extraordinary historical might-have-beens-a character who has been virtually forgotten and pushed to the sideline, like members of the Australian Democrats.
There is another point about patents that I want to draw to the attention of the House. Patent protection has been enormously significant in encouraging the development of invention. The classic case, which is often mentioned and worth repeating, is that of penicillin. When Sir Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin in 1928 he thought it would be of some significance to the world, but declined to patent it; he thought it should be available to all without cost. He did not want to benefit financially; he thought it better that penicillin be given freely to the people of the world. Because it was not patented, absolutely no interest was shown in the commercial development of penicillin throughout the 1930s. There were a few minor experiments conducted with it but it was only after it was patented during the Second World War that there was a serious interest in the exploitation-I do not use that word in its pejorative sense-of penicillin. It has been asserted that since the Second World War penicillin has saved more lives than were destroyed in that war. It has had an extraodinary impact on the world since 1944, when it became available in large commercial quantities. Whilst I am not an unqualified supporter of the pharmaceutical industry, I am very conscience of the significance of patent law and the importance of securing adequate rewards for people who develop new processes.
I draw the attention of the House also to probably the most important recent case on patent law, Chakrabarty'S case in the United States. Its full name is Sidney A. Diamond, Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks, Petitioner v. Ananda M.

Designs Amendment Bill

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1711

Chakrabarty et al. The citation is the United States Surpreme Court Reports 65 L Ed 2d~that is, the second edition~ 144, 100 S Ct. This is a terrible system of citation and much more complex than ours. The case was decided on 16 June 1980. The summary of the case note reads:
Decision: Live, human-made micro-organism, held patentable . . .
SUMMARY A microbiologist filed a patent application relating to his invention of human-made, genetically engineered bacteria capable of breaking down multiple components of crude oil, a capability possessed by no naturally occurring bacteria. A patent examiner rejected the microbiologist's patent claim, ruling, among other things, that the bacteria, as living things, were not patentable subject matter under 35 USCS  101, which provides for the issuance of a patent to a person who invents or discovers 'any' new and useful 'manufacture' or 'composition of matter.' The United States Patent and Trademark Office Board of Appeals affirmed, but the United States Court of Customs and Patent Appeals ultimately reversed, holding that the fact that micro-organisms are alive is without legal significance for purposes of the patent law (596 F2d 952).
On certiorari, the United States Supreme Court affirmed. In the opinion by BURGER, Ch. J., joined by STEWART, BLACKMUN, REHNQUIST, and STEVENS, JJ., it was held that a live, human-made micro-organism is patentable subject matter under 35 USCS  101, such a micro-organism constituting a 'manufacture' or 'composition of matter' within themeaningof 101.
Under Australian law it seems certain that the capacity to patent micro-organisms or other living things already exists. It has always been the practice under Australian law to allow for the patenting of hybridisation of plants or breeding of animals. It is true that many people do not avail themselves of the protection of the law. Nevertheless, it has been the practice of the Australian Patent Office to accept such patents. All the Office asks is that there is an element of originality in what is actually done, that it has some commercial significance, that it is essentially new and that it is capable of replication. If those criteria are present then it is possible to patent things relating to the creation and the development of life forms.
That opens the door to the biotechnology industry, about which my colleagues have heard me utter one or two words in the last few weeks. I hope that it will be possible before long for the House to have some understanding not just of the legal significance of biotechnology vis-a-vis the patent law, and also that it will be possible for us to understand and investigate through a parliamentary select committee what the long term significance is, including the ethical issues such as the implication of cloning, aging and genetic engineering. Section 160 of the Patents Act 1952 is amended to provide a new sub-section (3) as follows:

(3) The time for the doing of an act or the taking of a step may be extended under sub-section (I) or (2) for a further period although-
(a) that time has expired; (b) that time has previously been extended under this sec-
tion or another provision of this Act; (c) the act or step is in relation to a patent application that
has lapsed; or (d) that further period has expired.
(3A) In determining whether to grant an application under sub-section (2), the Commissioner shall have regard to-
(a) the nature of the error, omission or circumstances, as the case requires, upon which the application is founded;
(b) the reason for that error or omission or those circumstances, as the case requires;
(c) the time at which the application under sub-section (2) was made;
(d) the length of period for which the extension is sought; and
(e) such other matters as he considers relevant.
The amending Bill goes on under a further proposed sub-section (3) to state:
(3) A person who made application under section 160 of the Principal Act before the commencement of this section for an extension of the time within which to do an act or take a step, being an application that was refused before, or is refused after, the commencement of this section, shall not, by reason only of the making or refusal of that application, be prevented from making a further application under any provision of the Principal Act as amended by this Act for an extension of the time within which to do that act or take that step.
1 now turn to the third of the Bills being debated, which is the Trade Marks Amendment Bill 1981. This amending Bill is based on the parent Act, the Trade Marks Act 1955. I must confess that I find myself less happy with this Bill than with the others. Essentially it is are-writing, and I think an extraordinarily cumbersome rewriting, of section 103 of the Trade Marks Act 1955. It follows a report of the Industrial Property Advisory Committee. I was fascinated to count that the original section 103 of the principal Act runs to 31 lines. The amendment runs to 260 lines and Tcannot for the life of me think that those 260 lines represent an improvement. I think it is one of the most abominable pieces of drafting that I have ever read. I am glad that the team that drafted this legislation was not given the task of drafting the Lord's Prayer, the Gettysburg Address or the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights. It is a very bad piece of drafting. It intends to amend the provisions of the Trade Marks Act in respect of prohibiting the importation of goods and, if applicable, services bearing a registered trade mark. This Bill has also been considered by a committee as has the Designs Amendment Bill which went through the Industrial Property Advisory Committee. The Trade Marks Amendment Bill also went through a committee under the chairmanship of John Stonier. On page 39 of its report that

1712 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Designs Amendment Bill

committee sets out a whole series of recommendations, I think quite elegantly, in five paragraphs. To save the time of the House I ask leave to incorporate that page in Hansard. These recommendations set out what the committee thought should be done to section 103.

Leave granted..

The document read as follows-

PART III: RECOMMENDATIONS
In the light of what is set out above this Committee makes the following recommendations-

3.1 The provisions for seizure and forfeiture of goods under Section 103 should be confined to goods the importation of which infringes a trade mark registered in respect of those goods.

3.2 The entitlement of the registered proprietor of a registered trade mark to invoke Section 103 by notice in writing to the Comptroller-General of Customs should be continued and should be available to every such person, whether or not he is a manufacturer, dealer, or trader in Australia.

3.3 A similar entitlement should be available to a registered user of a registered trade mark where he has called upon the registered proprietor to give such a notice and the registered proprietor has refused or neglected to do so within two months after being so called upon, but not in any other circumstances. In cases of this kind, the registered user's notice shal1 cease to have effect (except with respect to already seized goods) upon a Section 103 notice subsequently being given by the registered proprietor.

3.4 The seizure machinery under Section 103 should be operative on the basis of a general notice of objection establishing to the satisfaction of the Comprol1er-General of Customs the identity of the trade mark as a registered trade mark and of the person lodging the notice as the registered proprietor (or a registered user who is entitled to give such a notice in accordance with 3.3 above).

3.5 The procedures which are available and apply fcil1owing the seizure of any goods pursuant to a notice of objection given under Section 103 should be as set out in paragraphs 2.41 to 2.54 (inclusive) of this Report.

Industrial Property Advisory Committee 7 October 1980

J.STONIER Chairman

Mr BARRY JONES-I thank the House. There are five parts to the original section 103. Of those five parts 103 (1) is found in proposed new sub-section (3), 103 (2) is found in proposed new sub-section (11 ) - -

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The Chair is reluctant to interrupt the honourable member but the Chair, in turn, would be derelict if it did not draw the attention of the honourable member to the fact that we are addressing this Bill in the second reading debate. Therefore, he should refer to the general provisions of the Bill and not to matters of a detailed clausal nature.

Mr BARRY JONES--The point I want to make is that I find that in this nine-page Bill, section 103 occupies six of those pages. In fact, the whole substance of the Bill concerns one section.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member is perfectly free to make that observation.

Mr BARRY JONES-I do make that observation. The Bill is an extraordinarily cumbersome piece of work. The intention of the Bill is to try to make the law somewhat more flexible concerning the importation into Australia of goods which bear an Australian trade mark and which, in fact, have been made overseas by Australian companies. As we know, in the last few years under the deplorable policies of the Fraser Government many Australian firms have moved off-shore-possibly 600. So it would not be too surprising if we saw a product coming in which bore, for instance, a Dunlop Australia Ltd trade mark but which was known to have come all the way from Indonesia or somewhere else in South East Asia. It would be understandable if there were some confusion.

The new Bill provides that, where goods have been seized. the Comptroller-General of Customs gives the owner of the goods an opportunity to object and to explain the circumstances under which the goods have been seized. If the person who is the true owner of the trade mark objects and gives notice to the Comptroller-General of Customs that he will institute proceedings, the goods can be held. If the true owner does not so proceed, then the Comptroller-General may exercise his discretion and release the goods. Proposed new sub-section (12)-a very important subsection-of proposed new section 103 states:

The Comptroller-General of Customs shall release goods seized . . . to the owner on the expiration of the period of one month after the giving of a notice . . . to the objector or the objectors unless an objector has, before the expiration of that period-

(a) instituted an action or proceeding for infringement of the relevant trade mark in respect of the goods; and
(b) given notice in writing to the Comptrol1er-General stating that that action or proceeding has been instituted.
In other words, the obligation is on the proposed objector. If the proposed objector does not seek to enforce his own rights in the court there is no reason why the Comptroller-General should have to carry the bag for him. So it is a matter of putting responsibility where, I think, it should properly lie. Another provision states:

Without limiting the relief that a court may grant apart

from this section, where an objector has instituted an

action

in respect of goods seized . . . the

court . . . -

Designs Amendment Bill

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1713

(a) may, at any time, if it thinks just, make an order, subject to such terms . . . as the court thinks
fit . . .
I draw the attention of the House to the second reading speech of the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson). I am sorry that the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) is at the table at the moment because I raised this matter personally with the Minister for Science and Technology. I thought that the Minister was given a bum steer in his second reading speech. The main argument that is put in the speech--it is put twice-concerns the common law remedy known as 'passing off'. I point out to the House that there is no such thing in common law as a remedy called 'passing off'. Passing off is the offence. There is a remedy in common law against passing off. One cannot describe passing off as a defence. I find it extraordinary-perhaps not so very extraordinary considering how badly drafted the Bill is-- that material has been fed to a Minister of the Crown which shows a complete misunderstanding of the nature of a Bill. At common law there is an offence of passing off. But if a plaintiff wanted to secure damages as a result of such an action he would have to prove that his products were identified with the trade mark. He would have to prove that he was going to suffer some loss and prove somebody else was holding himself out as a rightful user of the trade mark when he did not have the right to do so. The legislation means that instead of going through that procedure, which I agree is somewhat cumbersome, it would be possible for this to be handled administratively.
On the whole, I am not terribly keen about procedures whereby things are taken away from the courts and handled bureaucratically within an administrative system. I think, in this case, it has the merit of common sense. In the circumstances and to the extent that we are able to understand what the Bill actually means, we propose to let it go through. It ought to go back to someone else who could have another look at it and perhaps between here and the other place it could undergo some redrafting. I understand the Senate is doing a lot of redrafting in another matter which is now before that chamber. I do not see why this Bill should not join the queue.
Mr BRADFIELD (Barton) (4.38)-It is my pleasure to follow the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) in this debate. He is very knowledgeable, particularly on matters of history. I have certainly enjoyed his running through some of the historic events associated with these amending Bills. In fact, there are certain historic reasons why these Bills are before the House today. Because of the expansion and the rapid

advancement in technology since the turn of this century Bills associated with design, patents and trade marks are necessary. J will come to that matter later.
When we look at the oldest of the Acts concerned, the Design Act 1906-1 know it has been amended since 1906-it shows why Bills such as these became necessary at the turn of the century. Business has now become more international and has expanded to a great extent. There are greater complexities in deciding who owns designs and who owns patents and who is able to obtain designs and who is able to obtain patents. Of course, the Bill dealing with trade marks is necessary to protect the rights of people who design and manufacture goods. We have a very international situation in business today. That situation will become even more international. Therefore the Bills and the protection that they will afford to various people will become more important. Of course, there is a strong relationship between the Designs Amendment Bill and the Patents Amendment Bill because they both protect inventors, designers, manufacturers and the people to whom inventions and designs have been assigned. These Bills will give significantly greater protection to the consumer. J think we in this Parliament will have to give more time to the question of protecting the consumer, the people who need protection in these complicated situations.
I would like to devote most of my time to the Trade Marks Amendment Bill. Strangely enough, this is the Bill that the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) said that he was least happy about. Yet this Bill can give a great deal of protection to the Australian consumer. The Trade Marks Act, which this Bill seeks to amend, is a tool which has been used by many Australian manufacturers to stop imported goods being made available to the Australian consumer. At times goods can be brought in at a price cheaper than that of the same product manufactured in Australia. Yet, the imported goods are of the same quality and bear the same name as the goods manufactured in Australia. Often the legislation has been used by Australian companies to protect their monopoly situation in Australia from overseas companies which belong to the same international group as the Australian companies. It is for this reason that I offer my congratulations to the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) for at last bringing this Bill into the Parliament. I intend to give some recent instances of where the Trade Marks Act has been abused.
Mr Barry Jones-What do you think about the drafting of it?

1714 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Designs Amendment Bill

Mr BRADFIELD-The honourable member problem is one of big international companies-

dealt quite adequately with the drafting of the the companies that the honourable member does

legislation and I accept what he had to say. Draftnot like-which have been able to use this situ-

ing is more in the honourable member's line of exation to protect a situation in Australia.

pertise than mine. I am more interested in the practical application of the Bill. Regardless of whether the drafting is lengthy or not I am sure for practical purposes the Bill can certainly do the job for which it was designed. Like the honourable member for Lalor, I must refer to section 103 of the Trade Marks Act simply because this is the main section of that legislation with which this Bill deals. Indeed, basically the whole of this Bill is concerned with section 103. That section, of course, deals with the importation of goods bearing trade marks. It deals with the protection that is afforded to the Australian manufacturer the name of whose product is registered in Australia and bears the same name as an imported product.

I would like briefly to congratulate the Minister for introducing this legislation. I think the Australian consumer will benefit considerably from the protection afforded the Bills. I think the legislation can only be of advantage for Australian industry. I support the three Bills introduced by the Minister. They are complicated Bills but they are very necessary. They are necessary in particular because they will keep business in Australia competitive and protect the Australian consumer.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (4.47)-1 must say that when I agreed to speak in this debate J thought we would also be discussing a fourth Bill which is associated with the three Bills before the House-- the Industrial Research and Development Incen-

I would like to give a few instances of how the legislation has been used. I would like to refer to the motor tyre industry as an example of the way in which goods have been protected or kept from the Australian consumer. Before I was elected to this place I happened to be employed in that industry. I know of many instances in which high quality imported tyres bearing the same name as the Australian manufactured product were all of a sudden seized on the wharf. The Australian manufacturer, using the trade marks legislation, had the goods seized. The imported goods were of high quality and usually available at a cheaper price to the Australian consumer. That is probably the reason they were purchased overseas in the first place. Yet, the consumer has been denied a quality product which has a price advantage over the Australian product. The Australian business which chose to import the goods has been financially disadvantaged because the goods were seized. As a result the Australian manufacturer of

tives Amendment Bill. I understand that that is not the case. Therefore I shall confine my remarks to the three Bills which have been referred to by the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) and other speakers. The legislation, which obviously goes to particular questions of industrial design, patents and trade marks, is of some importance because it touches on the question of industrial innovation and technology and the need to provide appropriate protection for people, particularly in relation to design and patenting for innovation and changes that might be brought about. The honourable member for Lalor 'spoke about the importance of looking at this legislation within a national context and the need to protect Australian industrial design and Australian patents against what clearly is a highly competitive situation internationally. Very often companies and designers in Australia are not able and have not been able to achieve that protection within the parameters of existing legislation.

the same goods was in a monopolistic situation. I Clearly questions of technology are rarely ques-

have mentioned the tyre industry. However, this tions of technology alone. One has always to look

sort of thing happens in most industries-the at technology not only in terms of its relationship

automotive industry, the electrical appliance inin this case with the law that exists but also in

dustry and so on.

terms of property relations. If I could speak in

rather general terms about the legislation, one of

In the international business situation today the concerns that I certainly have is that we have

companies bearing the same name manufacture in not had in this country a history of being able to

different countries. The Trade Marks Act was develop what I would call indigenous technology

used by companies to keep goods in the countries or to establish a situation of technological sover-

where those companies wanted the goods kept. As eignty. I believe not only this legislation but also

a result it has been impossible for anyone to move other legislation which is being introduced by the

goods from one country to another. The honourGovernment is designed to try to move us rather

able member for Lalor mentioned the fact that further in that direction. I believe that that is ex-

the problem is probably due to Australian tremely important. The Australian economy is

companies going overseas. That is not right. This currently passing through an important period of

would be only a minute part of the problem. The restructuring-that restructuring is occurring as a

Health Care Services

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1715

result of international pressures-which, in part, Government in the health area is to ensure that all

is taking place on the basis of the argument that Australians have proper access to health care ser-

Australia ought to structure its economy in a way vices of high quality at a cost the individual and

which gives it the maximum international comthe community can afford. A large and increasing

parative advantage.

amount of scarce resources is being allocated to

The two areas around which it has been suggested that the Australian economy ought to be restructured, and in which it has a comparative economic advantage, are the areas of resource development and the development of high technology industries. It is that second category which is more relevant to this legislation. It is of concern to me that historically we have not been able to develop technology in this country for a number of reasons, some of which are related to the systems of protection which exist, including the extent to which a technology development in Australia can be protected against international competition. To some extent these Bills deal with legal matters related to that. As I suggested, one cannot separate the legalities of a situation from economic policy, market forces and property relations. Property relations are not simply a matter of trade marks-not simply a matter of the registration of a design. They also involve access to capital and the way in which capital may be integrated internationally. I think the honourable member for Barton (Mr Bradfield) referred to the way companies were able to operate through their

the health area to maintain the high quality services we have all come to expect. Clearly, if this level of quality is to be maintained, given priorities in other areas, every effort must be made to ensure that the resources allocated to the health area are used in an efficient and cost effective way. It is not an exaggeration to state that the health care delivery system could become a bottomless pit down which an ever increasing proportion of the gross domestic product could be poured without any real increase in the health standards of Australians. All of us, whether we be providers or recipients of health care, should be conscious of the cost of health services. For example, health professionals should become aware of the high cost of some individual services that they provide or seek access to when simpler procedures would be as effective. Equally individuals should become aware of the cost of the services they use by contributing to the cost of such services. Those responsible for the operation of health institutions must also be fully responsible for ensuring that they provide services on the most efficient basis possible.

international relationships to ensure access to, for

example, Australian markets and very often override areas where Australia may have had a comparative economic advantage.

For many years concern has been expressed about the nature and distribution of the institutions, particularly hospitals, which provide our

Whilst these Bills are important in terms of the health care services. Hospitals consume by far the

legalities of the situation, the problems that greatest amount of resources allocated to health

companies will face if they are to develop and care. They are expensive institutions to run. In

establish leadership in technological innovations many cases they are not physically located to

will go beyond what these Bills will be able to ensure easy access by the community which they

achieve, or even Bills in relation to international serve nor do they necessarily provide the types of

incentives would be able to achieve. I believe that services required by that community. Duplication

these are extremely important issues that this Parof services between hospitals exists, particularly

liament ought to be addressing itself to. We ought in the area of high cost technology. Regrettably

to set as an objective for Australia the achievment many hospitals compete with others in an attempt

of a much greater degree of technological soverto provide all services without any regard to

eignty. These Bills are important to that in terms duplication, needs, priorities or costs. If hospitals

of certain legalities, but to spell out a policy on are to be used effectively, it is important that

technological sovereignty would involve canvassthose people admitted actually require the ser-

ing issues which go well beyond these Bills. Mr vices provided. It is important to ensure that

Deputy Speaker, I seek leave to continue my rewhere a person can be adequately cared for at

marks at a later hour.

home appropriate support services are available.

Leave granted; debate adjourned.

For too long hospitals generally have concentrated on providing services within the hospital

HEALTH CARE SERVICES Ministerial Statement

rather than in the community. The Commonwealth has reacted to this and through the domiciliary nursing care benefit and the home nursing

Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for subsidy schemes, has attempted to encourage

Health)-by 1eave-The fundamental goal of this people to remain in the community rather than be

1716 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Health Care Services

institutionalised where this was not required. (viii) Providers of health care services should be

More needs to be done.

more aware of the costs they generate.

The Government recognises too that private hospitals form an integral part of the hospital system in anyone State. It is important that a balance between public and private hospital beds be maintained. The Commonwealth believes that any growth of private hospital beds should be consistent with overall State priorities for hospitals.

Concern over Australia's burgeoning health bill and significant doubts as to whether the large sums of taxpayers' funds allocated to health were being .spent properly led to the Commonwealth establishing the Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals in 1979. The Government believes that the Com-

The Commonwealth also recognises the immission's report has shown that the Government's

portant role of private doctors in providing health concern was justified. The health care delivery

services in the community. In the great majority system in this country is extremely complex and

of cases general practitioners provide primary its many parts are interrelated. It is therefore

health care services on the most cost-effective essential that any review of a major part of that

basis. The Government therefore believes that the system, such as public hospitals, should be carried

important role of general practitioners should be out in the context of the Commonwealth's overall enhanced, wherever possible, and should continue health policy. The Government has done so over

to be the first point of contact for patients with recent months. I believe that the Commission's re-

the health care system.

port has provided a sound basis on which to de-

In order to ensure that these general objectives are met the Government believes that firm measures should be adopted so that:

velop an equitable and responsible health policy. The co-operation of all those involved in the health and care delivery system will, however, be required if that policy is to benefit all Australians.

(i) States fully accept their constitutional responsibility for the provision of health ser-

Public Hospital Funding Arrangements

vices and determine their own priorities as At present, under the hospital cost sharing ar-

to how funds are to be allocated to the rangements, the Commonwealth shares with the

different parts of the health system.

States the agreed net costs of operating their pub-

(ii) All Australians become far more responlic hospitals systems. Honourable members will be

sible for their own health care needs and aware that these agreements are due to expire on

lifestyle and more aware of the full cost of 30 June 1981 except for South Australia and Tas-

the health services available to them.

mania. The agreements with SO'lth Australia and

(iii) Special assistance schemes designed to cover people's hospital and medical bills are only available to those in genuine need, namely eligible pensioners and the disadvantaged.

Tasmania expire on 30 June 1985. In 1976, these agreements were re-negotiated with the States to remove the open-endedness of the original agreements negotiated by the Whitlam Government. History shows that the decision to re-negotiate the

(iv) Those people in the community who can pay their own way should be required to contribute to the costs of the health services they receive-either by personal pay-

agreements was correct at a time when hospital costs were accelerating. Since 1976 growth in recognised hospital expenditure has slowed down markedly.

ment or through health insurance.

Despite the considerable success of these agree-

(v) Health insurance should be available to all ments in slowing down the rate of growth in

at a reasonable cost and should have wide hospital costs the Jamison inquiry was highly criti-

coverage in order to support the comcal of them. The inquiry said that the agreements

munity rating principle.

concentrated on reimbursement of expenditure.

(vi) Government assistance towards the As a result little account was taken of the relative

health costs of those who can afford to needs within and between States for hospital and

contribute towards their health services health services, their distribution and their ac-

should be restricted to those who are countability. States with the most expensive and

willing to help themselves.

inefficient hospital systems at the commencement

(vii) The important role of the private sector of of the cost-sharing arrangements received pro-

the health care delivery system should be portionately more funds than States which had

fully acknowledged and action should be attempted to move with the times, to remove

taken to ensure that the private hospital wasteful and inefficient services and facilities, and

sector continues as a viable complement to concentrate on services appropriate to the com-

the public system.

munities that they serve. The Commission stated:

Health Care Services

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1717

. . . the Cost-Sharing Agreements have rewarded the expensive and punished the efficient and have perpetuated rather than solved some of the main problems in Australia's health system.
I should point out also that even in those States which have made attempts to remove waste and inefficiency, there is still much more work to be done. Today, the members of the community cannot be expected continually to support, by way of taxation and their own personal expenditures, any wasteful and inefficient public hospital systems in Australia. In the face of the evidence produced by Jamison and earlier inquiries, failure by the Commonwealth to ensure that efficiencies are effected would mean that it would be abrogating its proper responsibilities. The Commonwealth cannot stand on the sidelines and see taxpayers and health fund members bearing increasing costs because of inefficiencies, inequities, and unnecessary duplication in public hospitals. On the basis of its criticisms of the cost-sharing agreements the Commission of Inquiry recommended that the agreements due to expire should not be renewed. The Governmen t has accepted that recommendation.
In its consideration of the funding arrangements that should replace the existing hospital cost-sharing agreements the Commission found that a major factor behind such inefficiencies was the divided responsibility between the Commonwealth and States. The Commission therefore recommended that the States should be required to take up their full constitutional responsibility for the provision of health care services. The Commission also recommended that the level of Commonwealth funding for the States' health services should be altered so that the amount of funds provided was based more closely on States' needs-as determined by their respective populations and taking into account recognised measures of efficiency. The Commission recognised also that there was a need for States to be able to use health funds provided by the Commonwealth for priority areas in their health service system rather than be confined to narrow program type funding.
The Government has been considering a range of options aimed at overcoming the problems highlighted by the Commission in this vital area. It agreed with the Commission that the responsibility of the States should be more clearly defined and that they should be required to take up their full responsibilities for the provision of health services. It also agrees that a new method for determining funding levels should be introduced. In reaching this decision the Government has been

mindful of the warning of the Commission of Inquiry that one should hasten slowly. Quite clearly in a situation involving hospitals where there is a large capital investment and where some communities have become used to facilities or services-even when they are not neededdramatic changes cannot be made overnight. The Jamison report stated:
. . . sharp, sweeping changes can be disruptive and impractical . . . Much can be gained from continual small measures, rather than from sweeping structural change.
The Government has therefore decided that the funds it provides for public hospitals, the general Community Health Program and the School Dental Scheme should be included in general revenue grants. This will afford the States the greatest possible freedom as to how the moneys to be allocated are spent. There will be no requirements laid down as to the services to which they should be allocated. The States will be totally responsible for making such decisions. Further, the Government has decided that, at least for the initial period of the new arrangements, the amount to be included in the general tax sharing arrangement should be identifiable as representing the Commonwealth's contribution to the cost of the health services provided by the States.
In view of the importance of ensuring that funds for health services allocated to the States are appropriately based, the Government has also decided that the determination of an appropriate mechanism for allocating funds between States in the longer term should be referred to the Grants Commission. The Commission will be asked to look specifically at relativities between States and to design incentives for States to correct inefficiencies in their health systems. The Commonwealth firmly believes that the peoples of each State will, as taxpayers, fully support the Government's decisions since the proposed measures are designed to ensure the maintenance of the high quality of health care delivery systems in Australia while protecting the position of all taxpayers by ensuring that the greatest value possible is received for each dollar spent on health services provided by the States.
I draw the House's attention to the fact that the Commonwealth has decided that the position of eligible pensioners and their dependants should be protected at all times under the proposed funding arrangements. The Commonwealth will continue to meet this responsibility in the hospitals area by requiring States to provide free public hospital accommodation and treatment for such pensioners. The Commonwealth will also ensure that free hospital services will continue to be provided to the disadvantaged. The Government will consult

1718 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Health Care Services

with the States on the question of appropriate adhospitals should be restricted to eligible pen-

ministrative arrangements.

sioners and their dependants and the disadvan-

taged as defined by the Commonwealth, they will

The Commonwealth holds the view that there not be required to introduce a means test. I

should be consistency between the definition of further emphasise that no State will be required to

the disadvantaged used by States in relation to introduce inpatient and/or outpatient charges for

public hospitals and that followed by the Comany or all persons. However, should any State de-

monwealth in relation to the bulk billed medical cide that free public hospitals should be provided

services provided to them. The Government beto all persons it will be required to meet the extra

lieves that only eligible pensi.oners and their decost involved out of its own resources.

pendants and the disadvantaged as defined should be protected in this way. It further believes that all other persons should be required to contribute

Protection of the Aged, the Chronically III and the Disadvantaged

towards the cost of services received in instiARI emphasised earlier, the Government will be

tutions particularly hospitals and that States acting to ensure that free access of eligible 'pen-

should take appropriate actions to ensure that sioners and the socially disadvantaged to public

they do. The Government recognises that such hospitals is maintained. The Government will also

actions should result in increased revenues being continue to protect the position of such people in

raised for both inpatient and outpatient services relation to their medical costs. It has therefore de-

particularly if the States raise the bed day charge cided to retain the present arrangements in re-

in public hospitals from $50 for a shared room and lation to eligible pensioners and their dependants.

$75 for a private room to a level which more However, it has decided that new arrangements

closely approximates the actual daily bed cost should be introduced for the disadvantaged. The

involved.

Government has decided to do so because of a

dual concern, namely, that bulk billed medical

As any increases in revenue resulting from such services provided under the existing disadvan-

actions would reduce the net operating cost of the taged arrangements are growing at a rate which

States' public hospital systems, the Commonindicate that those services have been made avail-

wealth is of the view that its funding in this area able to persons who could not normally be

can be appropriately reduced on a progressive regarded as disadvantaged; and people in genuine

basis without jeopardising the quality and stanneed are not always able to gain the protection of

dard of care now provided in public hospitals. The those arrangements.

new arrangements will, from the Common-
wealth's point of view, apply from 1 September
1981. The Government has therefore decided that the funding to be allocated to New South Wales,
Victoria, Western Australia, Queensland and the
Northern Territory that represents its interest in the provision of health services should be equal to
the sum necessary to' maintain in real terms the
funding provided in 1980-81 for public hospitals, the general Community Health Program, and the
School Dental Scheme, less a share of the revenue the States could be reasonably expected to raise
through the introduction of appropriate inpatient and outpatient charges in 1981-82 and the user
pays principle in public hospitals. It is expected that the funds to be allocated to South Australia

The Government believes that the following
groups in the community should be regarded as disadvantaged: All migrants and refugees in their
first six months in Australia; current unemployment and special beneficiaries who meet the pen-
sioner health benefit income test; and other persons who meet a specified income test. In respect
of bulk billed medical services received by such people a Commonwealth medical benefit of 85
per cent will be payable as is now the case in relation to eligible pensioners. Doctors will be able
to bulk bill the Government for such services or a
disadvantaged person may take a doctor's account to a health fund for payment of the appropriate
Commonwealth medical benefit.

and Tasmania will be based on the existing hospiHonourable members will be aware that the

tal cost-sharing arrangements. However, the current Commonwealth medical benefit for ser-

Commonwealth will be seeking to adjust those vices provided to the disadvantaged is 75 per cent

agreements to ensure that conditions relating to of the schedule fee. This new arrangement means

free access to public hospitals are uniform across that the insured population, eligible pensioners

Australia. The resultant total sum involved is and the disadvantaged will receive benefits for

expected to be about $1,250m.

scheduled medical services at approximately the

same level. This new arrangement will operate

I emphasise that if the States accept the from 1 September 1981. It is expected that a

Government's view that free access to public maximum of one million people will be eligible for

Health Care Services

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1719

assistance under this scheme. I now seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a statement of the main details of the new arrangements to apply in this area.
Leave granted.
The statement read as follows-
SUPPLEMENTARY STATEMENT BY THE MINISTER FOR HEALTH
Definition of the Disadvantaged
Under the Commonwealth definition of the disadvantaged the following would be included:
Migrants and refugees in the first six months in Australia-(no income test);
Current unemployment and special beneficiaries (including dependants) with private incomes below the PHB limits.
This group would not become PHB 'pensioners' and would not qualify for other Commonwealth 'fringe benefits';
A married couple who have a joint income less than the cut-out point for unemployment benefits for a married couple (rounded up to the next whole dollar) plus $20 and twice the rate of additional benefit for each child. On this basis the income limit is $160 a week for a married couple plus $20 for each child.
For a sole parent, with one child, the income limit will be the same as for a married couple. For each additional child, the limit will increase by $20.
For single people, without dependants, the income limit will be 60 per cent of the income for a married couple i.e. $96 per week.
Overall approximately I million persons are expected to be covered by the new arrangements.
Mr MacKELLAR-Honourable members will be aware that the assistance provided by the Commonwealth to help cover the hospital and medical bills of eligible pensioners is considerable. The cost of such assistance on the medical side alone is now running at $300m annually. Despite this the Government believes that further assistance should be given to protect the aged and chronically ill in relation to the cost of nursing home care. It has therefore decided that it will take over full responsibility for the payment of nursing home benefits from 1 September 1981. At present the Commonwealth pays nursing home benefits only for uninsured persons.
The estimated cost of this decision is $120m annually. This is expected to take the Commonwealth assistance to nursing home patients to about $560m in a full year.
The Government has also decided to increase its assistance for the aged and the chronically ill through greater support for organisations providing home nursing services. The Government believes that such services increase the quality of life of people receiving them and help contain costs by keeping people out of institutions when there is no medical reason for them to be there. As honourable members may be aware, a number of

home nursing services have expressed concern at the restriction imposed in 1976 on the number of nurses the Commonwealth will subsidise under the Home Nursing Subsidy Scheme. Recognising the important work carried out by these organisations, the Government has decided that this restriction on the number of nurses subsidised by the Commonwealth should be lifted as from 1 July next. The immediate effect of this will be that additional Commonwealth subsidies will be paid in respect of about 195 nurses. The estimated full year cost of this decision is $lm.
Health Insurance
As I stated at the outset, the Government "believes that health insurance should be available to all Australians at a reasonable cost and should have a wide coverage of the population in order to support the community rating principle. Regrettably, the combination of free public hospitals to all people irrespective of their incomes and the existing Commonwealth medical benefit arrangements has resulted in a gradual erosion of health fund membership and, as a result, of the community rating principle. If this trend were to continue it could threaten the Government's health insurance policy, the viability of the health funds and the position of those dependent on insurance-taking special account of the aged, the chronically ill and families with children.
In order to arrest that trend and bring about an increase in the numbers of people insured the Government has decided that the following major changes should be made to the present health insurance arrangements: Firstly, tax rebate separate from the existing concessional rebate arrangements will be introduced for the cost of basic hospital and medical insurance with registered health funds with effect from I July 1981. The rebate will be set initially at 32 cents in the dollar. Full details of this decision are to be announced by my colleague the Treasurer (Mr Howard) later today. Secondly, Commonwealth medical benefits will be restricted to those people with at least basic medical cover with a registered health fund. Thirdly, a flat rate Commonwealth medical benefit of 30 per cent will apply to all scheduled medical services and the existing 0-$20 arrangements will be abolished. Fourthly, the Government's payment to assist health funds to help cover the hospital costs of the chronically ill will be set at $100m. Fifthly, the basic level of medical insurance will be increased from 75 per cent to 85 per cent of the schedule fee with a maximum payment of $10 per service and, sixthly, current insurance tables classed as optional to basic will be prohibited. Unless

1720 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Health Care Services

indicated elsewhere, the commencement date for hospitals to those in genuine need and possible

implementation of these decisions is 1 September State action to increase public hospital charges

1981.

will considerably strengthen the position of pri-

As honourable health insurance

members will covers benefits

be in

amwedairce~lbaasnidc

hospital insurance as defined in the National

Health Act. Basic medical insurance will, as from

1 September next, provide to the insured con-

tributor medical benefits at 85 per cent of the

schedule fee with a maximum patient payment or'

up to $10 a medical service at schedule fee levels.

Basic hospital insurance provides hospital benefit

at the level of charges on insured persons for

shared ward accommodation in public hospitals

vate hospitals in the medium to longer term. However it is aware of the increasing cost of servicing surgical beds in private hospitals when compared with medical and other beds and that. action is required to ensure that such beqs continue to be available to the community. The Government has therefore decided to increase the present $16 per day bed subsidy for surgical patients in private hospitals to $28. The existing bed day subsidy level of $16 will be retained for other private hospital patients.

and other such approved charges-for example

out-patient-in public hospitals.

'

The Control of Health Services Costs

In addition the Government has decided that it should enter into urgent discussions with the health funds to establish a mechanism to protect members of registered health funds in the event of the collapse of such a fund. The Government is concerned to ensure that health fund members are not financially disadvantaged should any funds cease operation. However it would expect that such a mechanism would be fully financed by the health insurance industry.

As I stated at the outset, the Government is keen to ensure that health services are not unnecessarily requested by consumers or ordered by providers and that abuses do not occur. As part of this the Government has been carrying out an ongoing review of the Commonwealth medical benefits arrangements for some years now to ensure that benefits are paid only where services are reasonably required for medical treatment and to prevent abuse. Recommendations on further changes to the medical benefits schedule

As I stated earlier, the Government believes are currently being finalised by my Department

health insurance should be encouraged. The defor submission to me with a view to implementing

cision to introduce a tax rebate is a major step dechanges as from 1 July next.

signed to promote that objective. It will significantly assist all those who take out health The Government has also taken action to reinsurance. These decisions are based on the duce the incidence of abuse by those few people in

Government's firm view that community support the health care profession who may seek to misuse towards health costs through insurance should .be or defraud the system for their own gain. A major

b~sed on: the community rating principle; and sigexample was the establishment of medical ser-

mficant Commonwealth subsidisation that is vices committees of inquiry in 1977. These com-

financed through the general taxation arrangemittees are effectively a peer review system de-

ments. The Government firmly believes that such signed to prevent over-servicing by doctors. The

support, when coupled with special arrangements Government has recently agreed to a number of to protect the more needy sections of the comchanges to the committees' operation which

munity, is the most equitable and responsible should considerably increase their effectiveness. I

means of providing health insurance cover.

will be announcing details of these changes when I

introduce the necessary amendments to the

The Private Sector

Health Insurance Act later in this parliamentary

The Government fully recognises the valuable role played by the private sector of the health care delivery system. It believes that a strong health insurance industry underpins the continued viability of the private sector. The Government is particularly aware of the importance of private hospitals, particularly religious and charitable

session. In addition I am currently examining, in conjunction with the Attorney-General, a number of other suggestions designed to strengthen further the effectiveness of these committees. Subject to the outcome of discussions on these proposals I would expect that the resultant changes would be introduced as soon as possible.

hospitals. Private hospitals are an essential component of Australia's health care delivery system that should be maintained and strengthened.

The Jamison inquiry made recommendations in the area of salaried medical practice. The Government has considered these recommendations and

The Government believes that possible action has decided that it should consult with the States

by the States to confine free access to public on the matter. However, the question of the

Taxation-Health Insurance Rebate

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1721

administration of hospital systems is primarily a matter for the States.
Conclusion The overriding aim of the Government's health policy is that all Australians should have access to high quality health care. At the same time, individuals should be encouraged to be more responsible for their health care needs. The system must be equitable, paying particular attention to the capacity of individuals to contribute towards their health costs. But it is also important that all governments ensure that the high costs involved in maintaining that system do not cripple the general community. The Government's health policy, therefore, should also be responsible, providing adequate checks and balances to prevent abuses. The decisions T have speIt out today will ensure that both these objectives are met through special assistance to help cover the hospital and medical costs of those in genuine need; ensuring that those who are in a position to do so should contribute towards the cost of the health services they receive; the promotion of insurance for those providing such a contribution through subsidy arrangements financed through the adoption of health service funding arrangements designed to minimise waste and inefficiency in costly institutions; and acting to ensure that consumers and providers of hospital and medical services do not abuse the health care delivery system. I commend the statement to the House. I present the followingpaper:
Health Care Services-Ministerial Statement, 29 April 1981.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.

widely welcomed and will, it believes, be of particular benefit for Australian families. In considering the introduction of this new concession the Government has given very great thought to the question of tax indexation.
As indicated in the policy speech of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) of September 1980 the existing policy of half-tax indexation will provide taxation reductions of about $500m in a full year commencing in July next. As honourable members will be aware, there are significant arguments for and against tax indexation and 1 shall not weary the House today by canvassing all of those arguments. it is true, as members of the Government have frequently stated in the past, that tax indexation does oblige governments to legislate tax increases and, to that extent, has been a discipline. It could equally be said, however, that to the extent to which either expenditures or revenues are automatically indexed, the Budget flexibility available to a government to respond to changed economic circumstances is thereby reduced.
The Government has now decided that discretionary adjustments to taxation scales and allowances are preferable to tax indexation. However, the Government is conscious of the precise terms of what was said in the Prime Minister's policy speech and accordingly 1 confirm that halftax indexation will apply from J July next, thus providing in full the benefit of some $500m foreshadowed in that speech. However, that tax indexation adjustment will be the last indexation adjustment. Future taxation adjustments will be determined-usually in the Budget context-on a discretionary basis and in accordance with economic considerations.

TAXATION-HEALTH INSURANCE REBATE AND INDEXATION Ministerial Statement
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-by leave-As my colleague the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) has just informed the House, the Government has decided to introduce a new concessional rebate for health insurance contributions. My colleague has explained the nature of this new concessional rebate, which will be rebatable outside the $1,590 rebate block at the standard rate which is presently 32 per cent. I emphasise that the tax savings from this new concession will not depend on a taxpayer's total rebatable expenditure exceeding $1,590.
The Government believes the introduction of a concessional rebate for health insurance will be

As with similar rebates in respect of special categories of expenditure the medical insurance rebate will generally speaking be received on assessment. As a consequence, the revenue impact of introducing this new concession will be negligible in 1981-82. The full-year cost of the new concessional rebate for health insurance will be in the order of $600m. Legislation providing for the half-tax indexation adjustment will be introduced into the House later this session. I shall also, at a later date, be providing details of the half indexation factor to apply in respect of 1981-82 and details of the impact of half-tax indexation on taxation scales in that year. I present the following paper:
Taxation-Health Insurance Rebate and IndcxationMinisterial Statement, 29 April 1981.

1722 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Health Care Services

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.
HEALTH CARE SERVICES .Ministerial Statement
Debate resumed. Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this motion and the motion to take note of the Treasurer's statement as they are associated matters. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the motions at the conclusion of the debate. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these two matters? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Suspension of Standing Orders Motion (by Mr Sinclair)-by leave-agreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the honourable member for Bonython speaking for a period not exceeding 30 minutes.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (5.27)-1 want to place the two statements that have been made today in the background of the last 18 months of indecision in the field of health. In a sense tonight's decisions flow from the problems of that accumulating indecision. These problems flow from 18 months in which no decisions of any significance in the health field have been made despite considerable disquiet amongst most health care organisations. Throughout 1980 we were assured that no decisions could be made because the Government was waiting on the Jamison report. Certainly the Government displayed great impatience to get the Jamison report, compelling the Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals to report prior to effective completion of that report. There is the pathetic note in Volume 2 of the report:
Because of time constraint for the presentation of the Report imposed in the Letters Patent, this Volume is not in a form as refined as the Commission otherwise would have arranged. Detailed editing and normal proof reading have not been possible.
Anyone who has read that massive document knows of its state of incompletion and knows that there was not an opportunity to finish it off as the commissioners would have preferred. The Government was impatient to get that report in December 1980. But has displayed no impatience whatsoever in the past four months. It has had that report now for four months. We know that it

has caused deep internal divisions within the Government. We gather that the manic obsession of one man to get his own way within the Cabinet has led to conflicts between him and his Minister for Health of which I shall give examples in a moment. Of course, it has been climaxed by this afternoon's confusion because this statement has been put off again and again as the Minister's office tried to put together all those last minute pieces of paper reflecting last minute revisions in the document.
The Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) told us in his statement concerning the Jamison report:
I believe that the Commission's report has provided a sound basis on which to develop an equitable and responsible health policy.
Anybody who has read the Jamison report knows that the statements that have just been made derive not at all from the Jamison report. Indeed the Government has deliberately ignored the major findings of the report in the two major decisions that the Government has made. In this gobbledegook-that is what the first half dozen of these pages are-the Minister has assured us that that report has provided a sound basis for his policy. Let me just take the two major examples. Jamison opposed the absorption of hospital costs into general revenue grants to the States. Yet the Government has ignored him. Let us see what the Liberal Minister for Health, Mr Borthwick, in Victoria-he is no friend of the Australian Labor Party-had to say about the way the Jamison report has been used by this Government. Let me quote from a statement published in the Age on 14 April 1981. It states:
He said it suggested that Mr MacKellar had used the Jamison inquiry into hospitals, released in January, "as a cynical exercise and not as a genuine method of arriving at more efficient and equitable means ofhealth funding".
And this is the important point:
"The Jamison inquiry was a joint exercise between the Commonwealth and the States aimed at finding a rational basis for the funding of health services. Your Government's proposal to make critical decisions in this area without consulting the States is outrageous," . . .
The important point is that the Jamison committee was a joint committee. Its terms of reference 'were provided by the States and the Commonwealth to find an agreed and rational policy on hospitals. Yet this Government has rejected the major finding of the Jamison report on hospitals.
Secondly, regarding health insurance, even the Jamison committee, during its discussions on all the reactionary alternatives that it could find, did not contemplate a general deductibility health insurance scheme, but the Government has opted for one. Let me make it quite clear where this

Health Care Services

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1723

Government stands in relation to Jamison. It has ignored the major recommendation in relation to hospitals. The proposal which the Government has come up with in relation to health insurance was not discussed by the Committee.
Let me outline what-the Minister has done in relation to hospitals. His general assumption is stated thus:
The Government has therefore decided that the funds it provides for public hospitals, the general Community Health Program and the School Dental Scheme should be included in general revenue grants.
That proposal has been opposed by Jamison. Let us look at what Jamison said about that proposal. He opposed the proposal on the following grounds:
The Commission's view is that the existence of some form of identified funding for health services has come to be generally accepted as a means of ensuring that a high standard of health care is available across State boundaries for the Australian population.
That was the basic reason. Because of a concern for a national hospital provision Jamison opposed the major proposal which the Government has made this afternoon. Of course, it is not just Jamison. Every major national health organisation is this country has opposed the proposal. Let me start with the Australian Medical Association. The AMA recommended:
The present Commonwealth-State hospital cost-sharing arrangements be replaced by special purpose grants rather than the absorption of the health budget into general purpose payments to the States. These special purpose grants are designed to maintain national health care standards.
So the AMA in its submissions to the Government quite clearly opposed what has been the major proposal today regarding hospitals. The Voluntary Health Insurance Association of Australia also opposed what has been the Government's major proposal. It said:
The proposal for absorbing hospital funding into the general revenue grants to the States would seem to have serious disadvantages. Without the Commonwealth placing conditions upon its hospital grants to States there would no longer be a national hospitals policy.
The Australian Hospital Association also opposed the proposal. It stated:
The AHA supports the end to the Cost-Sharing Agreement, but only when an adequate block grant formula is developed.
So there we have it. All the major national organisations oppose the proposal that has been introduced.
Mr Donald Cameron-Are you saying the States are stupid?
Dr BLEWETT-lam just discussing it. The Jamison committee also opposed the proposal but, even more interestingly, it appears that the Minister opposes the proposal that he introduced

this afternoon. In the Age on Friday, 27 February, the Minister is reported to have told a back bench committee of his own party something which has not been denied in the Age, even though the Minister has had some months in which to do so. Numerous other statements have confirmed his position. Let me quote the article at length. It states:
Mr MacKellar told Wednesday's back bench committee meeting that there needed to be a national approach to hospital care. If hospital grants were absorbed, a national approach would be destroyed, and standards and conditions would vary.
Mr Donald Cameron-Who wrote that? Dr BLEWETT-The honourable member can check with Michelle Grattan. The Minister is reported to have stated that a national approach to hospital care would be undermined if there were an absorption of grants. The statement has never been denied. So there we have the reported, undenied view of the Minister himself. Jamison and every major health organisation in the country is opposed to what has been announced today. Even the Minister seems to have doubts about his own policy. It is, of course, no doubt to be explained by what we were told in the House yesterday-that one man in the Government has an obsessive determination to get his own way despite the views of his Ministers and despite the views of most informed national providers of health care in this society. Those groups and the Minister for Health, I think, have very good reasons for the positions they took. Let me suggest some of the reasons why it is unwise and likely to be disastrous for this country to abandon a major Commonwealth input to priorities in relation to hospitals, the community health programs and school dental services. First of all, the point has been made in numerous statements that there should be a national provision. Surely, at the end of the twentieth century we should have advanced sufficiently far to have some notion that in the field of health there is a need for a national provision, a national overview, of hospitals and health services in this country. This is undermined by the decision that has just been made. Secondly, if one is concerned with efficiency in health services then surely the system of insurance or health cover, which is a Commonwealth responsibility, should also be linked with responsibility in relation to the hospitals themselves. As we know, at the moment many of the problems arising in the hospital sector are arising because of problems and faults in the health insurance system. Those two have to go together. For the Commonwealth Government to go on retaining the

1724 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Health Care Services

health cover system while handing back the responsibility for hospitals to the States is clearly to introduce inefficiencies into the system. This divorce between the responsibility for national health cover and responsibility in relation to hospitals will clearly lead to inefficiency. Let us admit quite clearly that there will have to be, however it is done, an interdependence in these responsibilities. But this Government is giving away major elements whereby the Commonwealth can make an effective contribution to an inevitable interdependence. As things are at this stage in this society, we will never get rid of Commonwealth involvement in the health field. But by these decisions, we are giving away a major way in which the Commonwealth can participate effectively in that inevitably interdependent relationship.
Again we see this interdependence in another weakness that has arisen. We will have the most complex administrative procedures to ensure that the Commonwealth will cover all those patients in public hospitals who are pension beneficiaries or disadvantaged persons. I am happy with some of the decisions that have been made in that field but, because of the division ofresponsibility, there will be the most horrendously complex system whereby the Commonwealth will meet its funding commitments to all those groups for hospitals which are now fully in the hands of the States.
Of course, the decision on absorption will also lead, quite clearly, to the ending of the free public hospital system in this country. No doubt some members on the other side of the House will be happy that the experiment in free public hospitals in this country has been brought to an end. Quite clearly, it is the intention of the Government to enforce, squeeze and compel the States to charge for in~patients-a proposal that was opposed by Jamison-and to charge for out-patients. There will be a deliberate squeezing on the hospitals. On the Minister's calculation, he hopes to squeeze back about $250m, which the States will have to make up in charges or, as some State Ministers are contemplating, covering costs by hospital levies and hospital taxes. The Government probably will get its dual taxation out of this, in a sense, by the back door. But if we look at the figures, making allowances for inflationary expectations, something like $250m will be squeezed out next year. That means that something like five million bed days will have to be paid for by people who do not pay for them at the moment. Two million of those bed days will be in Queensland because Queensland, as honourable members know, has one of the most developed public hospital systems in this country. So it is not surprising that State

Ministers are fairly critical of the way in which they are being squeezed by these policies. As I have suggested, it may not be just hospital charges that are affected; it is known that many of the States are looking to add hospital taxes and levies to the program.
Another consideration is that by putting the Community Health Program and the School Dental Scheme into the same grant, quite clearly the Community Health Program and the School Dental Scheme will be deeply disadvantaged. The reason they will be disadvantaged is because of the institutional demands of the hospitals. It is inevitable that the kinds of pressures under which the hospitals exist and the influence they will have with State governments will mean that those smaller and less institutionalised programs, such as the Community Health Program and the School Dental Scheme, will tend to go to the wall.
Mr Donald Cameron-The States will decide that.
Dr BLEWETT -But they will be forced to. If honourable members understand the sorts of pressures applied to the limited funds by high-cost institutions, such as hospitals, honourable members will see that the inevitable victims will be those weaker, smaller and much less institionalised services. Of course, that contradicts what the Minister says in other parts of his statement. At various parts of his statement the Minister made the point that he wants to encourage deinstitutionalisation. Yet the effect of this hospital decision will be to threaten the whole development of the Community Health Program and, I think, to undermine the position of the School Dental Scheme.
It is not surprising, therefore, that, the Minister for Health in Queensland-in another non-Labor State Government-has said:
It has been stated by the Commonwealth that the states will be forced to means test at public hospitals. This statement would indicate that the commonwealth has absolutely no idea of what's involved in the running and operation of a public hospital system.
Queensland, over a period of 35 years has exercised stringent, but successful, cost-containment measures in the administration of its public hospitals and this factor must be recognised by the Commonwealth Government in any new funding arrangement.
Of course, it is not recognised in the funding arrangements announced tonight.
One might also ask the Treasurer (Mr Howard) whether he has thought through the economic effects of these redecisions. If one examines reports from Canada and the United States of America it is clear that general revenue grants, compared with specific purpose grants,

Health Care Services

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1725

have detrimental effects on the macro economic to induce more people to obtain private health in-

situation. For instance, the evidence from Canada surance. There are something like 3. 5 million

and the United States shows that general revenue people who are not covered by insurance. The

grants do not stimulate as much tax effort by the Government has designed a series of proposals

In States as do specific purpose grants. The evidence which have one specific purpose-to drive and to
from Canada suggests also that general revenue induce people in taking out health insurance.

grants do not stimulate as much State current this, of course, the Government has some limited

spending as do specific purpose grants. Of course, support from Jamison. Jamison did not ask him-

that is because the States too often-again this is self the central and fundamental question that the

because they are subject to many of these immediCommission should have asked on health in-

ate local pressures-put their money into capital surance; that is, what is the best health insurance

expenditure. That is the last thing we want in the system for this country?

development of health services in the country at this time. But the Canadian evidence shows quite clearly that under these general revenue grants current spending may be affected but that capital spending tends to go up.

Jamison asked a much narrower question which no doubt was conceived by the Government: What is the best way of propping up the private insurance industry in this country? The answer that he came up with was a series of sticks

Mr Donald Cameron-Are you saying the and carrots. The sticks were to beat people into

States do not have the ability to control it?

private health insurance and the carrots were to

Dr BLEWETT-States get pressurised more in relation to capital spending, and all the evidence

induce them in. We have been shown some splendid sticks and some splendid carrots tonight.

suggests that this is so. General revenue grants do Let us look at the sticks in this proposal. The

not seem to reduce State Government deficits as Government has proposed to force, compel or

much as specific purpose grants. So if those anapush people into private insurance by stating, first

lyses from Canada and the United States are corof all, that there will be no Commonwealth medi-

rect, the general management of the economy will cal benefit for the uninsured. Even though all

decline as a result of the decisions announced toAustralians are taxpayers, they are not to get any

night. Finally, let me remind honourable part of that taxpayer benefit unless they have

members of what the Prime Minister (Mr made a contract with a private insurance agency.

Malcolm Fraser) said about hospitals in that Despite the fact that all Australians pay taxes,

major philosophical utterance that he delivered in they are to be denied any tax benefit if they are

Adelaide earlier this year. He said:

uninsured. They will not get the Commonwealth

. . . the process of change be a deliberate and considered medical benefit if they are not insured. Of course,

one so that those things which most Australians value highly there is quite a generous Commonwealth medical

are not lost or damaged in the process.

benefit for those who are insured. But all tax-

The appallingly. dramatic changes that will be payers who have contributed to the general funds

imposed in the next 12 months in the hospital syswill not get any medical benefit unless they have

tem are certainly a classic example of a very sigmade a contract with a private health insurance

nificant and massive change, although certainly fund.

not a very considered one. People who have looked at these proposals have suggested that even .if it is intended to move to absorption into general revenue funds, clearly it should have been done over a number of years. If that were to be done, and if there were a commitment to some notion of gradual change and to making sure that the changes were deliberate and considered ones, then a timetable should be worked out for this move, rather than having a dramatic and dislocating move. I think honourable members will learn tomorrow and in the next week the kinds of dislocations that this move provides to the whole health scheme.

Secondly, the Government envisages the imposition of hospital charges. I do not quite know how some of these charges are to be imposed. The problems are pretty daunting and this was one of the reasons why Jamison refused to go along with such a proposal. We have seen some of the things that have happened recently in America in relation to the notion of injured and sick people turning up at hospitals and not being admitted until they have shown that they could pay for the treatment. This process is now being adopted in this country, except in relation to the very poor. I admit that the Government has made that special provision, although, as I said, it has quite horren-

Let me turn to the other major aspect of the dous problems in administering those complex in-

statement that the Minister made. I refer to income tests. But hospital charges will be

surance. Quite clearly the proposals that have implemented, again designed primarily to force

been made tonight are designed simply to drive or people into private health insurance. These

1726 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Health Care Services

charges will apply not only to in-patients but also to those people who have been using the outpatient services. A lot of private doctors have been very worried about this use of out-patient services because people have been flooding off to the hospitals. I do not deny that this causes problems in the hospitals, but I do not believe that imposing these sets of charges is the way in which to solve the problem.
By denying Commonwealth medical benefits to the uninsured and by imposing hospital charges, and possibly by means of other results of the Government's decision on hospitals, the Government hopes that people will be forced to insure. As I have said, I think it is very likely that the Community Health Program in the States will be completely undermined by the decision because of the effective institutional pressures of the hospitals. So again we will have another pressure forcing people towards insurance as a result of the demise of the community health centres. On the carrot side we have some classic carrots because the Government decided that it could not just beat people into private insurance; it had to provide some inducements as well. First of all there is the minimum inducement of increased basic cover: That is, instead of a 75 per cent return on insurance, 85 per cent of the standard fee will be returned and there will be a maximum contribution of only $10 per service. So there is an improvement from 75 per cent to 85 per cent so it will be somewhat more worthwhile to have insurance.
Of course the real carrot, the great and outstanding carrot, is to have a separate tax rebate of 32c in the dollar. This will cost some $600m. While the rebate system in itself is not individually regressive or individually unfair, in aggregate to the community, it is quite clearly regressive because of the pattern of insurance in this society, a pattern which will basically continue whatever these inducements and sticks. I think the Government will have some success but, I suggest, not very much success. If we look, for instance, at the present rates of medical insurance we find that only 52 per cent of people with gross weekly incomes of between $120 and $159 are insured. At the well off end of the scale people receiving gross weekly incomes of $300 and more, 83.5 per cent are insured. That means that the use of this rebate in aggregate across the community favours the rich as against the less well off. We will leave the really disadvantaged alone because there is a separate provision for them. But, this kind of rebate is a redistribution to the better off in aggregatethat is, in total across the community. We have a pattern of health insurance in this couJltry which

is now culturally entrenched and will not be much changed by these measures. There is a close correlation between one's income and whether one has insurance.
Mr Donald Cameron-What about the rebate? It is evenly applied.
Dr BLEWETT-;-I will deal with what the re~ bate does in a moment. I am glad the honourable member asked that question. Let me finish the point I was making. In this society there is a relationship between private health insurance and income. It is an almost perfect-but not quite perc fect-correlation. The higher one's income the more likely one is to be insured; the lower one's income the less likely one is to be insured. So this kind of tax rebate system is over the whole community regressive and inequitable.
Let me tackle the question that was asked by the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron). The cost of this rebate amounts to $600m. One thought the Government was being generous. For one moment one thought that some strange shaft of lightning had hit this contemptible government. But we find the explanation for its actions if we look at the statement by the Treasurer. We now learn that half tax indexation will last merely for this year. The Prime Minister made a promise during the election campaign on half tax indexation adjustments. I said in the very first statement that I madein this House that with this Prime Minister we had to read the fine print of every pledge. If we read the fine print of the pledge made by the Prime Minister in September 1980 we will find that the reference to half tax indexation did refer to the next 12 months only. It was suggested-certainly the headlines suggested-that it was a much more extensive and generous promise. If we look at the fine print we will discover that it was to last for 12 months only. Now we are told it will apply for only 12 months because it involves almost exactly the same amount of money as this rebate scheme.
Half tax indexation is to disappear next year and the money involved will be taken up or covered by this rebate scheme. There has been a switch. We have been given the rebate and the half tax indexation has been taken away. The Government has not added at all to its commitment to the taxpayers of this society. It has simply done a con trick. It will go out tomorrow-the Minister is probably out already-talking about the Government's great generosity. But quite clearly it is a con trick because it has cancelled out what was a clear promise made by the Prime Minister which most people accepted would involve a pursuit of half indexation for at least the three

Health Care Services

29 April 198] REPRESENTATIVES 1727

years of this Parliament, whatever the actual fine print of the Prime Minister's pledge. But no. The money is needed in order to fund this rebate.
Let us go one step further to answer the question of the honourable member for Fadden. If we consider most of the implications of these changes we find that health insurance rates will have to go up. It is impossible for me to calculate tonight what the percentage of that rise will be. I will not suggest figures because it is difficult given that I have had the statement for only an hour and a half. Let there be no doubt that there will be a distinct increase in health contribution rates. The obvious reasons for that happening are that all hospital charges will go up and the medical rebate has been raised from 75 per cent to 85 per cent. There is no way of escaping an increase in contribution rates. When the whole exercise is finished we will probably find that with half-yearly indexation gone, and the increase in the contribution rates people will be even more disadvantaged than the proposal would appear to mean on
the surface.
What have these proposals achieved? They are primarily designed to benefit private hospitals, private insurance and the well off sector of the community and to provide a limited protection for the clearly disadvantaged. On the other hand the result of these proposals will deny effective free public hospital treatment to the people of this country. They are regressive and unfair across the great broad swath of income taxpayers. They have been proposed-as nearly every proposal has been proposed by this Government in the health field-not in pursuit of a better health care provision for this country but simply in terms of the limited financial vision of this Government. This is why the fifth Fraser health scheme will be as much a failure as the previous four.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Sitting suspended from 5.58 to 8 p.m.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (8.0)-The health services arrangements which have been announced to the Parliament by the Government today are nothing more than a great medical confidence trick. They represent a snide strategy to promote the fortunes of private medicine, private hospitals and private health insurance organisations. The arrangements will be a bonanza for them. But the people who will have to pay will be not so much the poor people as the people who are not so well off in the community, who will be unable to insure themselves, who will take the risk of not insuring themselves and who

will therefore not have available to them the various forms of government subsidies and concessions announced tonight but who, nonetheless,
through the taxation system will subsidise these changes. The most miserable aspect of the proposals which have come before us is the shoddy way, the deceitful way, in which the Government has sought to shoot through the last rites on tax indexation on, believe it or not, a health insurance Bill.
I will go through a number of the objections which the Opposition has to these proposals. First, the proposals will set back health services
funding by more than a decade. They will take us back to the pre-1970s period when the community was expressing widespread dissatisfaction and anger at the deficiencies in the health insurance and health services arrangements. We will go back to the situation in which, because of the high cost of health insurance, the people who are less well off but who will miss out on the benefits of cover as pensioners or as disadvantaged persons
will play Russian roulette with their health, will face the risk of catastrophic health charges confronting them at some stage in their life. That is no ~xaggeration, that is not drawing a long bow; that IS a replay of the conditions which arose in Australia in that period before the introduction of the original Medibank program. The complexity of the arrangements will ensure, as did those circumstances applying to health insurance more than a decade ago up to the introduction of the original Medibank scheme, that particular groups will be massively disadvantaged by the new complex system-people such as migrants, who will not understand the processes.
I move to the more substantial objections that we have. Those I have mentioned are substantial enough, but these are the ones that outrage us. These proposals are a golden handshake for private medicine and private hospitals in this country. They are nothing more than an hydraulic lift to promote the fortunes of those groups. Let us look at what will happen with these changes. If the Government has its way, some two million people will be locked out of the public wards of public hospitals. Where will they go? Will they go to the private wards of public hospitals? More likely, as a result of certain changes I will mention in a minute, they will go to private hospitals. It means very simply that if they go to either of those sources of treatment private medicine will derive much greater profit. No wonder the Australian Medical Association tonight was trumpeting its
satisfaction with what the Government has done.
To the extent that people will be forced out of the private wards of public hospitals into private

1728 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Health Care Services

hospitals, the private hospitals also will enjoy a between the ages of 20 and 24 years today can an-

bonanza. There is no doubt that will happen, for a ticipate hysterectomies in the course of their life-

number of reasons. There will be a substantial intime. It is bad medicine. But it is also bad business

crease in the cost of bed occupancy in shared or for the community because it will promote private

single room private accommodation in public hospitals as blue chip corporate investment. That

hospitals. That will make the small private hospiis where the action will be.

tals a better proposition for many people. Again, there will be a generous increase in subsidies for private hospitals-a 75 per cent increase in the bed day costs of those private hospitals. That will make it more attractive to go to those places. That will pump up costs in an unbelievable way. It is bad medicine. It is bad health services planning. As the gentlemen from the Department of Health would well understand, it will do nothing to contain the increases in health services costs in this country. That is where the rip-off is taking place. As those gentlemen will understand, what it will do will be to promote the surgery mills, the playgrounds.9f the sporting surgeons in this country.
Mr Hodges-Rubbish.

We already have the Hospital Corporation of America moving, into Australia-a big multibillion dollar transnational health services corporation. It has been brought into several Australian hospitals so far. Of course, the director with his special skills was brought straight from Kentucky Fried Chicken in the southern states of the United States of America to become director of this health services organisation. It is a big money winner. That organisation is operating in Adelaide, among other places, with a $3.5m hospital with 68 beds and elaborate facilities. Of course, it charges like a wounded bull. It will be able to charge even more woundily as a result of the proposals because there will be more subsidies. The price of

Mr HAYDEN-It is not rubbish. When I was Minister for Social Security in charge of the administration of health insurance, Department of Health officials told me constantly that the greatest worry they had was the surgery mills in those small private hospitals in the community

competitive hospital services in the public sector for private beds will be pushed up higher. It will be able to get that subsidy, lift its prices, keep them below the charges, pace-set in the public sector for private beds. There will be a real bonanza. The community will be ripped off.

ripping out clean organs to make profits for the hospitals and for the doctors using them. Let us look at conditions in Australia, at the extraordinarily high rate of elective surgery procedures undertaken. The Australian rate for tonsillectomies is about 20 per cent when the rate should be only about 6 per cent. Why? The reason is fee for service and the small private hospitals. It is profitable to perform them. The more they take out, the more they make. If we have too many doctors they will undertake too many procedures. An article by Paul Ormonde in the Melbourne Herald stated:

Nothing in the proposals attends to the problem of cost escalation. They will make public hospital private treatment much more expensive. On my calculations there will be an increase of at least $20 a day. The objective of the Government is to lift the charges from $50 for shared accommodation and $75 for single accommodation for private rooms in a public hospital to $150 a day or thereabouts. The average cost of a bed day is about $150. I repeat: The proposals will push up health insurance costs, they will allow private hospitals to push up their prices and they will push patients out into commercial medicine. They

The Manager of a country hospital estimated that in the will downgrade the role of the public hospital ser-

past 10 years, 3,000 tonsillectomies and 3,000 appendicectomies has been performed. The population of the town was 5,OOO-the hospital service area population 20,000. This rate is twice the national average.

vices in this community. They will reimpose the stigmatisation of public hospital treatment. Once again, public wards will be recognised as paupers

The honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) said 'Rubbish'. If anyone here is to pontificate on rubbish, no one is better qualified than he is. Let us look at the condition of women in Australia today. Australia has more than four times the number of gynaecologists and obstetricians in proportion to population as have England and Wales. Australian surgeons perform-honourable

hall. People will go there with a stigma, with a tag attached stating: 'You are different from the rest of the community, you are not as well off'. They will go in with a sort of crestfallen feeling, a loss of self-confidence and of self-respect. We will return to the grim old days that existed in this country before the introduction of the original Medibank scheme.

members will not be surprised at this-four times I make this point too, which will probably

the number of gynaecological operations as do escape the Minister for Health (Mr Mackellar).

British surgeons. The consequence of that will be Doing this, restricting to a very small focus the

that more than 40 per cent of Australian women sorts of people who can use public ward treatment

Health Care Services

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1729

and public hospitals, is very bad in terms of medical training in this country. It will mean that at teaching hospitals the range of medical experience available to undergraduates at our medical schools will be enormously limited and in consequence, their skills, their qualities and their abilities will be diminished. As I said, there will be a tremendous boost to private health insurance. Commonwealth medical benefits will be available only for those in funds. So much for the great freedom-loving Government which is opposite; so much for freedom of choice and individual rights. What the Government is doing is holding a gun at everyone's head and saying: 'Get into a fund or we will not give you a Commonwealth benefit even though you paid it with your taxes'. That is the most obnoxious part for me. The arrangement is going to punish those who pay their way but who pay their way without joining a fund. They will get no Commonwealth subsidy, but they are going to be told that they will have to subscribe to the cost of that arrangement.
There will be savage penalties imposed on States like Queensland. I will tell the House what is going to happen in Queensland. About one million bed days of public ward treatment will be either terminated to meet the demands of the Government or else met at the cost of the State Government of Queensland. An average additional cost of $70 a day will work out at $70m a year. That is the sort of penalty that this Government, which claims it is concerned about cooperation with the States, is going to impose on Queensland where we have had for more than four decades free hospitalisation which was introduced, I might add, by a socialist State government, but which has been preserved by a succession of governments regardless of their colour. The Government wants the standard of services in Queensland turned back by more than four decades. Let us see what the Liberal Party Health Minister in Queensland said tonight. A newspaper report states:
The Federal Government had brutally and deliberately set about wrecking the public hospital system, Queensland Health Minister Brian Austin said tonight . . .
The Queensland Government was now faced with its greatest crisis in health care since federation, he said in a Brisbane news release.
That is what the Government is trying to achieve. Its action will have devastating consequences on that State.
The retreat from any direct involvement in the provision of the nation's health services is inexcusable. One thing we sought to do in government was to provide not only universal cover with the original Medibank health insurance program but

also to involve ourselves co-operatively-that is, in support of the States-to provide improved community health services, improved public hospitals, the initiation and the development of community health centres and the provision of school dental health services. All these are vital areas, especially in the more needy suburbs and communities of this country. The funding is all going to be buried into general funding arrangements with the States. We know what is going to happen in the conservative States which give a much lower priority to the needs and the rights of people in this country. The promotion of improved quality and comprehensiveness, adequacy and satisfaction in those services will expire.
I mentioned that this will be a more costly program. The cost of health insurance is going to increase. The contribution rates of hospital insurance will increase by about 40 per cent. Medical insurance rates will increase by about 15 per cent. The increase will be about $2 a week. Of course, there will be some offsets with the tax rebate, but at best it will be of the order of SOc to 60c a week. It will not get one anything better than a one way trip on the Manly ferry, and I doubt that. In June contribution rates are to go up and probably this will eliminate any benefit. Certainly with other cost increases there will be disadvantages. I mentioned that it will be more costly. It will raise private hospital fees by $20 a day. The effects of the health insurance changes in one quarter will be to add half a per cent to the consumer price index. On top of that, hospital fees will add further to the consumer price index. It is a poorly thought out arrangement. [t is an arrangement which not only disadvantages people but also works quite contrary to the management of the economy as the Government declares its intent.
The Government will, in some respects, give a windfall gain to some States. For instance, if the Government is determined to destroy free public ward treatment against the wishes of the State the result will be that where the patient was fully cost shared between the Commonwealth and the State he will be pushed into private accommodation. It will mean that the States will pick up half of the contribution-half of the $50 a day or whatever it is at the moment. It will mean that the Commonwealth will have to meet 30 per cent of all the medical charges where before it was cost sharing. That is a much more unsatisfactory way. It will mean that the States will make savings because private medical practitioners are providing services for those patients.

1730 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Health Care Services

When we put all these things together, they are the ingredients of even more confusion, more dissatisfaction and clear evidence that the Government once again, with the latest in this long chain of changes to health insurance, has not thought through properly the implications of what it has put forward. The explanation is simple. The explanation is this: There has been, not uncharac, teristically within the ranks of the Government, a massive brawl as to exactly what the changes were to be. The Minister had been proposing that there ought to be block grants identified for health services purposes. (Extension of time granted). I thank the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair). The Prime Minister, in his well-established, obstinate way, was determined that the money should be absorbed in the general allocations to the States. The Prime Minister, after brawling last night and brawling this morning-they will all be punchdrunk the way they have been brawling latelywon out. The consequence is that we have those proposals before us. They will be as confusing and as unsatisfactory as have been all the other changes in the past.
I come to the tenth point I want to make, and that is the shockingly snide effort of the Government to try to slide through, in the course of the deliberation on health services and health financing Bills before the House, the termination of tax indexation. Taxpayers are going to be some $500m a year worse off. They are not losing full indexation,but they are going to lose half tax indexation. We all remember the promise of the Government in 1975. The Prime Minister in his policy speech said:

We will encourage people's initiative and enterprise, not batter them into the ground with punishing taxes.
He went on to say:
We will reduce the tax burden.
Further, he said:
We will fully index personal income tax for inflation over three years.
He added for good measure:
It will make government more honest with your money. They will no longer be able to rely on the secret tax increase of inflation.
Fancy anyone believing the Fraser Government would be more honest with one's money or honest with anything. Look at its record. What happened, of course, was that we got the warningthe Gold Coast by-election. The Prime Minister in a television interview on Channel 7 said:
I think one of the problems of full indexation is that! don't believe people understood it. I think the reductions in tax went passed almost unnoticed . . . you have to expect politicians to want people to understand that when they have reduced taxes, when the election comes around they will remember it . . . I think everyone had forgotten it by the time the election actually took place.
So that is the basis upon which the Government makes great decisions of principle. The consequence is that there will no longer be any tax indexation. The facts also are that we have never had full tax indexation in the history of this Government. It has been much, much less. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table which shows the effect on taxpayers of the elimination of any tax indexation at all.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

TAX INCREASES

Income $pw

10 per cent

Tax

Current increase without

$pa tax ($ pa) in income indexation

Increase $pw percent

140 200 280 (AWE) 560

7,280 10,400 14,560 29,120

1,036 2,035 3,366
9,689

8,008 1l,440 16,016 32,032

1,269 2,368 3,832
1l,028

4.48 22.5 6.40 16.3 8.96 13.8 25.75 13.8

AWE-Average weekly earning.

Mr HAYDEN-This is a totally unsatisfactory response to our national health services needs. It does nothing to contain costs; indeed it will aggravate those cost problems. It totally ignores the problem of excess doctor supply, excessive medical treatment initiated by private practitioners and the lack of control over private hospitals. It promotes private health insurance funds in spite of public dissatisfaction with them. Every second Australian believes private health insurance does not give benefit for money and two out of three

flatly oppose the present system. It will be much more expensive for the public, but the Government does not care. It is shifting most of that cost onto the shoulders of a long-suffering people.
This is the latest change to a seemingly endless chain of confusing alterations to health insurance in the past five years. We repudiate it. We will, in the near future, announce a new universal health system to replace this shoddy, patched-up arrangement that punishes people and promotes the

National Health Amendment Bill

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1731

fortunes of private hospitals, private medicine and private health insurance at their expense.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hodges) adjourned.
NATIONAL HEALTH (PHARMACEUTICAL BENEFITS)
AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr MacKellar, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health) (8.20)-1 move:-
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The Bill seeks to give effect to a decision of the Government to establish an independent tribunal to determine the remuneration to chemists for the supply of pharmaceutical benefits. Under present legislation, the rates of remuneration payable to chemists for the supply of pharmaceutical benefits are determined by the Joint Committee on Pharmaceutical Benefits Pricing Arrange ments. This Committee comprises four represen tatives of the Pharmacy Guild of Australia and four Government representatives under an independent chairman. The framework within which the Joint Committee must operate has proven difficult in relation to the formulation of chemists' remuneration. There have been three inquiries into pharmacy earnings, costs and profits since 1964-65 and no agreement has been possible between the Government and the Pharmacy Guild of Australia on the results of any of those inquiries. The Government believes that the most appropriate mechanism to overcome the existing problem is the establishment of a tribunal sitting in a public forum.
Honourable members will recall that during 1980 the parliamentary Joint Committee of Public Accounts conducted a detailed inquiry into the 'Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme-Chemists Re muneration'. In its report tabled in this House on 17 September 1980, the Committee recom mended amongst other matters, that a tribunal be established to replace the existing Joint Committee. The Bill now before the House reflects the Government's acceptance of the parliamentary Joint Committee's recommendation on this particular matter. The Government currently has the other recommendations of that Committee under consideration.
The Government believes that there are a number of advantages to be gained by establishing a public tribunal. First, it will remove from the political arena the question of the level of fees

paid to chemists for the dispensing of pharmaceu tical benefits. Both the chemists and the Government will be bound by the tribunal's decisions. Secondly, it will provide a forum in which all interested parties may publicly argue their case whilst ensuring that the levels of chemists' re muneration are determined by an independent body. Thirdly, it will remove the need for the Government to finance cumbersome and costly inquiries of the sort that have been conducted since 1964-65.
I inform honourable members that the results of the latest inquiry in 1977-78 were not accept able to the Pharmacy Guild and an interim settle ment was arrived at. Under that settlement there was to be a study of alternative methodologies for determining chemists' remuneration and a review of the level of remuneration to be completed by 1 July 1981. However within the existing frame work it has not been possible to reach agreement on methodology. I would draw honourable members' attention to clause 10 of the Bill, which provides that the Tribunal shall complete its first inquiry and hand down its findings and the reasons for them by 1 July 1981. I am aware that this will place a large workload on the Tribunal but I think that it is essential that the earlier promise to pharmaceutical chemists be kept.
The Bill provides that the tribunal is to consist of a chairman, appointed by the Governor General, and two other members appointed by the Minister for Health. The Bill also provides that the chairman is to be a Deputy President of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. The other two members will necessarily be per sons who have business and accounting skills so that they can make a worthwhile contribution to the deliberations of the tribunal. Proposed new section 98BB does however allow the tribunal to continue to perform its functions in circumstances where one or both of the members other than the chairman have not been appointed. In order to ex pedite the first review, which as I have said must be completed by 1 July 1981, the tribunal in the first instance will be constituted only by the chair man. I can inform honourable members that the Government would be in a position to submit a name to the Governor-General for appointment as chairman as soon as the Act receives royal assent.
The function of the tribunal, as provided for in proposed new section 98B, is to determine the manner in which the Commonwealth price of all or any pharmaceutical benefits is to be ascer tained for the purpose of payment by the Government to approved chemists for the supply by them

1732 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

National Health Amendment Bill

of pharmaceutical benefits. In fulfilling its functhe Medicines Commission of the United King-

tion the Bill requires the tribunal to hold an indom. The British Pharmacopoeia is the basic ref-

quiry at least annually. These inquiries are to be erence standard for drugs and medicinal prep-

conducted in public and I see these public heararations that are available as pharmaceutical

ings as very important. It means that all interested benefits. This Bill is an important measure and

parties will be able to make submissions to the triwill pave the way for more orderly administration

bunal for consideration at a public hearing. I of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme. I com-

would point out that the Joint Committee of Pubmend this Bill to the House.

lic Accounts was critical of the existing system under which only the Government's and the

Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.

Pharmacy Guild of Australia's views are con-
sidered to the exclusion of other interested groups. This is because the existing Joint Committee on Pharmaceutical Benefits Pricing Arrangements operates in private and its findings are

REPATRIATION (PHARMACEUTICAL BENEFITS) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr MacKellar, and read a first time.

not open to public scrutiny. The Bill before the house removes these anomalies.

Second Reading Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for

The chairman of the tribunal will of course Health) (8.29)-1 move:

bring any proposed inquiry to the attention of the public by extensive advertising in the media. Notwiths~anding the requirement for public hearings, the BIll allows the tnbunal the discretion to determine that, because of the confidential nature of a submission, a hearing or part of a hearing should be conducted in private. It is proposed that the tribunal will decide the criteria that it considers appropriate in determining the fees or other amounts to be included in the Commonwealth price of pharmaceutical benefits. In deciding the criteria the tribunal shall take into account any principles determined by the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission as being appropriate for fixation of award wages or salaries. The tribunal will not be bound to act in a formal manner and will not be bound by any rules of evidence but may inform itself of any matter as it thinks
jtuhset.tI~nibaucncalorsdhaanlcl eawc titahctchoerdpirnogpot oseedqlueigtiys,lagtiooond
conSCIence and the merits of each case without undue emphasis on legalism.
There are two other matters which I should mention. First, the Repatriation Act is also being amended to allow the tribunal to consider the level of chemists' remuneration for pharmaceuticals dispensed under the Repatriation Benefits Scheme. The second point is that the tribunal will be serviced by the Department of Administrative Services. This is consistent with that Department's present servicing role of the two existing independent tribunals established under the Remuneration Tribunals Act. Finally, I would draw honourable members' attention to the provision in clause 3 of the Bill which would amend the definition of British Pharmacopoeia. This amendment

That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits and to reduce delays to certain applications for review by the Repatriation Review Tribunal. In the first instance, the proposed amendment will enable the Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal, that is to be established by the National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Bill 1981, to determine the level of remuneration payable to pharmacists who dispense prescriptions under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme currently administered under the medical treatment provisions of the Repatriation Act 1920. To achieve this, the Bill inserts a new section in the Repatriation Act 1920, section 109, which empowers the Minister formally to establish a Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme to provide pharmaceutical benefits to persons eligible to receive medical treatment under the Repatriation Act and associated legislation.
The Bill empowers the Minister to request the proposed Pharmaceutical Benefits Remuneration Tribunal to extend its inquiry to include the level of remuneration payable to pharmaceutical chemists under the Repatriation Scheme. The Bill will provide for the retrospective application of the Tribunal's function to I May 1980. This is to honour an undertaking given by Mr Justice Ludeke, Chairman of the Joint Committee on Pharmaceutical Benefits Pricing Arrangements, that should a subsequent inquiry modify his decision to reduce dispensing fees they would be adjusted accordingly.

is necessary because the publishing authority of The other part of this Bill provides for the

that publication has been changed from the Genamendment of the Repatriation Act 1920 to re-

eral Medical Council of the United Kingdom to duce delays occurring in certain cases that are the

Repatriation Amendment Bill

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1733

vpsuiasbtirojeinacsttiooofnfthaReneAvaicpetpwgliocvTaertriiobnnuinngfaotlrh. erTerhveieveiwecwubrbyryetnthhteepRRroee

patriation Commission of a decision which is the

 subject of  patriation

RanevaiepwplTicnll:tbiounnafloarrerecvoienw.mbyedt

e m

Re s:c

tion 107VL of the Act. These provisions reqmre

the Tribunal to refer back to the Repatriation

Commission any additional evidence presented to

the Tribunal which had not been considered by the Commission or a Repatriation Board but

which the Tribunal considers would have been

relevant to the making of the original decision by

the Commission or Board. This requirement has

led to protracted considerations of certain claims

; and as the amount of additional evidence being
pre ented has been considerable, the resulting

delays have been unacceptable. The proposed

amendment will assist in reducing these delays in

finalising reviews, by conferring on the President

of the Tribunal and the Tribunal itself a dis

cretionary power to consider further evidence in a

hearing rather than the Tribunal having to refer

such evidence, if relevant, back to the Com

mission. I commend the Bill to the House.

Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.

JOINT SITTING: PLACE AND TIME OF MEETING
Message received from the Senate requesting the concurrence of the House in the following res olutions agreed to by the Senate this day:
(1) That, for the purpose of choosing a person to hold the place in the Senate rendered vacant by the death of Senator John William Knight, a senator for the Australian Capital Territory, until the expiration of the term and in accordance with the provisions of the Senate (Representation of Terri tories) Act 1973, as amended by the Senate (Representation of Territories) Amendment Act 1980, the Senate meet with the House of Representatives in a joint sitting.
(2) That the place and time of the Joint Sitting be the
Senate Chamber at I 5 minutes past 2 p.m. on Tuesday, 5 May,
1981.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:
That the message be taken into consideration forthwith.
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the
House) (8.33)-by leave I move:
That the House concurs in the resolutions transmitted in message No. 70 of the Senate relating to the time and place of the Joint Sitting for the purpose of choosing a person to hold the place in the Senate rendered vacant by the death of Senator John William Knight.
I comment very briefly that this will be the first Joint Sitting of the Parliament for a purpose related to the appointment of a senator to replace a deceased senator in either of the two Territories. The only other occasion on which the two Houses have met for the purpose of joint consideration of

matters has been within the terms of the Constitu tion. This procedure that we will be embarking on on 5 May, therefore, is unique and has something of an historical significance for that reason if for no other.
It was felt by the Government that it was ap p ropriate, as the purpose of the meeting is to elect a senator, that the meeting should take place in the Senate. However, as the House of Representa tives is the paramount House within the Australian Constitution it was felt that it would be ap propriate that Mr Speaker sit alongside Mr President during the proceedings. Of course, it will be a matter of each member having a right to exercise the same rights and privileges and, of course, voting capacity as if he were in his own chamber. That means that, significantly, the members of this House will have a major part to play in terms of the result of any proposals that might be put to the Joint Sitting of the two Houses in the Senate.
I see that there is a peculiar significance in the reasons for this meeting, it being for the purpose of electing a senator to replace one who has died. In those circt.mstances the Government has felt it appropriate that the meeting be held in the Senate. Of course, it is only relevant to mention that the other occasion on which the two Houses met conjointly they met in this chamber. Then, of course, it was for a matter related to the purpose of this chamber which we felt was appropriate at that time and we agreed with the proposal of the then Government for that reason. I commend this motion to the House.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith)
(8.35)-The Opposition concurs with the motion. It is important to note-the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) has already drawn this to the attention of the House-that the proposal to have a Joint Sitting in the Senate next week is certainly different from the proposals that we were obliged to consider in 1974. 1 think it ought to be placed on record that the proposal for next week is to fill a casual vacancy caused by the untimely death of the late Senator John Knight. It is to fill a Senate casual vacancy in respect of the Australian Capital Territory. Accordingly, it is appropriate on that basis that both Houses meet in the Senate.
I immediately disabuse the minds of some who feel that the important House of the people-the House of Representatives-is being somewhat usurped for all time and that future joint sittings will necessarily have to be held in the Senate. Again l agree with what the Leader of the House has said. That is not the case. We need to draw the distinction between a casual vacancy in the

1734 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Joint Sitting: Rulesfor Conduct ofBusiness

Senate being filled pursuant to the Senate (Representation of Territories) Act and a Joint Sitting which is obliged to be held pursuant to section 57 of the Constitution. We have the constitutional requirement that, where there is disagreement between the Houses, particularly in respect of legislation, and where there has been a double dissolution and there is still a disagreement, there be a proposal for a Joint Sitting pursuant to section 57 of the Constitution. The precedent established in 1974 would be, I submit, continued; that is, Joint Sittings for that purpose would be held in this House. The rules pertaining to Joint Sittings adopted in 1974 would continue to apply.
The appointment of a chairman of that sitting would be the subject of resolution of those present and entitled to vote at that time. I just make that point because it was thought by some people, even those in the Parliament, that perhaps there would be some change of operation in the future. I just draw that distinction. The procedures for a Joint Sitting in respect of a double dissolution pursuant to section 57 of the Constitution do not apply in this case. This matter relates to a vacancy in the Senate for a territorial senator. The rules proposed on this occasion merely relate to that matter specifically.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
JOINT SITTING: RULES FOR CONDUCT OF BUSINESS
Message received from the Senate acquainting the House with the rules adopted by the Senate for the conduct of the Joint Sitting with the House of Representatives pursuant to section 9 of the Senate (Representation of Territories) Act 1973.
Mr SINCLAIR (New England Leader of the House) (8.37)-by leave--I move:
(l) The the following rules be adopted for the conduct of the Joint Sitting of the Senate and the House of Representatives to choose a senator pursuant to section 9 of the Senate (Representation of Territores) Act 1973:
Matter to be Considered at the Joint Sitting
1. The purpose of the Joint Sitting shall be to choose a person to hold the vacant place in the Senate pursuant to section 9 of the Senate (Representation of Territories) Act 1973, and no other matter shall be considered at the Joint Sitting.
General Rule for Conduct ofBusiness
2. In any matter of procedure not provided for in the following rules, the Standing Orders of the Senate, in force for the time being, shall be followed as far as they can be applied.
Chairman of the Joint Sitting
3. The President of the Senate or, in the absence of the President, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, shall be the Chairman of the Joint Sitting.

Clerks of the Joint Sitting
4. The Clerk of the Senate and the Clerk of the House of Representatives shall act as Joint Clerks of the Joint Sitting and either of them may exercise a function expressed to be exercisable by the Clerk.
Minutes of Proceedings
5. Proceedings of the Joint Sitting shall be recorded by the Joint Clerks, and such records shall constitute the minutes of proceedings of the Joint Sitting and shall be signed by the Joint Clerks.
Time Limit on Speeches
6. No Senator or Member of the House of Representatives may speak for more than 5 minutes on any proposal or question before the Joint Sitting.
Objection to Rulings of Chair
7. If any objection is taken to any ruling of the Chairman, such objection must be taken at once, and a motion of dissent, to be submitted in writing, moved, which, if seconded, shall be proposed to the Joint Sitting, and debate thereon shall proceed forthwith.
Entitlement to Vote
8. On any question arising in the Joint Sitting each Senator and Member of the House of Representatives, including the Chairman, shall have one vote.
Voting
9. Questions shall be decided by a simple majority of the Senators and Members of the House of Representatives present and voting, and, if the votes are equal, the question shall be resolved in the negative.
Choice of a Person to Hold the Vacant Place in the Senate
(10). (a) A Senator or Member of the House of Representatives, addressing himself to the Chair, shall propose a person to hold the vacant place in the Senate and such proposal shall be duly seconded. When any person is so proposed the proposer shall state that such person is willing to hold the vacant place if chosen.
(b) In proposing a person to hold the vacant place in the Senate, the proposer shall declare that that person is eligible to be chosen for the Senate and that the nomination is in accordance with the provisions of sub-section 9(3) of the Senate (Representation of Territories) Act 1973, as amended by the Senate (Representation of Territories) Amendment Act 1980.
(c) If only one person is proposed, and seconded, the Chairman shall declare that such person has been chosen to hold the place of the Senator for the Australian Capital Territory whose place has become vacant.
(d) If more than one person is proposed and seconded, the person to hold the vacant place shall be chosen by ballot. Before the ballot proceeds, the bells shall be rung for three minutes.
(e) Before giving directions to proceed with the ballot, the Chairman shall ask if any Senator or Member of the House of Representatives desires to propose any other person to hold the vacant place, and no other person shall be proposed after the ballot is commenced.
(f) Each Senator and Member of the House of Representatives present shall be provided with a ballot-paper certified by one of the Joint Clerks, and shall vote by writing thereon the name of one of the persons duly proposed, and shall place the ballot-paper in the ballot box.
(g) If two or more persons are proposed, the Chairman shall appoint a person from each House to be a scrutineer.

Join,t Sitting: Rules for Conduct of Business

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1735

nTthuhemescbsrecurrtuointfienveeorestresshs, afwollirrtehepaotchhrteothJf oetihrneetsupCletlretsorokntshs,edsCuhlhaylaliprarmoscapenor.steadin;

the and

(h) No informal vote shall be taken into account.

neobjoaanarcm ll(ilyhito)yettpIowoseffhfroosatthonplhlneeetbrhvipesseooeeetfnrexqissrscousalcnaturalbde,wsaettsh,lhduloaeo;btbsrsmeeucnccritotouetinipetfv.mddeaertebsaseatonthrhlndsleeosrtfthfehiesrcaehwseltlnaievbblusleatymsblvldaeboornetttaaretawkshbemeafsnotgnv,ltaoualhomttneeetdessfmsitdfrhooaeserft termine which of such persons shall be chosen to hold the vacant place, and the person whose name shall be first drawn shall be deemed to have been duly chosen.

(j) Until one of the persons proposed obtains n absolute majority of the votes cast, or (as the case may be) IS chosen by
lot to hold the vacant place, successive ballots shall be taken,
and at each such ballot the name of the person who receives the fewest votes at the preceding ballot shall be excluded.

(k) If on any ballot it is necessary to decide which of two or more persons is to be excluded from a subsequent ballot because of the number of votes for such persons being equal, a special ballot shall be taken at which the names of only those persons shall be submitted, and the name of the person having the fewest votes at such special ballot shall be excluded; but if on any special ballot it shall be necessary to decide which of two or more persons is to be excluded from a subsequent bal lot because of the number of votes for such persons being equal, the scrutineers by drawing lots shall determine which of such persons shall be excluded, and the name of the person last drawn shall be excluded.

(1) If at any ballot, other than the first ballot or a special
ballot, the names of only two persons are submitted and the number of votes for such persons is equal, the scrutineers shall, by drawing lots, determine which of those persons shall be chosen to hold the vacant place, and the person whose
name is first drawn shall be deemed to have been duly chosen.

(m) As soon as any person obtains an absolute majority of the votes cast, or (as the case may be) is chosen by lot to hold the vacant place, the Chairman shall declare that such person has been chosen to hold the place of the Senator for the Aus
tralian Capital Territory whose place has become vacant.

(n) The ballot-papers shall be retained by the Clerk of the Senate, who shall be the custodian thereof.

Conclusion of Joint Sitting
11. Upon the declaration of the person chosen to fill the
casual vacancy in the Senate, the Chairman shall forthwith declare the Joint Sitting closed.

(2) That a message be sent to the Senate acquainting it with
the rules adopted by the House of Representatives for the conduct of a Joint Sitting with the Senate.
I briefly advert to some of the contents of the rules because I think it is worth drawing the attention of honourable members to them. Item No. I sets down the purpose of the meeting; that is, as the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) has identified, to choose a person to hold a vacant place in the Senate caused by the very re grettable and tragic early death of our former col league, the late Senator John Knight. No other matter shall be considered at the Joint Sitting. The second matter within the proposed rules to which I might also draw the attention of honour able members is that, in any matters of procedure that are not specifically provided for in those rules

now presented to this House, the Standing Orders of the Senate shall be followed as far as they can be applied. Honourable members will recall that in 1974, although the meeting was held in this chamber for reasons that have recently been adverted to, the Standing Orders of the Senate were applied. As I said, the Chairman will be Mr President or, in his absence, Mr Speaker. It has been suggested, and I believe it is appropriate, that Mr Speaker should sit alongside Mr President during the conduct of the Joint Sitting. The Clerks and matters relating to the minutes are identified as well as the procedures for the election of the person to hold the vacant place in the Senate. As I said, on any question arising in the Joint Sitting, each senator and member, including the Chair man, shall have one vote. The procedures and rules have been drafted by the Clerks of the two chambers. They are akin to those that were set down at the time of the 1974 Joint Sitting. The second occasion for a Joint Sitting, therefore, puts into folk lore the proposed rules. This House might well consider it suitable that these be adopted, perhaps with some modification, in our Standing Orders. Whether that would be appro priate I suggest is a matter that the Standing Orders committee might well consider at a later time. I commend the motion to the House.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (8.41) The Opposition agrees with the motion. We have looked at the proposed rules for the con duct of the Joint Sitting. We can see no reason to have any objection to them. As the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) has explained, the Joint Sit ting relates to the filling of a casual vacancy. Our party, of course, does not even expect a contest for the filling of that vacancy. We accept the nominee. There will be no problems about the Joint Sitting, nor should any votes be necessary. We assume that there will be no other candidates. I can envisage circumstances in the future, when a vacancy involving an independent senator or member with no party affiliation may have to be filled. That may create some interesting problems. We agree that the matter ought to be speedily dealt with so that there can be effective represen tation in the Senate for the people of the Australian Capital Territory.
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House) (8.42)-in reply-Mr Deputy Speaker, I failed to mention one matter. A problem we have is knowing at what time this chamber should assemble immediately after the conclusion of the Joint Sitting. There is no way we can determine how long the Joint Sitting will take. It was felt ap propriate that the bells should be rung for five

1736 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Parliamentary Joint Sittings Bill

minutes and that the House should then reamended in 1974 to permit the televising of par-

assemble. We suggest that procedure because we liamentary proceedings. In relation to the Parlia-

cannot set a fixed time because we cannot be sure mentary Papers Act, the amendment now

when the Joint Sitting will be completed.

proposed would provide for authority for the pub-

Question resolved in the affirmative.

lication of the proceedings of a Joint Sitting held pursuant to an Act and for protection against

PARLIAMENTARY JOINT SITTINGS

legal proceedings in respect of the publication of

AMENDMENT BILL 1981

the proceedings of such a Joint Sitting by the

Consideration resumed from 28 April.

Government Printer. The amendments are of a . machinery nature, but it is desirable that the--

Second Reading -

changes should be made before the Joint Sitting

Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minis-

takes place next month. I commend the Bill to the House.

ter) (8.43)-I move:

Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith)

That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to amend three pieces of legislation to cover the Joint Sitting of the Senate and the House of Representatives which is to be held to choose a senator for the Australian Capital Territory in the place of the late Senator Knight. The three Acts involved are the Evidence Act, the Parliamentary Proceedings Broadcasting Act and the Parliamentary Papers Act. These three Acts were amended in 1974 in relation to the Joint Sitting of the Senate and the House of Representatives which was then held pursuant to section 57 of the Constitution. The amendments then made were limited to Joint Sittings pursuant to section 57 of the Constitution and do not apply in relation to the Joint Sitting to be held pursuant to the Senate (Representation of Territories) Act. That Act was amended last year to provide for the filling of a casual vacancy in respect of a senator from the Australian Capital Territory by the Senate and the House of Representatives.

(8.46)-The Opposition has no objection to the Bill. The legislation has already passed the Senate where the Opposition concurred with the terms of the Bill. As the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) said, it is necessary to amend the existing Act in order to provide for the judicial notice and the protection that is already applicable in respect of Joint Sittings held pursuant to the Constitution. As I have said in earlier debates, the proposed Joint Sitting will be held pursuant not to the Constitution but to an Act of Parliament, namely the Senate (Representation of Territories) Act 1973. The operative words are that the Joint Sitting will be held pursuant to an Act of Parliament. Accordingly, as this has never been done before, we ha'{e to make provision, as the Minister said, to cover the broadcast of proceedings, the Hansard record and the Parliamentary Papers Act. By doing so we give protection to the broadcasting and televising of proceedings. We provide authority for the publication of the record of proceedings and give protection in respect of

The effect of the present Bill will be to extend the changes made in 1974 to cover any Joint Sitting of the Senate and the House of Representatives pursuant to an Act. The effect of the changes in relation to each of the three pieces of legislation concerned will be as follows: With regard to the Evidence Act, the effect of the amendment will be to provide for judicial notice of the signature of the officer presiding at a Joint Sitting held pursu-

any legal proceedings in respect of that publication. We give judicial notice of the signature of the officer presiding over the Joint Sitting to provide for copies of the official record of proceedings, as such, to be admitted as evidence in relation to the parliamentary proceedings generally. Accordingly, it follows that we are required to pass this legislation with which the Opposition concurs.

ant to an Act and to provide for copies of official Question resolved in the affirmative.

records of proceedings of such a Joint Sitting to be admitted as evidence thereof. In relation to the

Bill read a second time.

Parliamentary Proceedings Broadcasting Act, the

Third Reading

effect of the amendment will be to provide authority for the broadcasting of a Joint Sitting held pursuant to an Act and to give protection against legal proceedings in respect of matters so

Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Viner) read a third time.

broadcast.

JOINT SITTING: POWERS, PRIVILEGES

In referring to broadcasting, I intend also to

AND IMMUNITIES OF MEMBERS

cover the televising of a proceeding, since the ParMr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the

liamentary Proceedings Broadcasting Act was House) (8.48)-1 move:

Designs Amendment Bill

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1737

That this House resolves that it be a rule and order of the House of Representatives that, at a joint sitting with the Senate, pursuant to the Senate (RepresentatIon of Terntories) Act 1973, as amended by the Senate (RepresentattOn of Territories) Amendment Act 1980, the proceedl.ngs are proceedings in Parliament, and tha~ the powers, pnv!lege~, and immunities of Members of this House shall, mutatIs mutandis, be those relating to a sitting of the House of
Representatives.
The substance of this motion is that it is intended to confer the powers, privileges and immunities of members in the same way for a joint sitting as for a sitting of the House of Representatives. I commend the motion to the House.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (8.49)-The Opposition agrees with the motion.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
DESIGNS AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading Debate resumed.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (8.50)--Prior to the adjournment of this debate I was saying that I thought underlying these Bills was an important theme of technological sovereignty. It is important at the present time that Australia seeks to achieve national independence in relation to technology as a fundamental goal. The legislation is not inconsistent with that end and in particular cases it will benefit the end. Perhaps the reason the original designs legislation was introduced in the early part of the century was that at that time there was within Australia a strong spirit of nationalism, a commitment to the development of all its resources, including human resources, and, therefore, a recognition of the importance of design not only in terms of industry and commercial application but also as an expression of the initiative, intelligence and creativity of the Australian people. I was suggesting that, of course, this legislation will not be enough to achieve that objective. It is important that resources be provided to those people who have a capacity to design and who have original ideas. Australia has a long history of people who have been inventive and creative, who have not had resources given to them initially, at a time when they are developing an idea, or perhaps even after the idea has been demonstrated they have not been able to develop that idea to the maximum extent because they have not been able to get the kinds of resources that are available to major corporations.
In recent years a great mythology has been associated with so-called economies of scale. In this country we have seen firm after firm consolidated in terms of takeover bids, and giant firms have been created. In the process, very often as a result of that consolidation of firms, technology

and ideas that have been developed in a particular firm have been either lost in a larger firm or they have even been transferred overseas where transnational corporations have been able to make use of Australian technology. Ultimately the benefits have not come through to the Australian people. One ought to recognise that very often the greatest creativity is to be found in the smaller firm. Creativity and initiative are not always associated with the largest and more dominant firms. Indeed there is some evidence to suggest that major corporations very often have had an interest in the prevention of the development of new technology and new designs because they would perhaps run against the interests of that corporation in a narrow economic sense.
I think also of the great example of the Australian Aluminium Co. which was an Australian Government corporation established at Bell Bay in Tasmania by the Chiftey Government which went on to develop a basis of an aluminium industry in this country. Unfortunately that company was sold off in the 1950s by the Menzies Government to Coma1co Aluminium (Bell Bay) Ltd which, as we all know, is a derivative of a multinational corporation. People think of it as having some Australian character, but it is simply a subsidiary of overseas corporations; I think the Rio Tinto Zinc Corporation Ltd of the United Kingdom and the Kaiser Aluminium and Chemical Corporation of the United States of America. In a very interesting article which I read as a result of a paper presented at a conference 1 learnt that before the Australian Aluminium Co. was taken over and became part of a multinational company it was leading the world in terms of technologies in relation to aluminium refining. Tn buying that company the multinational corporation was able to get access to technology in relation to that industry which at that stage was very much in advance of its time.
The absurd situation arises at this point in our history where we are paying hundreds of thousands-perhaps millions-of dollars to expand the aluminium industry in this country, almost completely in a situation of foreign ownership and control. Tn the process we are buying back technology to establish that industry; whereas if we had gone on in the aluminium industry with a government corporation which we started in the 1940s we would be in a much stronger position than we are at present. We would have much greater control of the aluminium industry at a time when obviously there are very good reasons for developing an alu-
minium industry in Australia. I take that example, which is a bit remote, I admit, from the legislation,

1738 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Designs Amendment Bill

simply to make the point that when one is talking about industrial design and the way in which designs may be registered, and when one is talking about patenting, one has to recognise that one is not dealing simply with a legal matter; one is dealing with the legalities of that matter in the context of social structure and in the context of a world in which increasing consolidation of companies into giant international corporations threatens the possibilities of innovation and makes it extremely difficult.
Countries that have had populations much less than that of Australia have been able to develop a world reputation in terms of their mastery of particular technology. I believe we ought to be seeking to learn from Sweden, Switzerland and from countries that have developed high standards of technology but very much in terms of the control of people within those societies and those national governments.
Mr Barry Jones-Tune in to tomorrow's debate.
Mr HOWE-As the honourable member for Lalor suggests, that matter will be taken up tomorrow. We ought to be learning even from a country such as Japan which has always preferred to take technology from overseas by way of licence rather than have its industry controlled by overseas corporations.
Mr Kent-The Japanese have a national pride.
Mr HOWE-Japan certainly has a national pride. In relation to these questions of design and patenting and the protection of technology Australia needs to develop some pride and some national direction. When we think of industrial design and technology we tend to think of it in terms of physical examples. When we are talking about protecting technologies we are thinking of protecting perhaps a new chemical that has been produced or a new drug or some physical process. I put it to the House that more important than any physical design is the way that we design social processes. The modern corporation is becoming an inappropriate form of social organisation to encourage new initiative and new designs. As a social process, the modern corporation is highly bureaucratic, centralised and authoritarian as a structure. Whilst very often it has resources to establish the laboratories and the capacity for producing new products in a narrow sense these major corporations tend overall to reinforce the direction in which the society has been moving.
I will give just one example which is associated with the automobile industry. In that industry we have developed over a period a form of travel and communication which has been not only highly

appropriate to urban societies but also has shaped the kind of cities that we have. Where has one seen those major companies that dominate the automobile industry looking forward to the need to find alternative forms of communication and travel? They have been much too devoted to preserving their own situation in the world and in preserving their own type of technology in a basically unchanged way over a very long period, rather than really taking us on to mon; energy efficient technologies which. will be absolutely essential in the last decades -of the twentieth century.
I believe these Bills are important in the sense that they protect design and they assist in enabling Australians to patent particular designs that they may be responsible for. One hopes that the Government in its approach to technology will take a whole issue and the whole theme of technological sovereignty seriously. One hopes that the Government will not only legislate in this area but also go on to legislate in other areas in order to ensure that the resources are provided to enable people to develop new technologies in Australia and, when it has done that, ensure that technology is not simply the subject of a takeover and transferred overseas and developed to its full commercial form so that it benefits some other country rather than the Australian people.
Mr LLOYD (Murray) (9.1)-The Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson), when introducing the Trade Marks Amendment Bill, referred to the necessity to protect trade marks and said that the way to achieve this is through section 103 of the Trade Marks Act. This section, in some circumstances, prohibits the importation of goods bearing a trade mark which is registered in Australia. The Minister then detailed the correct and incorrect use of this prohibition power. I wish to quote his comments. He said:
The registered proprietor or registered user of the trade mark can notify Customs that he objects to goods bearing the mark being imported. This objection enables Customs to seize such goods. It is not hard, for example, to see the value of this remedy where pirate goods bear forged or falsely applied trade marks. Section 103 effectively protects the proprietor or registered user against encroachment on his rights by unscrupulous overSeas manufacturers. However, the use of section 103 to prevent the import of genuinely marked goods has caused concern. This includes cases where the trade mark was applied overseas by the same company which is the registered proprietor in Australia.
Many object to this use of the section, saying it goes too far beyond the ideas behind protecting trade marks and abuses the purpose behind protecting trade marks by registration. The use of section 103 in relation to importation of goods was therefore referred to the Industrial Property Advisory Committee for review. That Committee's recommendations have generally been accepted by the Government. This Bill is designed to amend section 103 to implement the report. The Committee's key recommendation is that the provisions for

Designs Amendment Bill

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1739

seizure and forfeiture of goods under section 103 should be confined to those cases where importation infringes a registered trade mark.
Section 103 will no longer be available to prevent the import of goods bearing a genuine trade mark applied overseas by the Australian registered proprietor.
I hope the Minister's assurance is correct. My involvement with this section of the Trade Marks Act began some two years ago when a constituent of mine wanted to import second hand Cessna aircraft from the United States. He received a letter from the Rex aviation company, the proprietor or controller of that trademark in Australia, an importer of Cessna aircraft, saying that the company would use section 103 against anybody who imported Cessna aircraft without the company's authority. I understand that other agents and registered trademark holders of other makes of light aircraft sent out similar letters. The threat of that legal action made it impossible for anybody to import a second hand aircraft, even though it was the genuine article-a genuine Cessna or a genuine Beechcraft.
To me, my constituent and others, that was a completely inappropriate use of that section. It was a restraint of trade rather than a protection of a genuine trademark. I complained to the Minister of the day, as I know others did. I am very pleased that the Ministers involved have acted, that a review has taken place and that we now have this amending legislation before the House. I congratulate the Ministers involved, including the present Minister, for their action. I say again that I hope that this inappropriate and unfair use of that section of the trade marks protection legislation will not stand-that is, people will not be prevented from importing goods.
If it were to continue some absurd situations would develop. A person who actually is the owner of a second hand piece of machinery, aircraft, car-whatever it may be could be prohibited from importing what is his own article. It would mean that the Ford company, for instance, as the holder of the Ford trademark of Australia could prevent any Ford motor cars, new or second hand, from being brought in to the country by the owners of those cars. A person returning from overseas could not even bring a Slazenger tennis racquet or a Roller camera into the country if that provision were carried to the absurd lengths that applied to the second hand aircraft which my constituent wished to import. Therefore, I strongly support the legislation. I hope that the amendments have been drafted in a way that will overcome the problem I have raised. I congratulate the Minister.

Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology) (9.6)-~in reply-l thank the speakers who have taken part in this debate. The Designs Amendment Bill, the Patents Amendment Bill and the Trade Marks Amendment Bill are complex Bills. They are important Bills, as everyone has agreed. I am delighted at the degree of unanimity that all speakers have shown in this important debate. I hope that it heralds a bipartisan view on the importance of increasing our technological base in Australia. I do not always agree with the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe), but I agree with the points that he made about the importance of industrial property Bills and their influence in increasing technological independence in Australia. It is an aim which I will pursue as hard as I can because I believe we must achieve a much better technological base so that we can compete on the export market with new products, new processes, and be independent of overseas technology. We should encourage our own technology. We are a very inventive nation-we have always been an inventive nation-but up until now we have not been a good entrepreneurial nation. The inventions are here. Xerox is a single example which I think the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) has quoted. It was invented in Australia but is not used in Australia.
Mr Barry Jones-I do not think so.
Mr THOMSON-The honourable member does not think so. We need to do much more entrepreneurial development of our own inventions. We need to protect our own inventions against someone filching them. These three Bills will help in that respect. I congratulate the honourable member for Batman for his statements on that particularly important subject.
The honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd) and the honourable member for Barton (Mr Bradfield) made some very good points on the Trade Marks Bill. Tcan assure the honourable member for Murray that the cases he cited can no longer occur under this legislation. The legislation can no longer be used as an artificial tariff barrier. That is what it was. The legislation has been carefully drafted, I am assured, to prevent that from happening. A number of honourable members will have had representations from people who would want this artificial barrier to continue. When this Bill becomes law what has happened in the past will no longer be possible. I thank those two honourable members for their comments. The honourable member for Barton made some very interesting comments on the tyre industry and the effect the Trade Marks Act had on the industry.

1740 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Designs Amendment Bill

The honourable member for Lalor gave a most interesting and informative speech, as he so often does in this place. I know he had very little warning that the Bills would be brought on-I might say that I had the same problems as the honourable member for Lalor-but he made a good speech. I commend him, particularly for his comments regarding the problems of the patentability of living organisms. The subject of the patentability of living organisms has been specifically referred to the Industrial Property Advisory Committee on its review of the whole patent system. But it is already practice that the Australian Patent Office patents methods which use microorganisms for new processes. The production of antibiotics is one, and a simpler example is the production of bread and cheese in other forms. There have been a number of cases involving patents. The honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) has mentioned one in the United States of America.

Australia joined the International Patents Cooperations Treaty which has been used predominantly by small businesses in Australia. The International Patents Co-operations Treaty provides a simplified method of applying for patents in overseas countries. It is just one other way in which we can help small businesses. Small businesses have many problems. One is in obtaining venture capital, and the Government is looking at ways and means in which venture capital can be made readily available to small firms which wish to innovate and produce new products and processes. I thank those who have spoken in this debate. I am pleased to see interest being shown in this complex matter, but the speakers in the debate realised that it is an important matter for Australia and for our technological independence in the future.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.

Mr Barry Jones-The Chakrabarty case.
Mr THOMSON-Yes, the Chakrabarty case. There have been cases in Ireland and Israel and a number of other countries. But the situation in Australia seems to be clear: The invention of new living organisms is a patentable product in Australia. I will be interested to read the Industrial Property Advisory Committee's report on this matter as it will go into the matter much more deeply than we have done in Australia before as it is a new field.
Mr Barry Jones-We ought to have a parliamentary committee on it. It is such an important issue.
Mr THOMSON-I have noted the comments of the honourable member for Lalor on that matter. I make special mention of the work done by the Industrial Property Advisory Committee. I have found it invaluable in giving me advice and in solving very complex problems by bringing a wide range of expertise, knowledge and devotion to solving these problems. I publicly thank it tonight. The Patents Amendment Bill has been given unqualified support by industry and user groups in Australia. I thank those groups for that support. I hope that the Bill will assist in the aims that were stated so carefully by the honourable member for Barton (Mr Bradfield)-this is not a combative Bill-and the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe) in their speeches.
I was also interested in the comments made about the importance of small businesses in the innovative process. There is no doubt that small firms must innovate to survive. This year

Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Motion (by Mr Thomson) proposed:
That the Bill be now read a third time.
MrBARRY JONES (Lalor) (9.14)-The first point I raise with the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) concerns the Designs Amendment Bill. The report of the Designs Law Review Committee-the Franki report indicated that the Bill was not intended to cover fashion design, which is a very important area of industrial property. Can the Minister give some indication as to where he thinks protection is found for design, for example, of clothing? This is not made at all clear. I suppose that in a way one could read it into the words of the Designs Act as amended, but the Franki Committee considered that it should not be covered in that Act. I would like the Minister to make some comment on that matter. The second point I raise is a fairly complex one which concerns the Patents Act. I direct the attention of the Minister to what he said in his second reading speech. When dealing with the provisions in the Bill he said:
Time limits should not, however, be inviolate. An applicant who fails to observe them may incur the loss of all or part of the potential rights to a patent.
Provisions already in the Patents Act allow the Commissioner of Patents, under certain conditions, to extend the times laid down.
This is the paragraph to which I want to draw the Minister's attention:
The most important of these is section 160, which allows time extensions in circumstances beyond control or through

Designs Amendment Bill

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1741

an .error or omission by the person concerned, or his agent or attorney. It has been drawn to my attention, through the courtesy of the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi), that there is an inconsistency there. He has received a letter from a patent attorney from Adelaide. I will read the relevant part of that letter. It reads:
On page 4 in the marked paragraph the Minister indicated that the Government accepted the IPAC recommendation that extensions should be granted for the Convention period if failure to file in time was beyond the control of the applicant, his Agent or his Attorney. In fact that is not quite how Sectio? 142AAA reads in the Patents Amendments BIll of 1981, and If you read the marked paragraph 2 - -
The marked paragraph 2 is the one I have just readyou will see that there is apparently a drafting error requiring that the circumstances should also be beyond control of the Agent or Attorney. Even this is trivial alongside the inconsistency whereby an extension can be obtained if the error was an error or omission on the part of the person concerned or the Agent or Attorney, if the Convention application passes through the relatively new PCT route, but not if it passes through the old traditional route.
I draw your attention, Mr Deputy Speaker, to the wording of section 160 (2) of the 1952 Act which is retained; it is not altered by the amending Bill. It states:
(2.) Where, by reason of(a) an error or omission on the part of the person con-
cerned or of his agent or attorney; or (b) circumstances beyond the control of the person
concerned, an act or step in relation to an application for a patent or in proceedings under this Act (not being proceedings in a court) required to be done or taken within a certain time has not been so done or taken, the Commissioner may, upon application extend the time for doing the act or taking the step.
Honourable members will find in proposed section 142AAA (2), these words:
For the purposes ofsub-section (1)-
It is similar to the earlier partcircumstances shall not be taken to be beyond the control of a person or persons unless the circumstances are also-
I repeat the words 'are also'-
beyond the control of any agent or attorney of that person or of those persons.
It looks as if in section 160 (2) there is a single precondition and in section 142AAA (2) there is a double precondition set-up. I would like the Minister to resolve that point. The final point, the Minister will be relieved to know T want to raise concerns that infamous section 103 of the Trade Marks Act 1955. Sub-section (5) reads:
Where an application has been made to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, whether before or after the commencement of this sub-section for a review of a decision of the Comptroller-General of Customs made under sub-section (2),

a person is not entitled to appeal to the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs against that decision.
I quite understand that there needs to be some change in relation to that matter. It is no longer in the empire of the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs; it is part of the empire of the Minister for Science and Technology. I assure the Minister that sub-section (5) has fallen down the memory hole completely. I have been through it many times and there is no comparable proposed sub-section in the Bill. Whilst I can understand that there needs to be some alteration of wording, mutatis mutandis, I cannot see why it has been dropped out altogether. It seems to me to be a reasonable provision and I cannot see why it is not in the Bill.
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology) (9.20)-in reply-The honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) has asked three questions. The first related to the design of clothing. That is covered by the Copyright Act. The second related to an inconsistency in the proposed new section 142AAA of the Patents Act. There is, in fact, no inconsistency. The Commissioner of Patents has a discretion to decide whether an error or omission on the part of a patent attorney is, in fact, an error or omission. Those discretions are as wide as provided in section 160 of the Patents Act because proposed new section 142AAA is legislated outside the Paris Convention. It allows for grounds for an extension which are not allowed for in the Paris Convention.
Mr Barry Jones-Is the word 'also' perhaps unnecessary?
Mr THOMSON-It is covered by the discretion of the Commissioner of Patents. He can decide. I think that is a sensible way of dealing with it. Carelessness or a lost file is not a ground for the operation of that Act. He could decide that something more serious may be grounds for allowing the extension of time in relation to an error or omission on the part of a patent attorney. On the third question, matters relating to goods infringing Australian trademarks under proposed new section 103 would now go to the courts for determination as to whether those goods should be forfeited. Appeals to the Minister are no longer needed because the decision will be made by the courts.
Mr Barry Jones-Is the Administrative Appeals Tribunal out of it altogether?
Mr THOMSON-! gather that it is. These matters now go to the courts for decision on forfeiture of goods which have been seized.

1742 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Health Care Services

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)-I am Party's policies when in Government between

sure the honourable gentlemen at the table realise 1972 and 1975 differed very little from its policies

that I have allowed some straining of the Standing today. The Leader of the Opposition was respon-

Orders. That will not necessarily always occur but sible for and was the architect of Medibank. He

it did seem convenient in this instance.

has not changed one iota. I think that he knew

Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a third time.

little about the provision of health services and health care when in government and he knows less today.

PATENTS AMENDMENT BILL 1981

At one stage he spoke about two million people

Second Reading Consideration resumed from 7 April, on motion by Mr Thomson:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

being locked out of our public hospitals. That is utter rubbish. In my view people who can afford to pay should pay. Health and hospital-services will be available to all Australians. Of course, we have a welfare state Bill Hayden. We know the mess that we got into between 1972 and 1975 as a

Bill read a second time. Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.

result of that. He would certainly close private hospitals. There is no doubt in my mind, after listening to the Leader of the Opposition, that he would squeeze them out and eventually close many of them down. No one condones the fact

Bill (on motion by Mr Thomson) read a third that many unnecessary operations are carried out.

time.

There is no doubt that certain elective surgery

TRADE MARKS AMENDMENT BILL

1981

.

Second Reading Consideration resumed from 8 April, on motion by Mr Thomson:

often should not be done.
The Leader of the Opposition made some reference to the tax rebate that was proposed in this policy which will eventually be enshrined in legislation as being almost worthless. That is absurd. There will be a rebate-that is, money in the

That the Bill be now read a second time.

hand-amounting to 32c in the dollar on all

Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading

hospital and medical insurance that is paid for by Australians. In other words, at the. end of the financial year Australians will receive money back for the money that they have paid out for

Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Thomson) read a third time.

hospital and medical insurance to the extent of 32c in the dollar in the form of a rl<bate, depending on the amount of basic cover which they hold. That, I believe, will be a great saving and a great bonus to them. If one rids the speech of the

HEALTH CARE SERVICES Ministerial Statement
Debate resumed.

Leader of the Opposition of the rhetoric one finds that the Labor Party wants to return to the original Medibank days. His final comment in his speech was that in government the Labor Party

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)- would introduce a universal health scheme.

Before the debate is resumed on this matter I remind the House that it has been agreed that a general debate be allowed covering this motion and the motion to take note of the statement of the Treasurer (Mr Howard).

I want now to cite some figures showing what happened with health costs in three years under a Labor Government and in the ensuing three years, under a Fraser Government. This will remind the House of how dangerous the policy of a

Mr HODGES (Petrie) (9.25)-ln this health universal health scheme called Medibank was. policy debate earlier tonight the Leader of the Under Labor annual health expenditure rose

Opposition (Mr Hayden) reaffirmed my worst from $2,500m to $5,600m in three years. It more fears about him and, indeed, about the Australian than doubled with an increase of l25 per cent. In

Labor Party; that is, they are quite adamant that the three years following, under the Fraser

they will return to a universal health system or reGovernment, alillual health expenditure rose

turn to Medibank. I only hope that the speech from $5,600m to about $8,000m, which was a 40 made by the Leader of the Opposition is promulper cent increase. Under Labor, the cost of health

gated in detail to every Australian. The Labor care to Commonwealth outlays rose from $780m

Health Care Services

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1743

r to approximately $2,900m which :vas a 277 er
cent increase in that three-year penod. In the following three-year period under the Fraser Government there was a net reduction of 1.7 per
cent.
It is true that there was some shift of those costs from the public to the private sector. This clearly spelt out to many people their total health costs. Under the proposals that the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) announced today there will be a further movement towards people at least understanding more fully where health costs are. The Jamison inquiry was set up about 18 months ago. It looked at scores of options which were considered and canvassed. From its considerations and from the Government's consideration of the recommendations and findings of that inquiry has come the package which the Minister for Health announced today. Health costs will not go away but the public must be made more aware of the cost of health services. Under Labor's Medibank, as I said earlier, health costs got out of hand. Services were free at the point of delivery. Of course, we know what happens when that situation exists. People have no appreciation of the costs. In addition, the deliverers of health services also tend to be rather lax. As a result overall costs get out of
hand.
There is ample evidence in Western countries that the health of a people will plateau and regardless of extra money spent the mortality and morbidity rates will not reduce. There is a mistaken belief in our community that money will always buy good health and longer life. I do not believe that is the case. Therefore expenditure must be watched closely, efficiencies introduced and value obtained for the health dollar spent.
I want to outline some of the clearly stated general objectives in health care in the Government's very acceptable statement that was presented in the House today. First of all the States should be more responsible. They have the constitutional responsibility for the provision of health services. They ought to be able to determine their own priorities, and that is what this Government is working towards. Individuals should be responsible for health care and aware of health costs. Welfare and help should be directed to those in need. The handout mentality must be diminished and eventually stamped out. People who can afford to pay for their health costs should be made to pay for those costs. Health insurance should be available to all, and community rating should be pursued. The healthy and the young healthy in particular should support the rest of the community by contributing to health insurance. There ought to be government assistance directed only

to the insured. This, of course, will be a considerable incentive for people to take out hospital and health insurance. The private sector must remain strong. 1 think this is an important plank of the free enterprise system. Indeed, it was the private sector in particular that came under strong attack by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) in his speech tonight. Deliverers of health care must be more aware of the costs of the services they order. There is no doubt in my mind that so many deliverers of health care in this country are not aware of the extent of the costs of the services that they order.
Hospital costs, of course, virtually come under two headings-the capital cost of establishing hospitals and the recurring costs of running them.
r believe there has been too much political patron-
age in the States in relation to the building of hospitals and, indeed, the rebuilding of some hospitals. In many areas throughout the Commonwealth hospitals are situated in close proximity to other hospitals. Many examples of this can be found in all States. We all know of small towns with 20 or 30-bed hospitals which are located just four or five miles from each other. The States, mainly I believe for political reasons, seem to want to build or rebuild some of those hospitals. I do not believe the Commonwealth ought to be involved in that sort of operation. Hospitals have become what one might call sacred cows. Apparently they must remain whether they are needed or not. The cost sharing arrangements that the Commonwealth had with the States have been far too open-ended. It has been too easy for the States to include in their Budgets extra personnel and items such as cars and other equipment. Of course, the States are paying only 50c of every $1 expended. The States have been spending too many 50c dollars with the open-ended 50 : 50 cost sharing arrangement which has existed now for a number of years.
Under the new arrangements the Commonwealth's contribution to the States will be included in the general tax sharing arrangements although the amounts will be identifiable as a certain percentage. The allocation of funds to the States in the longer term will come under the scrutiny and control of the Commonwealth Grants Commission which will determine relativities between the States. I believe the Grants Commission is an ideal body for this purpose. It is a body that has been highly respected in this place and, 1 believe, throughout the Commonwealth. It is respected, non-political, independent and, I believe, free from political influence. I look forward to the implementation of the arrangement under

1744 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Health Care Services

which the Grants Commission will establish relaX-rays and free drugs can well afford to pay for

tivities between States in respect of the disbursethese services. Queensland has a means test on

ment of funds from the Commonwealth for dental care but not on hospital care.

hospitals.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)-

I wish to raise one matter which I do not think Order! The honourable member's time has

has been canvassed by the Minister or other expired.

speakers in this debate. This matter concerns hospital accounts. I believe fully itemised accounts should be provided to all hospital patients whether or not they pay that account. In other words, a pensioner or a disadvantaged patient who does not pay an account ought to be aware of the extent of the costs that he has incurred as a patient of a hospita1. There ought to be an awareness not only from the patient's point of view but also from the health workers' point of view. The doctors and the nurses who order and administer the treatments should know the costs. It is not uncommon these days for a patient who is hospitalised for three or four days to receive an account in excess of $1,000. Of course the cost depends on the extent of the diagnostic tests, the

Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (9.40)-I rise to make some comments on the statement made by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) supplementary to that made by the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar). His statement and my comments relate to matters of taxation. The two tax matters referred to by the Treasurer were the introduction of a tax rebate of 32c in the dollar for health insurance costs and the abandonment of tax indexation. The first point I make is that the benefit of the introduction of the 32c in the dollar tax rebate will depend on the extent of the rise in health insurance charges. So, whether it will be of particular benefit to families, as the Treasurer says it will be, highly dubious.

X-rays, the drugs and the treatments adminisMore importantly, the Government can be seen

tered. Patients, who do not know the cost of the to have reduced subsidies for health care but com-

services and who do not pay, often never know pensated for that reduction in subsidies, at least

the extent of the bill that they have incurred. Docpartly, through the introduction of a tax deduc-

tors, pathologists, nurses and radiologists who tion. It is important to note that tax deductions

order services are quite often oblivious to the very are, in general, a less satisfactory form of govern-

high cost of services that they so readily order. If ment assistance than are subsidies for a number of

costs are to be curtailed I believe all delivers and reasons. Firstly, the result is that the extent of

recipients of services must be made aware of the government assistance to this activity is hidden

costs. Most large institutions today have compuwhen it is in the form of a tax rebate or con-

terised account systems. I do not believe the issue cession. We know that the cost now will be some

of these details would be a great burden to them. $60Om. That figure was given to us in the

I want to make reference to a recent statement which appeared in the Brisbane Courier-Mail of Wednesday, 22 April, attributed to the Queensland Minister for Health. The article in that paper headed 'Knives are our for our free systern' stated:
Adequate health care should be available to all, irrespective of race, colour or creed. It is recognised that some people

Treasurer's statement. But, how will he know what the cost is in a few years time? We simply will not know the cost. It will not be published and unless the Treasurer is prepared to tell us in response to specific questions we will not have that figure available to us. Ifit were in the form of a subsidy that figure would be very obvious to us in the Budget accounts each year.

abuse the present free public hospital system.

Secondly, the tax deduction is less equitable be-

Therefore, the individual who uses the free out-patients or cause only those with taxable incomes several

the free hospital system. who can afford to pay. needs to examine his own conscience on this matter.

hundred dollars above the tax free zone will be able to claim all the rebate. Those with no taxable

I believe that is an absolutely ridiculous statement income will not be able to claim any part of it.

to make. It is a naive statement. I really do not beThis is particularly relevant for the low income

lieve the Queensland Minister for Health believes taxpayer with a dependent spouse. The House

the people who are abusing the system, the people should note that if a low income earner with a de-

who can afford to pay, will examine their conpendent spouse earns below $6,541 a year, he will

sciences and indeed decide in future to pay for sernot be able to take advantage of the tax rebate at

vices that they are accepting free today. Tens.of all. So, this tax. rebate which is put forward as

thousands of people in Queensland are abusing being a great boom to taxpayers will be of no

the system. Middle income and upper income advantage to a taxpayer with a dependent spouse

people who are accepting free hospitalisation, free and earning less than $6,541 a year. Even then he

outpatient services, free diagnostic services, free will have to earn up to approximately $7,000 a

Health Care Services

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1745

year before he will be able to take full advantage of the rebate. So, this tax deduction is not one which will be available in full to many low income earners. A third reason for a tax deduction rather than a higher subsidy is clearly to reduce the size of the public sector; that is, it is based on ideology rather than practical common sense and equity.
In a system of subsidies, as we have in this area, why should we not give all the assistance in that way rather than do it partly by way of subsidy and partly by way of tax indexation? If a government is to promote activity in some areas-such as assisting people to take up health insurance-where it can give subsidies or tax concessions, it does seem curious for it to give both. Why do it on both sides? No real reason for doing that is put forward in either of the statements by the Minister for Health or the Treasurer. It means that we will have an administratively cumbersome approach because we are giving assistance in two ways rather than in one way. It means also that the initial cost of health insurance will be much higher when the assistance is given partly in the form of a tax concession or rebate rather than in the form of a subsidy. It has both an inflationary impact and an impact in regard to the taking up of health insurance by low income people.
If the Government takes the approach of giving all the assistance by way of subsidy, then quite obviously the cost of health insurance will be less than it would be if the assistance were given partly by way of subsidy and partly by way of tax deduction. With that lower cost there will be less impact on the consumer price index and will be less inflationary inpact, which should be of interest to a Government which says it is concerned to beat inflation first. As the Government is anxious to get people to take up health insurance, the lower the initial cost of that insurance, obviously the greater the likelihood that people will take it up. In view of the large initial cost of health insurance a tax concession may still not be enough to induce people to take up health insurance. They are frightened by the initial high cost and therefore are likely to take the gamble. Under this new system, they may face horrendous bills for their health care if they do gamble, as I am sure many of them will do when faced with the large health insurance costs which otherwise they would have to pay. The Opposition has a number of reservations about providing assistance to people in the area of health insurance through tax deductions. It would be much better to offer a higher subsidy, as happened previously.

The abandonment oftax indexation is an extraordinarily important development. The Government has attempted to hide it away in a supplementary statement on the matter of health finance. Presumably the Government hopes that by hiding this statement in this fashion the political flak from the abandonment of tax indexation will be considerably reduced. It is obvious that tax indexation has nothing to do with health finance, so why has the Government attempted to do it in this way if it is not simply to hide from the Australian people what is going on? Of course, the Government hoped that it would be able to reduce hostility in this way but, as we have already mentioned, this tax rebate must be seen as compensation for increased health costs, not as compensation for the loss of tax indexation. There can be no argument that it must be associated with the tax rebate. Saying it is a tax rebate which is compensation for the loss of tax indexation is an absolute absurdity. The tax rebate for health insurance is a compensaion for the increased costs of health insurance which will come from the other measures announced by the Minister for Health. The abandonment of tax indexation must be seen as something which is not in any way compensated for by the tax rebate. It is something which should stand on its own. The Government's attempt to associate it with the tax rebate is simply a diversion.
Indexation is a very important aspect of taxation in this country. If applied in full it prevents the proportion of income being paid in tax from increasing automatically because of inflation. This happens because under a progressive income tax system the higher the income, the higher the proportion of income paid in tax. If incomes go up with inflation and there is no adjustment to the tax schedule through tax indexation then taxpayers automatically move into higher tax brackets and therfore pay a higher proportion of their income in tax. If tax indexation is fully applied, the tax schedule is adjusted in accordance with inflation and taxpayers whose incomes move up in line with inflation do not move into higher tax brackets and do not pay a higher proportion of their income in tax. That is the theory of tax indexation. The Fraser Government in its early days was very strong in its support for tax indexation. As the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) said earlier tonight, the now Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) made great play of tax indexation when stating his policy in the 1975 election. He promised:
We will fully index personal income tax for inflation over three years . . . It will make government more honest with your money. They will no longer be able to rely on this
secret tax increase of inflation.

1746 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Health Care Services

The Prime Minister put his reform of full tax Treasurer meant in his statement on taxation last

indexation in quite dramatic terms- --terms which month in which he stated:

will now come back to haunt him. Of course, this promise was never fulfilled to the full extent. Full

. . . personal income tax would under present policies be likely to assume a greater share of that overall burden.

tax indexation never applied in any year even though supposedly full tax indexation was introduced in 1976. Because of discounting from the consumer price index for price rises attributable to Government action-that is for devaluation, oil price rises, other indirect tax increases and health insurance cost increases-full tax indexation never applied. Then, after two years of supposedly full tax indexation it was reduced to half tax indexation and then it was suspended altogether in 1979-80. What was supposedly half

The Treasurer was saying that the personal income tax burden will be increased. Hence, we not get, a month later, the complete abandonment of tax indexation. The House should also note that the effect on taxpayers of non-indexation will be to cause a higher percentage increase in taxation for low income earners than high income earners. That was fully set out in the table incorporated in Hansard earlier tonight by the Leader of the Opposition.

tax indexation was reapplied this year and we see The importance of maintaining tax indexation

now that after next year it will not exist. The relates not just to keeping the tax burden down

actual degree of tax indexation for each financial but also to other matters. It is a supportive mech-

year of the Fraser Government has been: In anism for wage indexation. If we support wage

1976-77, 92 per cent; in 1977-78, 79 per cent; in indexation full tax indexation is a very necessary

1978-79,35 per cent; in 1979-80 it did not exist at compliment. In fact, the present Prime Minister

all; and, in 1980-81-the current year-it is 39 per recognised this in his earlier days when he said in

cent. The average for the five years is 49 per cent. his 1975 policy speech in announcing his reasons

We can see that even while we supposedly had tax for supporting full tax indexation:

indexation the Government placed substantial reIt will support wage indexation.

liance on the secret tax of inflation, to use the Prime Minister's words.

Well, it did not take him long to ditch wage indexation-about two months. But that system

The impact of non-application of full tax indehas limped along since despite government antag-

xation on taxpayers has been substantial. It has onism. But the total removal of tax indexation

meant that they have been forced to pay a higher represents another nail in the coffin of wage inde-

proportion of their income in tax. That is the xation. I note also in passing that if the Price Jus-

reason that four out of five taxpayers are now tification Tribunal were abolished tomorrow that

paying more of their income in tax than they paid would also be a further nail in the coffin of wage

in 1975. Of course, the situation for the other oneindexation as another supportive mechanism

fifth of taxpayers who are paying less of their inwould have gone by the board.

come in income tax than they paid in 1975 arises because of a discretionary change to the tax system which was introduced in 1977 and which gave substantial tax concessions to high income earners. The rest of the taxpayers are paying more of their income in tax because of the small measure of benefit they received from that discretionary change and the secret tax of inflation which has occurred through the non-application of full tax indexation in any year in the five years of the Fraser Government. In future the nonexistence of tax indexation will have a severe impact on taxpayers unless there are fully compensating discretionary changes.

The Prime Minister has made the point also that tax indexation is a supportive mechanism for an anti-inflation policy. He claimed this in 1976. So, his abandonment of it now means that he is walking away from something which he originally said was important the prevention of inflation. The abandonment of tax indexation has been announced thin this House tonight without reason. There is no reason in the Treasurer's speech for abandoning tax indexation-a system which was said by the Prime Minister to be of enormous importance to the economic health of this country. Yet now we see it abandoned without any rf!ason being given at all. There is simply a canvassing of

If it is intended to introduce fully compensating one reason in favour which is supposedly the disci-

discretionary changes, why make the change in pline for government, one reason against, a sup-

the first place? Discretionary changes are quite posed inhibition on the Government's Budget

possible with the system of tax indexation, as has flexibility-this is nonsense-then we have the

already occurred with the change in the schedule statement that it will be better for the Govern-

in 1977-78 to which I referred. The impact of nonment to make discretionary adjustments. The

application of tax indexation will clearly be to Government simply does not say why that is the

raise the tax burden on taxpayers. This is what the case. As the Leader of the Opposition said tonight

Health Care Services

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1747

the reason is that the Government sees political value in going back to the old system of secret taxes by inflation because it is not getting enough credit, as it sees it, for tax indexation. It prefers the old system of tax increases by inflation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)
Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HARRIS (Chisholm) (9.55)-1 welcome
the statement of the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) this afternoon. It is the product of a great deal of thought and much hard work. It re sponds to the report of the Jamison Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals in a way that that report clearly dem onstrates was required. The fact is that spending in the health area over the last decade has been increasingly unrestrained and uncontrolled. There has been, regrettably, a great deal of waste of money. The community and governments hoped that that maney was spent in areas of real need and areas that required these huge sums of money. The percentage of the gross domestic product spent on health has steadily increased without, regrettably, an equal improvement in the health services provided. As the honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges) said in his speech, more money does not necessarily mean better health services. Anyone who has any doubt about this ought to make reference to the Jamison Report.
I cite just a few examples from the report which I think leaves nobody who has read it in any doubt as to the need for reform. For example, the report
states:
Information provided to the Commission shows a general over-supply of hospital beds in Australia, significant differences in total provision between States, mal distribution of beds within the States and a close relationship between the supply and use of hospital beds and facilities.
The report states further:
The Commission has sufficient evidence to show that medi cal technology is proliferating, without proper assessment, and that avoidable variations in staff numbers exist between hospitals of equivalent size and function.
The report also states:
The States have been encouraged by the hospital cost-sharing agreements in particular to devote a large share of their health budgets to hospitals.
The report further states:
The present budgetary processes are cumbersome and time consuming.
The Commission has had evidence of the year-end spend up by hospitals irrespective of needs so that funds will not be reduced in the following year.

I interpolate that that is a common syndrome in many publicly funded institutions. The report goes on to state:
. . . the attitudes and efficiency of some hospital adminis trations has not been impressive. The Commission has evidence of ridiculous and unsubstantiated demands for ad ditioal staff, inefficient allcation of stl;l.ff and rostering of overtime, and reluctance to mtroduce measures with proven cost savings such as contract cleaning. Other examples of wasteful practices include rosters deliberately organised to ensure that certain employees had a guaranteed overtime component in their wages, whether the hours needed to be worked or not, and arrangements for payment of salaries and allowances in excess of award provisions, sometimes with authorisation from the hospital's board but commonly with out approval of the appropriate health authority. The Commission regards these as manifestations of poor managerial control and of a total lack of appreciation of the managerial function in publicly funded institutions.
It is no surprise that the Commission as a result of that and many other pieces of evidence was led to conclusions similar to those following a nation wide survey of the health services. It found:
. . . health authorities and hospital managements in general hve not taken enough trouble to promote cost
constramt-they must take more action; financial efficiency as tken second place to spending in many hospitals-this SituatiOn must be altered; the present system of funding encourages-
I repeat the words 'the present system of funding encourages'-
and promotes expenditure with little consideration of need need must always be the main consideration;
No doubt when this Parliament and the State parliaments have voted sums of money for the de livery of health services they had hoped-they ought to have hoped-that those sums were based
 on the needs of the community. Regrettably, as
the amison report manifestly demonstrates, that has JUSt not been the case. This uninhibited spend ing, of course, as the report says, has been based upon the fact that those who deliver the health services have not had to consider the source of their money; they have had to think only about the spending of it. As the honourable member for Petrie remarked, the cost-sharing arrangement has meant that the States and the hospitals have
been spending only 50 cents. They have had no in hibition upon them. The new arrangements will ensure control. The States will know the amount they are getting to spend. They will know that an upper limit is provided. The set percentage means that there will be a finite sum for them to spend. At the same time time they will, in a sense, have greater fiexibility. In the areas of public hospitals, commum_ ty health and the school dental health service they will be able to decide how the funds are to be spent. We hope that they will spend them where the need is greatest. The new arrange ments will encourage them to spend carefully.

1748 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Health Care Services

They will know that their funds will not be topped their not doing so but it is unfair. It is a little like

up on a 50-50 basis.

not paying one's life insurance premium and

These changes will be effected upon the basis that eligible pensioners and the disadvantaged will continue to receive free hospital services. I believe it is important to repeat that the aged, the chronically ill and the disadvantaged will be protected. I am glad that disadvantaged people have been defined. Previously the determination of who was a disadvantaged person in need of health services has been in the hands of those delivering

expecting to collect benefits when one is older. In time the younger people will make demands upon the health services. If the present system had remained they too would be faced with heavy health insurance premiums at a later stage. There is no question that we have to get those who are able to pay for their health costs to do so. It is highly desirable that we encourage them by various means back into the health insurance system.

medical services. It has commonly involved the At present only 60 per cent of those who ought general practitioner. The definition now provided to be covered by health insurance are covered. In is, I believe, a reasonable one. It is far better than one State the figure is under 56 per cent. The

the disadvantaged person be defined by the Government and that the deliverer of the medical services does not have to concern himself with the definition. It is important to mention the greater

Jamison report itself recognised this. The Committee's 22nd recommendation proposed that people be encouraged to take out health insurance by limiting medical benefits only to those who are

support to be given to organisations providing insured. The Committee also recommended that a home nursing services. I consider that we should form of health insurance ought to be devised

always try to keep people out of institutions. lt is which has equity, freedom of access, payment by true that this contains costs and that is an importthose who can afford it and which promotes uni-

ant consideration. I also believe it is important in versal participation. I have no doubt that the new

that it allows for a quality of care which cannot be scheme will result in everyone other than eligible provided even in the best of institutions. I welpensioners or the disadvantaged moving into the

come the increased subsidy which will, in the next health insurance system. This is as it ought to be.

financial year, be paid in respect of 195 additional lt is consistent with the criteria of equity, freedom

home nurses.

of access et cetera that the inquiry recommended.

I turn to health insurance. The existing arrangeThe denial of benefits to the uninsured is a strong

ments have, as circumstances now clearly show, argument in favour of insuring. Equally, the tax

encouraged people to opt out of the health inrebate is a generous incentive. It is worth pointing surance system. One must admit that for many out that a tax rebate, unlike a tax deduction, does people that was a sensible and logical thing to do. not give an added benefit to those on higher in-

This has meant that free health care has been procomes. I congratulate the Minister, who has vided irrespective of income and commitment. lt worked very hard over a number of months, and has led to a gross over-use of the free hospital out the Government on the measures they have an-

patient facilities. I am sure that many honourable nounced this afternoon. I commend the work they

members have received complaints from their have done and the results they have produced.

constituents to the effect that obviously affluent people have been holding places in the outpatients queue at their local hospital ahead of them. Those who most need health services have had to do the paying. The young and healthy-in the present circumstances one cannot criticise them because they have made a logical decisionhave not been paying for health insurance. This is unfair and inequitable.

Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler) (10.8)-The proposal which has been brought into the Parliament this afternoon by the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) is the fifth Fraser health plan. I say it is the fifth Fraser health plan because it is obvious that the proposal is not one with which the Minister for Health is happy. The decision has obviously been made in the Cabinet by the supporters of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm

The older members of the community require Fraser) and the Treasury who have decided to

about three times the amount of health services dump Australia's health system in the basket. The

that the average member of the community reMinister opened his speech to the Parliament by

quires. The ones having the greater need have saying:

been paying for health insurance. With a smaller The fundamental goal of this Government in the health proportion of the community having to provide area is to ensure that all Australians have proper access to

health insurance, the premiums payable have health care services of high quality at a cost the individual and been consequently higher. People who are fit, the community can alford.

young and in the work force have not been payThe Minister's 28-page speech proposed a system

ing. As I have already said, one can understand which will ensure that people in the community

Health Care Services

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1749

can either not afford a health service or will not

have a high class health service. his complete dismantling of the

The Minister, health system

by in

this country, in my view has done the Australian

community a great disservice. After this proposal

there is very little else that the Government can

give away either to the private sector or the

States. I think that is a very sad thing.

The Minister talked about the important role of the private sector in health care delivery. It is this obsession with the private sector which, in my view, has caused a number of problems for the Australian community. The Government has attempted to prop up the health insurance funds over many years. Recently I received a letter from the Minister for Health in which he said that the Government's hospital reimbursement fund would make the health funds viable. Obviously it has not made them viable and the Government has now decided on a plan which will compel people to be members of health funds. I find it interesting that the honourable member for Chisholm (Mr Harris), who came into this place as the doyen of the private enterprise sector, is now suggesting to us that there should be no free enterprise in the private health plan area; people either join a fund or they make sure that they do
not get sick. There will be no middle ground any
more in this country if these proposals are put into

effect.

Earlier this evening the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) stated in this Parliament that 3t million people in this country at present are not insured. If this Government has its way it will make sure that every last man, woman and child gets themselves insured. Of course, that will mean that many of the Government's friends who are doing quite well out of these health insurance funds will do a lot better than they have been doing in recent years. In fact it does not take one long to cast one's mind back to the scandals that one read about in regard to the large health funds-how they were buying jet aircraft to pilot their executives around the country; how they were entering into massive superannuation payments with regard to the chief executives of a couple of the health funds in Sydney. After the fat was removed from a lot of them they had to cut back on these perks that they were giving to their executives. Honourable members can be assured that when this plan is put into effect they will be back on the gravy train once again. It is rather ironical that even in the days when Bob Menzies was Prime Minister of Australia at least one could get the Commonwealth benefit if one went into hospital, even if one was not in a health fund. Under the free enterprise Fraser Government a

taxpayer, if he is not in a health insurance fund, will not even be able to get back in the form of a Commonwealth benefit the money that he has paid to the Commonwealth Government. I think that is a ridiculous situation. It is a terrible proposal for a government which says it believes in freedom of choice to put forward. In the health area there will be very little freedom of choice.
The Minister for Health said how important it is that the private hospital sector should be encouraged. Previous speakers have said that as well. The Government and the Minister should have taken cognisance of the overseas studies that have looked at the private sector of hospitals, par ticularly in America. I commend to the House an article in the annals of the American Association of Social and Political Sciences entitled 'The Pol itical Economy of Nursing Homes'. That article points out quite specifically how the private nurs ing home and private hospital operators manage to rip off the system very well. In fact they got to the extent where even the Nixon Government in America was doing its very best to curtail their operations. We have been very fortunate that large American private hospital operators have not really got their hooks into the Australian hospital system.
The Jamison report very trenchantly came out in opposition to allowing large private hospitals to have a big say in the Australian health delivery service. This is not what the Minister for Health has proposed tonight. Under that proposal private hospitals will be not only given as much help but also as much money as they need. The Minister has proposed doubling the daily bed benefit to private surgical hospital entrepreneurs. That is a sad state of affairs when the profit motive will be what determines whether or not people are interested in health care. I thought health care was about care, not the maximum amount of money that one can take from people in beds. This Government has done a terrible thing to the Australian population by putting the health ser vice of this country into that sort of situation.
We heard from the honourable member for Chisholm some suggestion about the disadvantaged and who they are. The fact that the Government has continued to use that word suggests that we are back once again to the old nineteenth century proposal of health care as a charity-the old hospices that were run by charitable institutions for the poor people. The Government is getting back to a definition of what that would be health care as a charity, not health care as a right, as if it is not the right of every Australian to have a fair chance to receive medical aid if he needs it
 not whether he can afford it. The fact that one ca

1750 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Health Care Services

afford it should not even enter into the discussion. Of course, not to the extent to allow them to make

Today the Minister talked about the disadvana decision as to who is disadvantaged and who is

taged in the following terms, when referring to the not. That would be up to some bureaucrat in Can-

bulk billing system:

berra. Quite frankly I would not like to leave to

. . . that bulk billed medical services provided under the existing disadvantaged arrangements are growing at a rate which indicate that those services have been made available to

the bureaucrats in Canberra the decision as to who was disadvantaged. It has been said on many occasions that the facilities provided in this city

p.ersons who could not normally be regarded as dIsadvantaged; . . .

tend to isolate people considerably from the real world, from electorates such as mine and elector-

That is what the Minister said happened. The reason he gave was the number of people who had been claiming the bulk bill disadvantaged proposal through their local doctor had increased. This was not because there had been an overutilisation of the service. The reason was that after six years of this Government there are many more disadvantaged people in this country than there had ever been in the past. In fact if the policies of the Fraser Government are allowed to travel on in the way in which the Prime Minister

ates such as that of the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) who is sitting next to me. These are the areas in this country where we find the real disadvantaged people. People on the spot there should be able to make the decisions about such matters, not people from the Health Department or whoever the Government decides will be making that definition. The Minister has not been very precise as to how that definition will be arrived at and who will arrive at that definition. To bring down an important statement such as

would like, they would ensure that the majority of this and not get to that point leaves a lot to be

people in the country became disadvantaged. We desired.

would have a small group of advantaged people such as the Prime Minister and the wealthy people, and the rest of the people could not even afford to become ill or to take their children to the doctor if they needed treatment.

The definition of who is disadvantaged really is at the nub of what we are going to be providing in the health care delivery service in this country. If, as the Minister said, it is about whether the people have an income test that is equivalent to the pen-

The Government cannot even accept its own definitions at times. We have heard from the Minister and from previous speakers that we have to be able to define who are the disadvantaged; we have to have some sort of formula. Honourable members can bet their lives that the formula would exclude anyone who is in dire straits. The Government has said in the past: 'We will allow the doctor to be the person to decide'. After all, if someone comes into a doctor's surgery, in many instances the local doctor knows that person's economic and family circumstances. Ministers have on many occasions in this House said that the doctor is the one who should make that decision. Now the Government is saying that the doctors cannot be trusted to make that decision

sioner health card, how does that help a single income family with eight or nine children? How does that help low income families who have been hardest hit by the policies of this Government and who, it would appear once again, will be hit even worse? How can they afford the $600 or $700 per annum that it costs to insure oneself under a private health scheme? If one has young children, under this scheme that the Government is proposing, one must ensure that one does that. A person who has a number of children who become ill-if the Government has its way by making the States charge what are to be their costs in the hospitalsand who is on a low or medium income in this country will be unable to afford these costs if they are not insured.

any more; we are going to have some bureaucrat in the Health Department in Canberra, the most affluent city in the Commonwealth, making a decision about who is going to be disadvantaged in Sydney, in the Kimberleys, in Melbourne or anywhere else in Australia. That is a ridiculous situation. It does not quite gel with what the Minister said in his speech. He said:

The Minister said in his speech that the States should be pressed to ensure that they charge the real cost of hospital care. We are all aware that the real cost of hospital care is about $150 per head per day. That is considerably more than the $50 a day that is now charged for public beds or the $75 a day that is charged for shared beds. The cost of being in a hospital under these proposals

The Commonwealth also recognises the important role of being forced upon the States by the Commonprivate doctors in providing health services in the community. wealth Government will triple the cost to the indi-

In the great majority of cases general practitioners provide primary health care services on the most cost effective basis. The Government therefore believes that the important role of general practitioners should be enhanced wherever possible . . .

vidual health consumer. The people who will be hit hardest are the people in this country who are the least able to afford it-the working people, the people with large families, those who are out

Health Care Services

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 751

of work and those who are on the lower social income levels.
In fact, the Government has even recognised that by undertaking to give some benefit back to people who insure themselves. The Government has looked at giving back a fiat benefit of 32c in the dollar on the tax scales. It has also said in the statement which was made at the same time by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) that it will take tax indexation away from people but will give them 32c in the dollar back on their health insurance. Of course, that gives a disproportionately higher amount of return to a person on a high income than it does to a person who has a large family and is earning $120 to $150 a week. A rebate of 32c in the dollar will not be of much value to that per son. It would be of much more value to the people who are on incomes in excess of $20,000 and $30,000, as are most of the Government supporters.
The main area in which I am interested regard ing the issue which we are debating tonight is the way in which Government has absolutely sold out to the private hospital and nursing home proprietors. It has given a paltry $1m for home nurs ing services and $120m to nursing home proprietors. The Minister for Health has successfully covered up the report of the Auditor-General that showed there was iniquitous massive overcharging of the Commonwealth in the nursing home area. I am sure, from the statement brought down by the Minister tonight, that the proposed inquiry and the moves to request repayments from those people will not be proceeded with. The private hospital and nursing home proprietors in this country will sit back tonight and throw cham pagne parties while they live off the people who are in their establishments.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Milal r) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr LLOYD (Murray) (10.23)-The attitude of the honourable member for Grayndler (Mr Leo McLeay) to private hospitals and the improved arrangements for them as announced in the policy statement presented by the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) rather surprised me because the greatest amount of criticism of the present disadvantage suffered by private hospitals comes from the Catholic hospital sector. I think that it quite genuinely and correctly comes from that sector because of the difficulties it has. So it surprises me very much that the honourable member should be so ignorant of the situation confronting the Catholic hospital sector as a part of the general private hospital sector.

Mr Leo McLeay-What has that got to do with it?
Mr LLOYD-I think it has a lot to do with it. If the honourable member cares to talk to some of his Catholic hospital administrators about the problem, he would be informed of the problems they face in trying to survive under the present arrangements.
Mr Leo McLeay-It is rather offensive when one suggests that a person's religion ought to colour what that person says in the Parliament.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-There is no sub stance in the points of order.
Mr LLOYD-I suggest that the honourable member should check the real situation of private hospitals a bit more before he enters into that sort of general abuse of the private hospital sector.
I commend the Chairman of the Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals, Mr Jamison, and the other two com missioners, Dr Yeatman and Mr De Boos, for their comprehensive inquiry and report. That is the basis upon which the Government has made its changes to hospital financing arrangements, and medical and hospital insurance arrangements. I commend the present Minister for Health for his patience and perseverance during this difficult decision-making period.
The most significant recommendation that has been made by the commissioners-it has been ac cepted by the Government-is that the open ended 50-50 cost sharing arrangement provided by the previous Labor Government has to go. Under that arrangement there was no financial responsibility-or, one could say, the Commonwealth had all financial responsibility but no authority. With the various ruses that the States were able to operate, it was not a 50-50 arrangement. It was more like a 60-40 arrangement. There was no incentive for the States to be efficient or accountable. I am not being critical of t he States in that regard. If that sort of arrangement were provided, any level of government or any organisation would naturally take that option.
When the decision was made to end the cost sharing arrangements, when considered together with the federalist philosophy of this Government that hospitals are a State government responsibility and, therefore, should be allowed and encouraged to be responsible, it was inevitable that either the absorption or general revenue grant approach or specific purpose grant approach, or a combination of the two, would be introduced. I think it is this compromise between

1752 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Health Care Services

the two that we have before us in this statement. special beneficiaries who on an income test would

It is a compromise. It is a general revenue grant, qualify for the pensioner health benefit card, and

but it has a percentage identifiable as being the other persons who meet a specified income test.

Commonwealth Government's contribution to As I have not been privy to the additional infor-

health care. The Minister stated that at least for mation that the Minister had incorporated in

an initial period that identifiable percentage will Hansard, I am not aware of the actual provisions

remain. I suggest to the Minister and the Governthat apply to the last group but it is very much the

ment that they should keep that initial period key group. This group can, quite often, be the

with that identifiable percentage for as long as most disadvantaged-more disadvantaged than

possible for practical and political reasons.

pensioners or people receiving some form of un-

The Minister stated that the formula to be used is to be that provided in the 1980-81 financial year in real terms less the revenue that could be reasonably expected to be raised through more realistic hospital bed and out-patient charges. The Commonwealth Grants Commission is then to determine an appropriate formula for State payments in the longer term. I hope that the Government is not too hasty with its phasing-in arrangement and that, during that period, recognition is given of the

employment benefit. The group comprises, for instance, low income or single income families, dependent children, people with chronic illnesses, and people suddenly faced with large payments because of disasters or traumatic experiences. With the flat rate 30 per cent government rebate on medical insurance they could face very large expenditure. I hope that the Government will be flexible and sensible with its definition and its cri-
teria for that group.

policies that have operated for many years in the Debate interrupted.

various States and the problems that some of the States have, or would be confronted with if the

ADJOURNMENT

phasing-in were too hasty. At the end of that

Unemployment Benefit-Religious

period when the formula is applied there should

Organisations-Taxation: Imported

be an allowance or recognition for geographic iso-

Wheelchairs and

lation, which is more apparent and real in some Accessories-Pensions-Returned Services

States than in others, and for population move-

League-Parliamentary Press

ment, et cetera. Beyond that I presume and hope

Gallery-Bauxite Mining

that the formula would be basically an equal per head allocation throughout the States of Australia and that any additional services or facilities that any State desired to have would be paid for by

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10.30 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.

that State from its own sources.

Mr HOWE (Batman) (10.31 )-1 draw the

At present, as pointed out in the report of the inquiry, per head payments in the highest State can be almost double the Commonwealth commitment in the lowest State. The States should also be forced to charge a more realistic amount for hospital beds and generally be more efficient and responsible. That, together with the provision of tax rebates for health insurance payments or premiums and the payment of government rebates through the insurance organisations-as was the case and as was quite well accepted up until 1973-should make those who can afford it pay either directly or indirectly. For those who are in genuine need arrangements will be nego-

attention of the House to the plight of unemployed people in Australia. The benefits to which the unemployed are entitled are miserably low, as we know-$36 weekly for those under the age of 18 years, and $53.45 for those over the age of 18 years. Both married and single recipients of the benefit receive $10 weekly for each dependent child. Benefits are withdrawn on a 50 per cent basis per dollar earned for private incomes within the ranges of $6 to $50 and thereafter benefits are withdrawn on a dollar for dollar basis. The rest of the population is taxed at 32c in the dollar, so why
must the unemployed, one might ask, pay substantially more?

tiated with the States and those payments will be Further inequity can be seen when one con-

covered, as is now the case, by the Commonsiders the method of taxing the unemployment

wealth. Two particular groups are involved. They benefit recipients who are paid the $10 weekly de-

are the eligible pensioners and the disadvantaged. pendant's allowance and do not have this allow-

The Minister and the Government are attempting ance taxed. Yet unemployed persons pay full tax

to achieve a better definition of this disadvantaged on all money received for dependent children.

group. In the statement the groups are identified This is done in the mistaken belief that their un-

as all migrants and refugees in their first six employment is a temporary contingency and that

months in Australia, current unemployment and the unemployment benefit is a temporary benefit.

Adjournment

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1753

One has only to consider the amounts paid in tax as though it somehow relates to the current cir-

to see the enormous differences paid out when the cumstances. I would be interested to hear the

dependant's allowance is taxed. A single penTreasurer explain why the distinction is made on

sioner with six children pays no tax, whilst an unthe basis of any contemporary logic.

employed beneficiary pays $771.84. Married pensioners in a similar position pay $484.16 in tax, whilst the unemployed pay the staggering
$1,482.56.

Mr O'KEEFE (Paterson) (10.35)-In the time available to me tonight I wish to bring to the attention of the House and the people of Australia an organisation known as the Children

I raise this matter simply to ask the question: Why are the unemployed singled out for what appears to be an iniquitous burden? Tam pleased to note that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) is in the House and perhaps he might be able to give me an explanation for the differential treatment of various classes of beneficiary which occurs. As we are all aware unemployment, particularly in Australia, is no longer a brief stage in the lives of many people. For many people, it may be an almost permanent state due to the short sightedness and callousness of this Government's policies. In today's circumstances people are unem-

of God or the Love Family, an evil society that should be banned from this country. The world head of that organisation is an outlawed American by the name of Father David Berg. That man is now barred from re-entering the United States of America and divides his time between living in Switzerland and living in Italy. While an American citizen he was charged with incest and he has a hatred of Americans. It is estimated that his yearly income from the Children of God societies spread throughout the world is of the order of $50m. He is a friend of Libya's Gaddafi.

ployed for increasingly longer periods, A young lady, a university student from my

particularly unemployed people with dependent electorate, was standing at a bus stop in the city of

children. This issue is raised with 'me by social Sydney recently when she was approached by

workers at the North Richmond family comyoung men playing musical instruments. They

munity health centre. I point out to the House stopped and struck up a conversation with her,

that that centre is located in the Highett Street, eventually inviting her to join them for coffee.

Richmond, Housing Commission estate. ThouAfterwards she was asked to hold hands in prayer,

sands of single parents and low income people are take Christ to heart and to give away her Catholic

living in that estate and in that area. The social religion. She was then invited to dinner and acworkers at the centre have had a large number of cepted, going to a house at 37 Christie Street, St

cases of people receiving the unemployment Leonards. She was impressed with the playing of benefit who have dependent children for whom music and noticed some attractive girls who apthe next meal and the next rent payment almost parently were conducting a so-called escort ser-

invariably represent a crisis.

vice. Within 40 hours that attractive, fine young

It is interesting that economists talk a great deal about marginal costs but when it comes to people in this community for whom the marginal costs mean the difference beteen misery and a sense of security it seems that marginal costs are of very little consequence. I would be very interested to hear from the Treasurer (Mr Howard) just what

Australian lady was under the influence of those people and was asked to sever all relations with her family. Fortunately, her mother heard of the situation, travelled to Sydney and rescued her daughter from that dreadful, iniquitous society which has a large underground movement with houses in Sydney.

his justification is for that differential in treatment I understand that the society is established in

which exists between the various classes of Melbourne also and in other cities throughout

beneficiaries. I make a suggestion to him of why Australia. The authentic Bible is misinterpreted

that is so. It is for the same reason as we have by the cult. It uses post office box numbers for its

different health treatment for the so-called disadaddress. There is a branch at Hurstville. Ten per

vantaged people and the working poor. It is becent of the income from the organisation is paid to

cause one class of people is regarded as undeservFather Berg and is spirited out of the country. The

ing and the other is regarded as deserving. 1should escort service provided by the Children of God is

have thought that that kind of philosophy should nothing more than prostitution in the name of re-

have gone out at some time in the eighteenth cenligion. The organisation is hell-bent on dragging

tury or certainly by the middle of the nineteenth fine young Australian girls and boys down. Fortu-

century. I will say one thing for the Fraser nately, the young lady from my electorate came

Government-it has a great sense of history. It out of the spell quickly and was assisted by a

keeps throwing up history, as we have seen it do Christian gentleman in Melbourne who has had

again and again. The Government treats history considerable experience with the organisation and

1754 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Adjournment

has been able to rehabilitate many young Ausof equipment. The Amigo chair is designed for use

tralians who previously were under the influence inside buildings and for persons who have some

of that evil organisation. Sometimes that takes limited mobility. It is useful for travelling inside

some years to do.

hospitals, libraries, factories and large offices, or

Of course, the organisation is masquerading as a religious organisation. Many fine young Australians, both girls and boys, are being spirited into the Children of God movement. They are lost to their families forever. Let that be a warning to parents of young people to warn their children against having anything to do with that society. It is a filthy, rotten organisation and should be banned from this country.
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (l0.39)-In this Year of Disabled Persons we continually hear members on the Government side of the House detailing what should be done for disabled people. They do not really do anything but they do make a lot of noise. Tonight I challenge the Government, the Liberal-National Country Party coalition -1 am glad to see that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) is at the table-to stop talking and start doing, to remove the duty and sales tax from imported wheelchairs and accessories. I specify the Amigo chair, which looks more like a golf buggy than a conventional wheelchair. It is highly mobile and can be turned in limited areas, such as in a lift. Its seat resembles that of a normal office chair. It can be rotated through 360 degrees so that it can be backed up to a table and the user can turn the seat through 180 degrees to sit at the table in a chair which looks very little different from any other dining chair or conference chair. Furthermore, it is powered by a battery called a gel-cel which re-

for moving from one place to another in a selfdriven car, for attending conferences or for air travel. The heavier Australian chair is designed largely for outdoor use. It is heavier, sturdier and far less easy to transport by air. There is no similar or equivalent wheelchair manufactured in Australia. So, if the duty and sales tax were removed we would not be creating unfair competition with the Australian manufacturers. No Australian product remotely resembles the Amigo chair, nor has it the flexibility for plane or car travel.
1 think in the Irtternational Year of Disabled Persons the Government could make some generous gesture-it has not made very many lately-and take the sales tax and duty off these wheelchairs. They cost $1,600 to manufacture, but with the duty and sales tax they come to $2,700. That puts them out of the range of the average person who struggles to buy one. We stand up and put one foot in front of the other without thinking about it. But if we could not we would start thinking about using a wheelchair in which we could get around in a manner similar to other people. Dr Ford, who works at the Caulfield Hospital, has an Amigo chair. He is a man who for years has battled strongly against a disability, and it was not really until he got the Amigo chair that he was able to walk-he calls it walking in his chair-as we do.

quires no maintenance and contains no acids and This is the International Year of Disabled Per-

therefore can be turned upside down with imsons. The Government has spoken so much about

punity. This is the only battery which, under inwhat it is going to do but so far, with a quarter of

ternational aircraft regulations, can be carried the year gone, it has done nothing. The removal of

aboard passenger aircraft.

sales tax from these wheelchairs would be a ges-

Australians manufacture a great variety of wheelchairs. At the march of disabled people held in Melbourne on Saturday, 21 March there were numerous electric wheelchairs to be seen and hardly any of them were exactly the same. Therefore, there is a great range manufactured, and it seems that they are largely manufactured on a

ture that would be appreciated all over Australia. The cost would be negligible to the Government. 1 assure the Government that the benefits given to the disabled would be tremendous. I urge the Treasurer to pick up this matter and to salvage something out of a week that has not been very good for the Government.

one-off basis. The Australian wheelchairs are all Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (10.44)-I would

powered by ordinary wet-cell batteries, usually like to speak tonight about a problem experienced

two of them. They are very heavy and many of by many elderly pensioner couples in our com-

them are not capable of being transported in the munity. This problem occurs when an elderly

boot of a car, as is the Amigo chair, which is easily pensioner couple is separated by illness, one of

disassembled to place in a car boot. The Austhem having to enter a nursing home. In this cir-

tralian chairs that can be disassembled are still cumstance the patient's pension goes toward the

very heavy because of the weight of the batteries. cost of the nursing home or private hospital,

Therefore, even though the Australian chairs and which frequently absorbs the whole pension. The

the Amigo chair can all be designated as remaining partner is left to maintain the home

wheelchairs, they are, in fact, very different pieces and himself or herself on one pension. The costs of

Adjournment

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1755

running a home do not go down by half when one member of the Campbell-Russell sub-branch of

person is not there. Water rates, municipal rates the Returned Services League, advising me that

and other costs stay the same. A telephone behe intended to put a motion before the monthly

comes even more vital and household costs such meeting of the sub-branch at 12.30 p.m.

as electricity and heating continue. Transport tomorrow. If the motion is adopted by the sub-

costs also increase when visits to the hospital must branch, it will lead to my being investigated by the

be made regularly. The enormous financial strain Australian Capital Territory branch of the RSL

on a pensioner in tbis situation is compounded by with a view to-having me expelled from that or-

loneliness and anxiety.

ganisation. The motion accuses me of engaging in

In this context I would like to discuss the Government's $40 a day subsidy to nursing homes, which is withdrawn when a patient goes home for a visit at the weekend or overnight. I will refer to a specific case in my electorate-Mr and Mrs Urquhart of Boronia. Mrs Urquhart is a patient in a private nursing home. She is 68 years old and has chronic rheumatoid arthritis.

conduct subversive to the objects of the League. It was accompanied by a supporting statement which set out my actions in supporting the efforts of the organisation known as Women Against Rape to participate in the annual ANZAC Day march. The statement also criticises me for not following the forms of the League in pursuing my goals.

Although she is confined to a wheelchair, she is I intend to attend the monthly lunchtime meet-

quite mentally alert. Mr Urquhart has heart ing tomorrow to deny these charges and to defend

trouble and is not physically well enough to care my position. I am disappointed at the action of Mr

for his wife at home. They are both aged penMcCann, whom J have always regarded as a

sioners. However, Mr Urquhart would be able to friend. However, I am not surprised that the

care for his wife at weekends and for other short action has been initiated. It was a fairly predict-

periods with the help of his family. The problem is able reaction from the RSL. I am sure-l will say

that if Mrs Urquhart leaves the nursing home, her this-that it would be more beneficial to the

family must pay the $40 a day subsidy to secure League if it were to examine its own policies,

her place in the hospital. This is clearly an imactions and attitudes rather than spend time

possibility for an aged pensioner who is finding it examining mine. I think it is ironic that as a

an enormous strain to maintain a home on a single member of long standing-I have been a member

pension.

of the League for something like 35 yearsI

While I am aware that abuses of the subsidy system could occur, I maintain that we have a moral responsibility to patients in this position. Present Government policy is condemning these people to end their lives in an institution, when

should be called upon to defend my actions in supporting democratic rights of dissent and freedom of expression of Australian citizens. These are the principles for which our soldiers fought and died and which I serve to defend.

there are people wanting to care for them but who I have received many expressions of support,

are financially penalised so grossly that they are including a copy of a letter from a Liberal Party

unable to do so. All modern sociological research supporter. The original was sent to Sir William

indicates that patients' well-being is best served in Keys and claims that the RSL owes me and the

a non-instititionalised environment, and that members of my electorate an unreserved apology.

wherever possible the home environment is best The League's actions remind me of its action in

for the elderly. It is time that the Government expelling members who .first spoke out against

took account of these findings in planning social Australia's involvement in the Vietnam war in the

services for the elderly. The care of chronically 1960s. I was also very interested to read a copy of

sick elderly patients must be reviewed to take into a speech by one of my colleagues, the honourable

account the family unit and the best interests of member for Hotham (Mr Kent), in which he said

this unit. Some freedom and flexibility can be althat members of two well-known fascist

lowed for by more sensitive and creative planning organisations-the organisation of Ravna Gora

of care for our elderly citizens caught up in the Chetniks and the organisation of Captive

web of bureaucracy. Schemes have been devised Nations-many of whose members fought beside

for prisoners in our State penitentiaries to spend Hitler's Nazis in Europe, were allowed to march

weekends at home. Surely our elderly and sick can with the ANZACs in Melbourne last Saturday. I am

be catered for in this need.

looking forward to my meeting with the

Mr FRY (Fraser) (10.47)-Honourable members may be interested to know that this

Campbell-Russell sub-branch of the RSL tomorrow at lunchtime.

evening I received a letter from a gentleman Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (10.50)-ln

named Mr Allen McCann, who is an ordinary another place and in Press releases Senator John

1756 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Adjournment

Button has been impugning the integrity of Government was held out continually to journal-

journalists who work in the Press Gallery of this ists who worked in the Press Gallery of this place.

place. As an ex-journalist, I say that it seems There were 27 jobs for Press secretaries in the

strange that Senator Button would have set out on Government at that time. Twenty-seven journal-

this campaign of attack on the journalists who ists were invited to work for the Government at

work under very difficult conditions in the Press quite high remuneration. It seems to me that if

Gallery of this place. He suggested that one wants to endeavour to subvert people here

newspaper journalists are allowing themselves to then holding out the offer of well-paid jobs may

be crudely used by the Prime Minister (Mr be a way to do it. I believe that the journalists

Malcolm Fraser). I would have thought that the were not, in fact, subverted. I believe that it is un-

evidence quite clearly shows that the Prime Minfortunate that their integrity should be attacked in

ister is subjected to what could be described as this way. I do not believe that it is proper that this

some healthily cynical and critical journalistic ensort of attack should be made. I totally support

deavours as a result of interviews and discussions them, as a former journalist and as a former dis-

with journalists in this place.

trict committee member of the Australian

It seems to me that for Senator Button to say that it is overdue for journalists to take some action about the way in which they are being manipUlated by the Prime Minister indicates a view which is not only inaccurate but also which is insulting to members of the Press Gallery who do, under difficult conditions, a job in reporting to the people of Australia what happens here. I do not

Journalists Association. I was a member of the State executive of that union. I believe that it is wrong and improper for the integrity of journalists to have been attacked. I support wholeheartedly the attempts journalists make to report this place accurately. I have some criticisms, but certainly not in terms of criticising the integrity of members of the Press Gallery.

mind if Senator Button does not like what the Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilJar)-

Press Gallery puts out. On many occasions I do Order! The honourable member's time has

not like what the Press Gallery puts out. There expired.

have been many occasions when I would have criticised members of the Press Gallery. There have been some occasions when there has appeared to me to be the intrusion of personal attitudes in what some members of the Press Gallery have sent out of this place. That is bad luck for me. But I do not believe it is right or proper for Senator Button to allege that journalists are allowing themselves to be manipulated by the Prime Minister.

Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (10.55)-If the previous speaker, the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) is concerned about the 27 Press secretaries of the Whitlam Government, then he ought to take a look at the 34 Press secretaries in the Western Australian Government and the Government Information Unit. He may then come to a different conclusion about that matter. He should also reflect on the fact that the period of the Whitlam Government was the most open

I agree with the editorial which appeared in the period of any Australian Federal government.

Sydney Daily Telegraph of 22 April which There was easy access to government information

recommended to the honourable senator: 'Button to which the public had a right, as did the Press.

up Senator!'. I support the Daily Telegraph's There has been unquestionably a period of a high

proposition. It states:

degree of manipulation of news by various means

But we resent most strongly and reject utterly yesterday's since that time.

statement by Senator John Button in which he attempted to cast doubt on the integrity of this and other newspapers.

The matter I wish to raise in this House was reported in The Age of 28 April. The newspaper

It seems to me that unless the media are in supcarried a report of a request by the Attorney-

port of a party, a senator, a government or its General (Senator Durack) to seek United States

leader or the Leader of the Opposition there is a State Department intervention in the District

willingness and a readiness to question the integCourt of Pennsylvania requesting it not to assume

rity of the journalists simply on the basis that they jurisdiction over an action initiated by the Conser-

are not evidently supporting the position of the vation Council of Western Australia. Honourable

person doing the criticising. It seems to me that if members would be aware that the Council alleged

there have ever been attempts to subvert the Press that bauxite mining operations of Alcoa Australia

Gallery of this place those attempts, which I hope (Western Australia) Ltd threaten our jarrah for-

were effectively resisted, took place during the ests and water supplies. The action is against the

three years 1973, 1974 and 1975 when the parent companies of the companies mining in

prospect of highly paid jobs in the service of the Western Australia's south west.

Adjournment

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATTVES 1757

There has been a great deal of alarmist nonsense talked about this matter by the Western Australian Government and, recently, the Australian Government. In the first place the action, even if totally successful, would not stop bauxite mining in the south west. From the parent company's point of view, the worst possible thing to happen would be for .it to ~e obliged to sell ,up its 51 per cent holdmgs m the AustralIan company. One can readily imagine a number of companies operating in Australia which would be willing to buy. As I have said, that is the worst possible and most unlikely outcome of the case from the company's point of view.
Secondly, it has been argued that it will affect the North West Shelf project by reducing south west demand for gas. That is more nonsense. At the very worst, it might cause a rescheduling of the State Energy Commission's allocation of gas which might indeed produce a windfall for the SEC if that gas is bought at something like today's prices and delivered to the consumer in the 1990s at the then prices. The Attorney-General has a concern for Australian sovereignty. He ought to extend that concern to a much wider range of Australian controls over aspects of foreign investment in this country and to what amounts to individual sovereignty in our domestic legal system. It is time that this Government and the Western Australian Government recognised that this problem is a direct product of an inadequate access for Australian citizens to their own courts for a reasonable range of what are commonly called class actions. The type of class action attempted by the Conservation Council in the United States Federal Court ought to be available to it here. The Government has had before it quite an extensive review of the matter in a discussion paper by the Law Reform Commission which was printed in June 1979. One of the interesting features of that document is that it points out that current permissive American law on class actions and the more restrictive Australian law on representative actions-or the rather toothless power of intervention by government agencies such as the Trade Practices Commission, in a state of demise, and various consumer protection authorities-stem from common roots in the British judicial system of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
The evolution of class action type procedures in the Australian judicial system was largely curtailed by a British case in 1910 which severely restricted the use of representative actions to secure damages. As a result of that court case there has been very little attempt to change Australian judicial procedures in this direction either by legislation or by the interpretations of courts. The

matters which the Law Reform Commission raised are complex. I do not deny that.
But, as the Commission pointed out, the matters are not intractable. The Government ought to press the Commission to a conclusion and bring down a final report on the matter. Better still, it ought to present to the public evidence of its own intention to improve public rights in this area, I suggest that this would be a far more sensible and constructive way for it to proceed in this matter than the way in which it has chosen to proceed to this point. What goes for the Australian Government on this matter, as I said, goes for the Western Australian Government as well.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-It being 11 p.m., the debate is interrupted.
Mr Howard-Mr Deputy Speaker, I require the debate to be extended.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The debate may continue until 11.10 p.m.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (ll.O)-ln the course of the adjournment debate two matters were raised that come within my ministerial responsibilities. First of all, the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe) raised a number of matters relating to what he saw to be differential tax treatment of certain categories of tax-
payers. r am sorry that I did not hear the begin-
ning of his reml:\.rks, but I will undertake, when I get the Hansard, to read them and to indicate to him what my views are. Rather than punt on a reply, not having heard of all of what he said, [ hope he will understand that I should take the opportunity to look at the Hansard.
The honourable member for Henty (Mrs Child) raised the question of sales tax exemption on certain wheelchairs, particularly in the context of this year being the International Year of Dis-
abled Persons. r think the honourable member
made a fair case. I can inform the House that in recent weeks I have had a number of discussions with my colleague the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) about the whole question of what might be done in the taxation area so far as the International Year of Disabled Persons is concerned. Opinions differ as to what is the right thing to do. I can assure the honourable member and indeed honourable members from both sides of the House that the Government intends to make a practical and helpful contribution towards the International Year of Disabled Persons. A number of proposals are being considered by Senator Chaney and me at present. I will certainly take on board what the honourable member for Henty said. Whether that proposal is among those that we will finally decide upon I

1758 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Notices

cannot say at this stage. I certainly acknowledge completely her very genuine interest in the situation she described. I thank her very much for raising the matter.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The debate having concluded, the House stands adjourned until 10.30 a.m. tomorrow.
House adjourned at 11.2 p.m. NOTICES
The following notices were given: Mr Fife to present a Bill for an Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes. Mr Fife to present a Bill for an Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes. Mr Howard to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905. Mr Moore to present a Bill for an Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters. Mr Moore to present a Bill for an Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Act 1981. Mr Moore to present a Bill for an Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981. Mr Moore to present a Bill for an Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other purposes. Mr Moore to present a Bill for an Act relating to the priority of Crown debts. Mr Moore to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Mr Moore to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.
Mr Moore to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Mr Moore to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Mr Moore to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.
Mr Moore to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Mr MeVeigh to move-
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, the following proposed work be referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Worles for consideration and report: Extensions to international terminal facilities, Brisbane Airport, Queensland.
REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Parliamentary Library Dr Theophanous to ask Mr Speaker:
Further to the answer given to Senator Evans in Senate Estimates Committee A on 27 April 1981, (Senate Estimates Committees A, Band C Hansard, page 12) by Mr H. Knight, an Officer of the Parliamentary Library, to the effect that the Parliamentary Library had not adopted a deliberate policy of leaving vacant positions unfilled in order to achieve cost savings, (a) what positions fell vacant in 1980-81, and on what dates did they become vacant, (b) what notice was the Library given in each case, (c) on what date was each position advertised and (d) on what date did the successful applicant commence duty in each case.
PAPERS The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 29 April 1981, pursuant to statute:
Lands Acquisition Act-Statements (4) of land acquired by agreement authorized under sub-section 7 (I).
Telecommunications Act-Australian Telecommunications Commission-By-laws-1981Telecommunications (Charging Zones and Charging Districts)-Amendment No.9. Telecommunications (Community CaUs)- Amendment No.7.

Answers to Questions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1759 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Meat Exports
(Question No. 311)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) What have been the amounts of beef (a) imports or (b) quotas applying to Australian beef with respect to (i) Japan, (ii) the United States of America and (iii) the European Economic Community for each of the last 8 years.
(2) What have been the amounts of sheepmeat (a) imports or (b) quotas applying to Australian sheep with respect to (i) Japan, (ii) the EEC and (iii) Middle East, for the same period.
(3) How many delegations led by the responsible Minister went to the countries referred to in parts (I) and (2) to negotiate market access.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1)-
IMPORTS OF BEEF FROM AUSTRALIA
(Tonnes, shipped weight)

Year

Japan

USA

EEC

1973

107,271

315,968

93,219

1974

42,356

233,485

25,110

1975

37,109

314,817

10,825

1976

76,138

303,512

10,625

1977

71,738

291,308

6,774

1978

77,541

364,039

10,943

1979

100,430

396,659

9,685

1980

92,935

365,730

n.a.

Imports into the EEC and Japan have been subject to quotas as well as a range of other import restrictions. In respect of the United States, quotas applied in 1976 and imports in 1975 and 1977-1979 were subject to voluntary restraint arrangements.
Sources: Japan Tariff Association; US Departments of Commerce and Agriculture; EEC Nimexe.
(2)IMPORTS OF SHEEPMEAT FROM AUSTRALIA
(Tonnes, shipped weight)

Year

Japan

EEC

Import figures are not separately available for the Middle East region and the following figures for Australian exports to the Middle East are from the Australian Bureau of Statistics.
AUSTRALIAN EXPORTS TO THE MIDDLE EAST

Year

Sheepmeat Live sheep

(Tonnes shipped wt)

(Head)

1973

13,300

946,392

1974

17,788 1,026,713

1975

37,823 1,493,789

1976

41,744 2,401,554

1977

68,844 4,105,653

1978

50,031 3,427,261

1979

47,088 4,216,417

1980

77,654 5,220,293

(3) Details of Ministerial visits have been made available publicly at the time of each visit. The number of Ministerial visits between 1973 and 1980 to the countries referred to in (1) and (2) to discuss or negotiate market access was in excess of 20.

Disabled Children
(Question No. 320)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
Has the Government accepted the recommendations contained in the report by the Women's Advisory Council entitled 'My Child was Born Disabled', relating to the revision of the handicapped children's allowance to provide (a) all parents of disabled children with allowances regardless of their income level and the nature of their child's disability, (b) parents with information on the guidelines given to medical officers for differentiating between the classifications of handicapped and substantially handicapped under the allowance, (c) an additional allowance for single parents and those in financial difficulties, (d) periodic adjustment of the allowance in line with the consumer price index, (e) for continuation of the allowance to parents when the child is placed in a hostel or other facilities for short-term stays and (f) an increase in the allowance to cover the costs of equipment, medication and treatment; if so, when will the changes be implemented; if not, why not.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

1973

58,390

24,756

1974

34,689

7,895

1975

66,138

8,425

1976

98,649

12,688

1977

100,522

5,757

1978

78,578

11,981

1979

69,821

8,885

198O

44,480

n.a.

Quantitative limits applied in some member states of the EEC.
Sources: Japan Tariff Association; EEC Nimexe.

The recommendations of the National Women's Advisory Council have been carefully studied; those concerning the handicapped child's allowance will be taken into account in any review of that program. The following specific comments are offered:
Recommendations (a), (c) and (f) would involve a fundamental change in the purpose of the handicapped child's allowance. Currently the allowance is paid to assist parents who have a severely or substantially handicapped child in need of constant care and attention to care for the child at home rather than place him in an institution. The allowance is not in the nature of compensation. Neither is it intended to meet the full cost of caring for handicapped children; rather, it is to assist in meeting the special costs involved.

1760 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Recommendation (b) concerns assessment guidelines devised by the Department of Health. The question of whether a child is severely handicapped or substantially handicapped is assessed by a medical officer on the grounds of information supplied by the parents and the child's own treating doctor as to the child's medical condition and his capacity to cope. Where appropriate, further examination may be sought. The nature of the assessment involved is thus a matter of professional judgment.
Recommendation (d) would also involve amending the Social Services Act; at present the rate of the allowanCe is reviewed each year in the Budget context.
Concerning recommendation (e), entitlement to the allowance is generally not affected by the child's absence from home provided the absence is of a temporary nature and the institution concerned does not receive handicapped childrens' benefit or nursing home benefit for the child for the same period.
Coal Developments
(Question No. 413)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
Does the Government accept the recommendation in report No. 10 of the National Energy Advisory Committee that Governments should give closer attention to the impacts of equity participation by foreign consumers in new coal developments, particularly in relation to the terms of contracts and prices negotiated by such joint venturers; if not, why not; if so, what action will the Government take, through which authority and when.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
In examining proposed foreign investments in new coal projects, including proposals that incorporate equity participation by foreign customers, the Foreign Investment Review Board and the Government give full consideration to all of the benefits and costs associated with customer equity participation, including arrangements for the sale of the output from the projects. As part of this examination process, advice is sought from all Government departments and bodies whose responsibilities may be affected by the proposed investment, including the Australian Taxation Office. The Government is well aware of the implications of foreign customer equity participation, and in order for such participation to be approved it must comply with the foreign investment policy requirements and must not be contrary to the national interest.
Further scope for protection of the national interest against any adverse export pricing implications of foreign customer equity participation is provided by Regulations 9 and 11 of the Customs (Prohibited Exports) Regulations. These Regulations prohibit the export of certain raw or semi-processed minerals and metals, and of hydrocarbons and nuclear sensitive material unless permission is granted by the Minister for Trade and Resources or an authorised person. This export control power may be used if the need arises to ensure, amongst other things, that fair and reasonable world market prices are paid in respect of exports of Australian coal.
Additional protection is provided through the taxation arrangements applicable to joint ventures involving customer participation. Where, for example, non-arm's length sales are made, Section 136 of the Income Tax Assessment Act provides that the Taxation Commissioner has power to determine a taxable income so that an appropriate amount of income tax is payable.

International Charter Flights
(Questions No. 421)
Mr Jull asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) How many applications were made for international charter flights (a) to and (b) from Australia during 1980.
(2) Which companies made these applications.
(3) Which applications were approved.
(4) Which rights were taken up.
(5) When did each charter operate and which ports in Australia were involved in each case.
(6) Have any applications been made for charter rights in 1981; if so, by whom and for which dates.
(7) Have any applications for J981 been rejected.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honorable member's question is as follows:
(1) My Department received applications for 433 international charter flights to Australia and 365 from Australia during 1980.
(2) Application for international charter flights were made by the following companies.

Flying Tiger Airlines Tradewinds Airways British Cargo Airlines
Japan Air Lines Cargolux Airlines Bayu Indonesia Air
Scimitar Airlines Transamerica Airlines Air Trust (Singapore)
Air New Zealand Thorpes Transport Jet Charter Airlines McAlpine Aviation Civil Aviation Administration, China UTA-French Airlines Ansett Airlines of Australia
Transport, Australia Korean Airlines Elomair Pty Ltd
Beagle Airways Executive Air Charter Bouraq Indonesia Airlines
World Airways Inc. Pelican Cargo Airways Executive Airlines
Condor North Queensland Aero Club Seaworld Aviation
Capital Jet Katies Fashions P.T. Airfast Services (Indonesia)
Talair Co-ordinated Air Charters (PNG) Krisair
I.P.E.C. Aviation P.T. SAATAS (East Indonesia) P.T. Pelita Air Services
Norfolk Island Airlines Barclay Jet Charter
Stillwell Aviation
Hazelton Air Services

Inbound Outbound

45

20

2

2

12

8

23

2

8

1

4

5

1

1

57

48

7

7

2

Nil

2

2

2

4

1

1

1

1

7

7

2

6

Nil

1

2

Nil

1

1

2

1

1

Nil

2

2

I

1

I

I

Nil

1

I

1

1

I

Nil

I

2

2

1

I

89

88

14

10

1

Nil

1

Nil

Nil

1

5

5

9

13

14

16

11

13

11

12

2

1

Answers to Questions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1761

Air North
Qantas Bush Pilots Airways Ltd MacRobertson Miller Airline Services
Air Nauru British Airways Singapore Airlines Ports of Call Travel Club of America
Statewide Air Charter

Inbound Outbound

18

18

26

28

25

l3

4

4

Nil

I

Nil

I

Nil

1

1

1

1

Inbound Outbound

Kevron Photographics Pty Ltd Transwest Airlines Air Nuigini

I

1

I

I

8

7

(3) My Department approved all applications received during 1980.
(4) Most of the flights were operated.
(5) Dates and ports of operation for these charter flights are as follows:

Operator Flying Tiger Airlines
Tradewinds British Cargo Airlines Japan Air Lines
Cargolux Airlines Bayu Indonesian Air

Port served Sydney
Melbourne
Brisbane Darwin Adelaide Perth Sydney Melbourne Perth Canberra Melbourne Sydney
Sydney Melbourne Darwin Adelaide Brisbane Brisbane Perth

Dates of operation

Inbound

Outbound

January 08,14

Nil

February 04,11,25

04,11,25

March

03,17,24,31

Nil

April

14,28

14

May

05,26

Nil

June

03,09,16,18,23,30 16,18

July

07,21

Nil

August

04,11,18,25

Nil

September 01,08,15,22,29 08,29

October 06,13,20,27

Nil

November 03,10,17,24

17

December 01,08,13,15,22

February 26

26

June

17

17

July

nil

22

November nil

11

December nil

02,08

March

nil

25

April

nil

01

November nil

24

September nil

IS

September nil

22

March

26

26

April

11

II

January 18

18

February 23

23

January 16,18

16,18

February 08,24

nil

January 05, 18

05,18

February 01,08,25

01

March

08

08

January 15

IS

January 15

15

March

03,31

nil

April

20,27

nil

May

05

nil

June

01,08,22

nil

July

14,28

nil

August

04,11,25

nil

September 15,22

nil

October 12, IS

nil

November 05,26

nil

December 03,17

nil

May

09,25

nil

May

03

nil

August

29

nil

December 20

nil

April

20

nil

June

30

nil

September 29

nil

May

nil

26

November nil

26,27,29

September 11,24

11,24

1762 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Operator
Scimitar Transamerica Airline, \\

Port served
Sydney Sydney Sydney

Melbourne

Airtrust (Singapore)
Air New Zealand Thorpes Transport Jet Charter Airlines
McAlpine Aviation CAAC UTA-French Airlines
Ansett Airlines of Australia
Transport, Australia Korean Airlines Elomair Beagle Airways Executive Air Charter Bouraq Indonesia Airlines

Melbourne Brisbane
Adelaide Christmas Island
Norfolk Island Horn Island
Cairns Brisbane Sydney Darwin Melbourne Sydney Norfolk Island
Melbourne Sydney Townsville Cairns
Essendon Sydney Cairns Cairns Cooktown Cairns Christmas Island

Answers to Questions

Dates of operation

Inbound

Outbound

October 26

nil

November 28

nil

March

01

01

January 18,20,22,27,29 18,22,27,29

February 0 03,05,08,09, 00 12, \3*, 15

06, 08, 10, 13*, 15, 29

March

04,20*

20

April

03,04,08,09 04,08

May

04,07,08,23 04,07,08

August 01,07,08,09,10 01,07,08,10

September 11,12

11

October 12,15,29

10,12,29

November 28,29,30

28,30

December 02, 05,13

01,02,05

January 20,27,30

20,27,30

February 10

10

March

02,20

02,20

April

10

10

May

24

24

August 09,12

03,09,12,18

September 01, 12

01

October 10,12

12

November nil

29

December nil

\3

January 28

28

April

nil

04

December 01

nil

September 01

nil

January 11,16

11,16

March

07, 15

07,15

June

25

25

July

16

16

September 03

03

August

23

nil

December 20

nil

March

nil

13

April

09

15

June

29

nil

July

nil

31

October nil

23

October nil

16

December 18

04

October 26

nil

June

03

03

May

03

nil

May

nil

03

February 09

10

July

12,26

13,27

August

15

16

September 13

14

October 18

19

November 08

09

February 02

nil

February nil

03

April

20

18

August

nil

12

September nil

14,19

November nil

07

September nil

02

September 17

nil

October 24

nil

December 24

28

July

nil

30

August

01

nil

September 12

nil

April

01

nil

December 24,28

24,28

Answers to Questions
Operator World Airways Inc. Pelican Cargo Airways Executive Airlines Condor North Queensland Aero Club Seaworld Aviation Capita1Jet Katies Fashions Pty Ltd Airfast Services Indonesia Talair
Co-ordinated Air Charters Krisair I.P.E.C. Aviation P.T. SAATAS (East Indonesia) P.T. Pelita Air Services
Norfolk Island Airlines
Barclay Jet Charter
Stillwell Aviation

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1763

Port served Brisbane Adelaide Melbourne Sydney Sydney Cairns Brisbane Sydney Weipa Townsville Cairns Cairns
Horn Island
Townsville Cairns
Cairns Broome Darwin Darwin Christmas Island
Cairns Adelaide Sydney Brisbane Norfolk Island
Brisbane
Cairns Sydney Townsville Darwin Sydney
Port Hedland Alice Springs Canberra Canberra

Dates of operation

Inbound

Outbound

April

01

01

May

07

nil

May

nil

08

February nil

10

December 05

05

November 25

25

November nil

24

June

13

13

October nil

09

October 12

nil

December 04

04

February 09

nil

April-Sept 2 flights per week

October-Dec. 3 flights per week

February nil

11,29

March

05

nil

September nil

09

October 15

nil

March

nil

05

February nil

19

May

17,18*

20

June

03,10,14

03,13

October 17

21

December 03,11*,16

03

October 01

nil

June

19

nil

April

nil

05

November 10

10

December 05,08,15,18

06,09,16*

April

07

03

June

13,16

13,16

August

08,12

08,12

December 24,28

24,28

September 23,24

23,24

August

nil

28,30

September nil

01,03

February 07

05

November 10

05

January nil

16,27

March

29

29

April

01 ,04,07,24,28 01,04,07,24,28

May

01,04

01,04

June

09

06

August

22,31

22,31

September nil

29

October 04

nil

February nil

18

May

04

nil

June

06,30

29

October nil

24

December 12,24

12,23

May

nil

30

June

05,10

06,10

February 19

nil

May

07

06

May

03,o4

03,o4

July

nil

29

August

OJ

nil

January 23

22

February 28

27

March

04,21

14,16

August

08

06

November 20

17

April

nil

08

April

13

nil

April

nil

23

April

nil

23

1764 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Operator
Hazelton Air Services Air North

Port served
Brisbane
Townsville Cairns Essendon Brisbane Cairns Darwin

Qantas (subchartered MAS/Tradewinds aircraft)

Christmas Island

Bush Pilots Airways

Sydney Cairns

MacRobertson Miller Airline Services

Port Hedland

Air Nauru . . . . . . . . British Airways . . . . . . Singapore Airlines . . . . . Ports of Call Travel Club of America
Statewide Aircharter . Kevron Photographics
Transwest Airlines Air Niugini

Melbourne Melbourne Melbourne Melbourne Sydney Brisbane Brisbane
Port Hedland Cairns

Darwin
* More than one flight on this day.
(6) Yes. Details of operator and the proposed date of operation are as follows:
Air Niugini: 19 March, 16, 20 April. Seaworld Aviation: 20 January, 27 February. Barclay Jet Charter: 08, 09, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 27 January. 04,06,09, 16,20,26,27,28 February. 05,06, 12, 14,26, 29 March. Bush Pilots Airways: 09 January Thorpes Transport: 16 February Capital Jet: 03, 04,19,20 January. 28 February

Dates of operation

Inbound

June October July November April June July March April June July August October November December February March April May June July August September October November December June October February March
April
May June July April August September October June June June March March September September October June July September October August

02 06
17 nil 25 07
13 02,17 28 05,07*,20,24 12,28 03,04,05,09
20 15 07,09 07,13 06,20,31 17,30 15,26 12,24
10,22 09,19 04,18
02,14,30 13,26 10,11,22
nil
17 16,20,23,27 01,08,15,19, 22,29 05,12,19,23,
26,30 17,31 06,11,20,25 02,09,23
09,27
nil 05 26 nil
nil nil 06 nil
05 nil 27 28 13,23 12,21,26
16,20 15

Outbound
01 05 17 28 nil 04 nil 01,14 25 05,07*,20,24 12,28 01,04,05,09 17 14 06,09 07,13 06,20,31 17,30 15,26 06,12,24 10,22 09,19 04,18 02,14,17,30 13,26 10,11,22 06 nil 16,23 01,08,15,22,29
05,12,19,26
17,31
02, 12 12 nil 12 06 23 21 nil 12 05 02 nil 27 20 15,21,26 16,20 18

Jet Charter Airlines: 22, 25, 26, 28 February. 01, 18, 21 March. Okanagan Helicopters: 24 January. 16 March. Helitrans Aust. PjL.: 12 March. Wards Freight Express: 20,21,22,25,28 February. Katies Fashions P/L.: 27 February. McDougalls Air Services: 10 February.
Navair: 18, 19,26 February. Korean Airlines: 05,14, March. Japan Air Lines: 11, 18 February. OS, 18 March. Ansett Airlines of Australia: 04, 31 January.

Answers to Questions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1765

Stillwell Airlines: 03, 20, 24, 26, 27*, 28 February. 01 March. Qantas: 03,17 February. 05,17March.
!F)9ly,i1n6g,2T3igFeerbAruiralrinye. 0s:20, 507,,1029, *1,4I,I1,91,62, 61,72, 273J,a3n0uMarayr.c0h3. ,
CargoluxAirlines: 15 February.
T10r,a1n8sa,2m0e,r2i1ca, :2127,2,31*8,, 2243,, 2256,F2e7b,r2u8a*ry, .3002,,3113J,a1n4uMarayr.c0h9.,
Beagle Airways: 23,24 January. P.T. Pelita Air Services: 20 January. 04,08 February. P.T. SAATAS (East Indonesia): 14, 15, 20, 21, 26, 27 Jnuary. Heavylift Cargo Airlines: 27 February Ports of Call Travel Club of America: 05March.
UTA-French Airlines: 31 January. 02, 14, 17 February.
Talair: 16*, 28 February. Air Trust (Singapore): 03, 18March. Airfast Services (Indonesia): operating for JunjFeb /March 3 times per week. Douglas Airways: 29 January. 17 February. Bali Air: 31 January. 02, 15,17 February. AustralianMetals: 27,28 February.
(7) In the first two months of 1981 no applications for international charter flights were rejected.
Cimetidine (Question No. 495)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the article headed
'Stomach drug linked to cancer' (Age, 12 January 1981,
page 1).
(2) If so, what quantities of cimetidine have been dispensed in Australia since its introduction.
(3) Have there been any reported cases of stomach cancer in people using cimetidine in Australia.

Stomach Disorder Drugs
(Question No. 496)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the article headed 'US.
may ban sales on 16 stomach disorder drugs' (Financial Review, 21 January 1981, page 17).
(2) If so,how many of those drugs named have been dispen sed in Australia in each of the last 5 years, giving both quanti ties and value of prescriptions.
(3) Are any of the drugs named currently under suspension in Australia; if so, which ones and what is the reason in each case.
(4) Are there any plans to suspend the use of any of these
drugs on the grounds of unproven effectiveness or any other grounds; if so,what are the details in each case.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable
member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Only three of those drugs named are currently available on the Australian market. These are Librax, Bentyl with Phenobarbital and Valpin. Librax and Valpin are available on prescription only in all States while Bentyl with Phenobarbital is available in syrup form on prescription only in Queensland,
asmania, Western Australia and the Australian Capital Ter
ntory and as an over-the-counter preparation in the remain ing States. Since none of these products is available as a phar maceutical benefit I am unable to provide any details regarding the quantities and value of prescriptions.
(3) No.
(4) Not at this time. In respect of the three drugs which are currently available on the Australian market, details of the basis for the proposed action have been sought from the Food and Drug Administration in the USA. and when available will be referred to the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee for consideration.

(4) In view of the potential problems following the use of cimetidine,are there any plans to withdraw the drug from the Australian market,on either a temporary or permanent basis.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable
member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2)My department does not have details of the quantities of cimetidine dispensed in Australia since its introduction.
Since cimetidine was listed as a pharmaceutical benefit on I
August 1978 there have been 125,883 pharmaceutical benefit prescriptions for cimetidine tablets 200mg (each for 150 tab lets) processed for payment up until 28 February 1981. This figures does not include supplies of cimetidine from hospitals or under the Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme or on private prescritpion.
(3) The Adverse Drug Reactions Advisory Committee has not received any reports of Australian patients suspected of having developed stomach cancer while using cimetidine.
(4) No. None of the evidence reviewed by the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee to date supports the view that cimetidine causes cancer. Nevertheless that Committee and its sub-committee, the Adverse Drug Reactions Advisory Committee, will continue to monitor reports and review the literature on this subject and the honourable member may be assured that appropriate action will be taken as considered necessary.

Tourist Attractions: Effect of Staff Ceilings

(Question No. 497)

Mr Holding asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:

(I) What are the opening and closing times for each of the

following tourist attractions in the Australian Capital Terri

tory: (a) the Australian War Memorial; (b) Parliament

House; (c) the High Court building; (d) Telecom's Black

Mountain Tower; (e) Lanyon Homestead; (f) National Li

b(1;)aM ry;t

(g) Botanic Gardens; Stromlo Observatory;

(h) U)

the Royal Australian Mint; Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve;

(k) Tidbinbilla Tracking Station; (I) Royal Military College,

;\ Duntroon; (m) Cuppacumbalong; (n) Blundells' Farmhouse;
(o) ustralian Capital Territory Law Courts; (p) Australian

Institute of Anatomy, and (q) Government Nursery

Yarralumla.

(2) Are the opening and closing times of any of these tourist
attractions affected by Public Service Board staff ceilings; if so, which ones.

(3) Are factors such as daylight saving and school holidays taken into account when determining opening and closing times; if not, why not.

(4) Has his Department (a) received any complaints re
garding early closing times and (b) made any investigation of the impact of early closing times on the potential attractive ness of tourist sites in the A.C.T.

1766 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that information can only be provided on those tourist attractions administered by the Department. They are-
Lanyon Homestead National Botanic Gardens Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve GovernrnentNursery, Yarralumla The relevant information in respect of each is:
Lanyon Homestead(1) lOam to 4 pm Tuesday to Sunday and Public Holidays.
Closing time extended to 5 pm on weekends and public holidays, during period of daylight saving.
(2) No.
(3) Yes. See (1)
(4) (a) Yes, following which closing times extended during period of daylight saving. (b) No.
National Botanic Gardens: (1) 9 am to 5 pm daily. Closing time extended to 6 pm on
weekends during period of daylight saving.

most outstanding research projects are supported to the limit of available funds. On this basis of scientific merit, the NH&MRC has provided the following funding for direct research into SIDS:

1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981

$ 40,000 100,000
110,000
130,000 180,000 280,000

To this must be added a portion of a $237,000 Program Grant awarded to Professor G. D. Thorburn of the Department of Physiology, Monash University, which will be expended on SIDS research.

There are however other research projects throughout Australia related to SIDS funded other than from Commonwealth Government funds, e.g. a 3 year grant of $146,349 from the US. National Institute of Child Health and Human Development to Dr D. Megirian of the University of Tasmania. I do not, however, have detailed information as to the extent of such research.

(2) No. (3) Yes. See (1)

Paraplegics and Quadriplegics: Charge for Medical Needs

(4) (a) Yes-there have been complaints from persons arriving at the gardens after closing time and also from persons who would like the gardens opened earlier in the morning. (b) No.

(Question No. 515)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:

Tidbinbilla Nature Reserve: (1) 9 am to 6 pm March to October 9 am to 8 or 8.30 pm
(depending upon public demand and staff availability) from November to February.
(2) No.

(1) Will he take action to make available free of charge through public hospitals all medical needs required by paraplegics and quadriplegics, that is, catheters, ileostomy equipment and all other medical equipment needed by people coping with incontinence.

(3) Yes. See (1) (4) (a) No-there have been numerous suggestions by visitors that the hours be extended. (b) No. Government Nursery, Yarralumla: (1) 7.30 am to 4pm daily all yearround. (2) No. (3) No. The opening hours are presently considered sufficient for persons interested in viewing the nursery. (4) (a) No. (b) No.
Sudden Infant Death Syndrome Research
(Question No. 513)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) Is it a fact that more than 500 babies die each year as a result ofsudden infant death syndrome.
(2) What sums have been made available by the Federal Government for research into sudden infant death syndrome in each year since the assistance commenced.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The most recent figures available indicate that 414 babies died in 1978 as a result of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS).

(2) Will he also take action to have wheelchairs, and their repair and maintenance, made available free of charge to all patients needing them, upon production of a doctor's certificate.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) lind (2) Under the hospital cost-sharing agreements between the Commonwealth Government and each State Government, whereby the Commonwealth Government meets 50 per cent of the agreed net operating costs of recognised (that is, public) hospitals, the States have undertaken to provide surgical aids and appliances free-of-charge when these are considered necessary by the hospital in the ongoing treatment, care, rehabilitation, etc., of in-patients and registered outpatients of recognised hospitals. The types of aids and appliances supplied differ to some extent among the States.
Each State has decided and listed the items to be provided generally to patients of its recognised hospitals. Those items have been accepted for the purpose of the cost-sharing arrangements. The Commonwealth has always given consideration to any reasonable State request to extend or vary the list of agreed items.
According to the agreed lists, the position in each State regarding the supply of catheters, stomal appliances and wheelchairs to patients of recognised hospitals is as follows:
New South Wales

(2) I should make it clear that the National Health and Medical Research Council (NH&MRC) does not itself initiate research but responds to applications made by researchers. These applications are assessed by an independent scientific committee, and, after this peer review process, the

Catheters-first catheter on discharge (if registered outpatient, replaced as necessary).
Ostomy appliances-fitted at hospitals.
Wheelchairs-specifically excluded.

Answers to Questions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1767

Victoria
Catheters-not included in agreed list.
Ostomy appliances-ostomy appliances, including belts, bags and supplies of applications necessary to prevent damage to the skin.
Wheelchairs-provided for a temporary period on loan.
Queensland
Catheters, Ostomy Appliances-all types of ostomy appliances, urine collection appliances and urine incontinence appliances such as Kleenex Undersheets and Soft-eze pads (subject to means test).
Wheelchairs-all types depending on patient needs (subject to mean test) .
South Australia
Catheters-first catheter on discharge.
Ostomy Appliances-ostomy appliances fitted at hospital.
Wheelchairs-available on loan.
Western Australia
Catheters-first catheter on discharge (if registered outpatient, replaced as necessary).
Ostomy Appliances-ostomy appliances, including belts, bags and supplies of applications necessary to prevent damage to the skin.
Wheelchairs-provided for a temporary period on loan.
Tasmania
Catheters-first catheter on discharge (if registered outpatient, replaced as necessary).
Ostomy Appliances-ostomy appliances fitted at hospital.
Wheelchairs-not included in agreed list.
In addition, in the context of the 1980-81 Federal Budget, there was an announcement of a new Commonwealth program under which a range of aids to daily living are to be provided to disabled people not eligible for assistance under existing Commonwealth, Commonwealth/State or State funding arrangements. This new program is currently being developed by my Department with a view to its introduction later this year.
Items to be provided under this new Program of Aids for Disabled People include aids for incontinence and wheelchairs (the latter on loan indefinitely). They will be available on prescription and without charge to enable disabled people to live in the community, whether their disability is permanent or of indefinite duration.
War Service Pensions: Eligibility
(Question No. 519)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) Has the Minister seen correspondence in the West Australiatl of 6 December 1980 from Mr H. O. White of Rushbrook Way, Thornlie, Western Australia, on the question of rights to war service pensions for volunteers for overseas service who were not sent to war zones.
(2) If so, will the Minister consider extending war service pension eligibility to persons who accepted the possibility of service overseas during World War II by joining the Australian Imperial Forces.
(3) Is it a fact that eligibility is apparently extended to servicemen, whether or not they were volunteers for overseas service, on Rottnest Island, Western Australia.

(4) Has eligibility been extended to servicemen serving on other Australian island possessions; if so, which ones.

Mr Thomson~The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) Yes.

(2) The service pension was introduced for those veterans who served in a theatre of war to compensate for the indefinable and intangible effects of war service. Eligibility for the service pension is, therefore, dependent upon service in a theatre of war which is defined in section 23 of the Repatriation Act 1920 as follows:

, "Served in a theatre of war" means served at sea, in the

field or in the air, in naval, military or aerial operations

against the enemy in an area, or on an aircraft or ship of

war, at a time when danger from hostile forces of the enemy

was incurred in that area or on that aircraft or ship of war

by the person so serving.'

.

The extension of eligibility for the service pension to persons who did not serve in a theatre of war would be contrary to the purpose of this benefit.

(3) Members of the Forces, regardless of the terms of their engagement, who served on Rottnest Island, may he regarded as having served in a theatre of war, provided service there was for a continuous period of not less than three months between 3 September 1939 and 5 May 1944.

(4) Eligibility may be conceded to a member of the Forces who served during World War II on other Australian island possessions at a time when danger from hostile forces was incurred in the area concerned. The declaration of certain areas at certain times as theatres of war is related primarily to known enemy activity in and around these areas. In many cases, an island itself was not subject to enemy activity and may be considered not to have been a theatre of war. However, a veteran who served on such an island may be deemed to have served in a theatre of war, not because of actual service on the island, but because the veteran's passage to the island may have been through an area of known enemy activity. In determining eligibility for the service pension, on the basis of such service, it is necessary to consider each case on its individual merits. For this reason, and because there are a number of islands involved, it is not practicable to provide the precise information requested by the honourable member.

Visual Display Units: Commonwealth Public Servants
(Question No. 545)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
Will he or the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet:
(a) establish a Committee, composed of both public servants and officials of public service unions, to investigate any occupational health and safety problems likely to be encountered by Commonwealth Public Servants in the operation of visual display units,
(b) keep a register of staff users and time spent in operating VDUs, and
(c) conduct regular eyesight tests on staff users ofVDUs.
Mr Viner~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

1768 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Answers to Questions

(a) The health and safety problems likely to be encountered by Commonwealth Public Servants and others in the operation of visual display units have been considered by the National Health and Medical Research Council which has produced an occupational health guide on 'Vision and Eyesight Tests for Visual Display Terminal (VDT) Operators' and a draft occupational health guide on the 'Use of Screenbased Equipment'. The Standing Consultative Committee on Occupational Health Services (which comprises representatives of Commonwealth departments, statutory authorities and staff organisations and makes recommendations to the Director-General of Health) has taken an interest in these issues and has been closely watching progress on the development of the guides.
(b) While the suggestion to maintain a register has been noted, the need to compile and maintain such a detailed record has not been demonstrated.
(c) The occupational health guide, 'Vision and Eyesight Tests for Visual Display Terminal (VDT) Operators', referred to in paragraph (a), recommends the introduction of a program of eyesight tests for staff using VDU's. Some departments have commenced testing programs and the Public Service Board, in conjunction with the Department of Health, is currently examining the feasibility of introducing a servicewide program.

as a direct result of federal election related activities; employment of locally engaged staff to work wholly on federal election related activities at the busier overseas posts, e.g. London,
Port Moresby, Singapore, Athens; overtime worked by locally engaged staff as a direct result of additional work load created by federal election related activities; air freight of election material to overseas posts; advertising costs associated with
advising potential electors of the election and of the availability of postal voting facilities at overseas posts; hire of accommodation and equipment at some posts; printing of postal vote application forms and posters advertising the availability of postal voting facilities in London; miscel1aneous payments for postage and stationery, as well as the cost of supplying updated microfiche electoral rolls for use at posts where Assistant Returning Officers were appointed. The cost details do
not reflect normal salaries of officers (both Australia based and locally engaged) employed on federal election related activities; the cost of the voting materials and forms used at
overseas posts; the cost of cables despatched to posts or the return to Australia (for destruction) of the microfiche elector rolls and return of postal bal10t papers.
(a) Cost of providing postal voting facilities at each of Australia's overseas posts:

Post

Cost

Voting Facilities: Overseas Posts
(Question No. 580)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
In respect of each of Australia's overseas posts on the occasion of the Federal election of 18 October 1980 (a) what was the cost of providing voting facilities for electors, (b) what would have been the cost of providing voting facilities in those posts where facilities were not made available and (c) how many requests for voting facilities were received by posts where facilities (i) were available and (ii) were not available.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
At the time of the 18 October 1980 Federal election there were 95 Foreign Affairs, Immigration and Trade posts overseas.
The Australian Electoral Office, on the advice of the Department of Foreign Affairs, appointed Assistant Returning Officers to issue and receive postal voting papers at overseas posts where such appointments were considered necessary to meet the needs of potential voters-54 such appointments were made. The appointment at Bonn also serviced the Cologne post and for the purpose of the election the two posts were treated as one. Appointments were also made at Cocos (Keeling), Christmas and Norfolk Islands and the RAAF. Base Butterworth.
All other overseas posts (excluding Tehran) were supplied with Postal Vote Application Forms (and with Street Lists and Lists of Pol1ing Places, to assist potential voters to determine the Subdivision and division for which they were enrolled). These posts were instructed to forward any completed Postal Vote Application Forms to the nearest post at which an Assistant Returning Officer had been appointed, for him to issue the appropriate postal voting papers direct to the voter concerned.
The following statistical information and cost details in respect of the 18 October election have been compiled from information supplied by the Departments of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Resources and the Australian Electoral Office. The cost details include overtime worked by Australian based staff

Abu Dhabi
Accra Algiers Amman Ankara Apia Athens Auckland Baghdad Bahrain Bangkok
Beirut Belgrade Berlin Berne . Bombay Bonn (and Cologne) Brasilia Brussels Buenos Aires Butterworth (RAAF)
Cairo CapeTown Caracas Chicago Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Is.
Colombo Copenhagen Dacca Damascus Dar-es-Salaam Dublin Edinburgh Geneva
Hanoi Hong Kong Honiara Honolulu Islamabad Jakarta Jeddah
Johannesburg Kingston

$ 1,241.00
54.00 68.64 455.10 69.84
152.50 3,062.89
3,396.73 581.82 208.00 901.30 372.50
513.20 73.68 27.09 43.28 1,019.02
393.04 114.24 392.34 130.00 1,029.89 700.51 173.04 592.62 150.00
nil 571.22 77.84 228.40 83.40 57.92 730.75
nil 90.30
56.70 716.76 24.40 246.08 379.48 1,252.88 70.24
93.00 446.31

Answers to Questions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1769

Post
Kuala Lumpur Kuwait Lae Lagos Lima Lisbon London Los Angeles Lusaka Madrid Malta Manchester Manila Messina Mexico City Milan Moscow Nairobi Nauru New Delhi New York Nicosia Norfolk Island Noumea Nuku'Alofa Osaka Ottawa Paris Peking Port Moresby Pretoria Rangoon Rio De Janeiro Rome Salisbury San Francisco Santiago De Chile Seoul Singapore Stockholm Suva Tehran* Tel Aviv The Hague Tokyo Toronto Tripoli Vancouver Vienna Vientiane Vila Warsaw Washington Wellington

-Cost
$ 866.12 311.72 686.21 70.80
70A2 91.62 34,109.12 3058.92
nil 747.08
515.88
nil 1,213.76
73.60 114.95 57.00 108.00 42.42 276.90
606.86 1,159.61
75.24 831.01 154.80 393.82 172.50 504.25 4,037.39 42.18 3,148.37 313.14 32.62
72.80 1,078.18
390.64 1,261.56
78.66 44.59 3,521.32 1,301.14 338.69 130.00 1,379.76 830.54 1,852.12 1,080.34 295.69 847.47 537.72 82.48 20.80 80.88 1,515.24 4,691.99

Total

96,360.87

* Cost incurred but material not provided due to warzone
situation at the time of the election.
(b) Estimated additional cost if Assistant Returning Officers had been appointed to issue and receive postal voting papers at those posts where Assistant Returning Officers were not appointed:

Estimated

Post

cost

Accra Algiers
Ankara Apia Bahrain Berlin Berne . Bombay
Brussels Caracas
Cologne Copenhagen Damascus Dar-es-salaam Edinburgh
Geneva Hanoi Honiara
Jeddah Johannesburg Lagos .
Lusaka Lima Lisbon Manchester
Messina Mexico City Milan Moscow Nairobi Nicosia
Osaka Peking Rangoon
Rio De Janeiro Santiago De Chile Seoul
Vientiane Vila Warsaw

$ 685.00 258.00 310.00 255.00 668.00 450.00 315.00 270.00 2,220.00
564.00 218.00 475.00 255.00 488.00 3,130.00 365.00 250.00 595.00 760.00 230.00 262.00 330.00 630.00 230.00 1,130.00 268.00 1,256.00 272.00 310.00 565.00 1,155.00 130.00 395.00 270.00
386.00 260.00 325.00 280.00 420.00 380.00

Total

22,015.00

(c) (i) Number of requests for postal voting facilities received by posts when an Assistant Returning Officer was appointed to issue and receive postal voting papers:

Post
Abu Dhabi Amman Athens Auckland Baghdad (War Zone) Bangkok Beirut Belgrade Bonn Brasilia Beunos Aires Butterworth (RAAF) Cairo

Number of
requests

Number of postal
ballot papers issued

70 17 1,700 1,300 7 311 22 140 450 33 50 738 100

25 17 1,038 576 7 280 22 63 434 31 41 738 53

1770 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Number

of postal

Number ballot

of papers

Post

requests issued

CapeTown Chicago
Christmas Island
Cocos (Keeling) Is. Colombo
Dacca
Dublin Hong Kong Honolulu
Islamabad Jakarta Kingston Kuala Lumpur
Kuwait Lae
London Los Angeles
Madrid Malta
Manila Nauru New Delhi New York
Norfolk Island Noumea Nuku'Alofa
Ottawa Paris Port Moresby
Pretoria Rome Salisbury San Francisco
Singapore Stockholm Suva
Tehran (War Zone) The Hague
Tel Aviv Tokyo
Toronto
Tripoli Vancouver
Vienna Washington Wellington

180 207 95 80 350 64 165 1,000 145 43 1,600 10 353 16 520 14,440 1,000 120 276 578 45 162 700 150 15 60 109 700 1,500 110 550 18 800 920 135 308
NIL
500 282 400 200 26 350 381 1,500 548

68 145 95 80 324 Q4 165 932 145 43 312 10 353 26 411 13,021 385 94 157 383 32 142 521 132 15 47 109 674 1,382 76 488 18 557 672 115 308
NIL
312 282 365 160 26 169 331 603 442

Total

36,649 28,506

(c) (ii) Number of requests for postal voting facilities received by posts wherean Assistant Returning Officer was
not appointed to issue or receive postal voting papers:

Post
Accra Algiers Ankara Apia Bahrain Berlin Berne . Bombay

Number of requests
4 11
10 52 30 10 50 40

Number of

-Po-s-t --------------------------requests

Brussels . . . . .

100

Caracas . . . . .

20

Cologne (referred Bonn)

Copenhagen

100

Damascus

4

Dar-Es-Salaam

42

Edinburgh

300

Geneva

100

Hanoi

11

Honiara

45

Jeddah

20

Johannesburg

nil

Lagos .

11

Lima

17

Lisbon

75

Lusaka

1

Manchester

150

Messina .

nil

Mexico City

50

Milan

50

Moscow

43

Nairobi

35

Nicosia

75

Osaka

nil

Peking

70

Rangoon

7

Rio De Janeiro

50

Santiago De Chile

12

Seoul .

60

Vientiane

3

Vila

4

Warsaw

25

Total

1,687

SiemensAG
(Question No. 582)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
Is he able to say whether the West German electrical company, Siemens AG, is involved in any construction projects in Australia; if so, what are these projects.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am advised that neither Siemens AG nor its Australian Subsidiary, Siemens Industries, is a principal contractor in construction projects for the Commonwealth at present. I am unable to say whether either company is involved in commercial construction projects in Australia, nor the extent to which either company is involved as a major contractor in State Government construction projects.
Royal Australian Mint
(Question No. 620)
Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
Is the switchboard at the Royal Australian Mint closed at lunchtime during working weeks; if so, why.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1771

   iaaagt1tbnhhdudr.oq3reem vaTaa0urirabnhspiiddnredogemsidimaeestiCrmstsa(tidrnhtkoaeachieianrntssleetiottitvsnrrsstwroeatt-eheaoctlsdielcinottevsbocadmeredherfafdaiaeosrtnaieedrdfhlgvrcdyelattatmuhihnat obnlrengeaneocsoedbtsuM hsmswlag-toaebgehiepfpnfeernpotrttesnthoa.rrashoTeckrtthaptehhhM oiashr'eee:vieam lasCseflhltdeetedoworcov)lvnuupuiyasedttrerertdiudsredt,oaneyslgo,taltiyneoeofhlvgdrtftfeafh1ciwnewtsce2onaeith.ltntts3hlhvtih_uslcs0e:aet.nfhdJhJa.?H olsneemcipwnrmrgtee.seoittntitarhhttchioneaohaltdyddessft
since about 1965.
Tax Avoidance
(Question No. 621)
Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
 Is there a need to attract highly qualified personnel from
private industry to fill key positins in the Pu lic Service such as on ministerial staffs and can thts best be achteved by monet ary inducements; if so has the Government considered paying top level salaries to corporate tax lawyers in an attempt to de tect and dismantle tax avoidance schemes.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Senior positions in the Commonwealth Public Service are commonly advertised as open to persons in the community at large when it is considered desirable to attract people with a variety of experiences and differing backgrounds, where special expertise is required or where there is a shortage of people with appropriate skills.
The salary applicable to a position may be an important factor in determining its acceptability; other factors, such as job location or job content, are also relevant.
The continuing practice of the Australian Taxation office is to recruit persons academically qualified in accounting, law, commerce or economics to administer the taxation laws. They then receive formal and on-the-job training which equips them to carry out tasks requiring a unique mix of legal, ac counting and investigative skills.
The analysis of tax avoidance schemes is carried out by teams of highly skilled and experienced officers located in all taxation branch offices and advice on remedial legislation is given by senior qualified officers of the Head Office of the Commissioner of Taxation.
In these circumstances, it is not considered necessary or de sirable to hire corporate lawyers, but the opinion of outside counsel has been sought when the occasion was seen to require that course.
Social Welfare Supplementary Assistance
(Question No. 624)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
(1) When was rent allowance renamed supplementary as sistance and for what reason was it renamed.
(2) In order to stem any confusion surrounding the purpose of providing supplementary assistance, will the Government call it rent allowance.
(3) Will the Government consider paying supplementary assistance separately from pension to avoid any confusion.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(1) Supplementary assistance was introduced for pensioners in 1958 and a similar payment, supplementary allow ance, was introduced for long term sickness beneficiaries in 1970. Neither has been renamed.
(2) There is little evidence of confusion about the purpose of supplementary assistance and it is not merely a rent allow ance. It is provided as a supplementary addition to the pension for what is seen as a particularly needy group of pensioners and supporting parent beneficiaries viz. those who pay for rent or for lodgings and who have little or no income apart from their pension.
(3) No. The administrative overheads and additional post age involved in issuing separate cheques for pension and sup plementary assistance would outweigh any advantage this procedure might have. However, pensioners are notified when the rate payable to them includes supplementary assistance.
Rosemount Repatriation Hospital
(Question No. 630)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
(I) How many wards at Rosemount Repatriation Hospital, Brisbane, Queensland, have been opened to patient care dur ing the last 12 months.
(2) How many patients have been at Rosemount Repatriation Hospital for each week since October 1980.
(3) On which occasions were all wards full at Rosemount Repatriation Hospital.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) During the past 12 months the Rosemount Repatriation Hospital had four wards open for patient care.
(2) The daily average number of beds occupied at the Rosemount Repatriation Hospital for each week during the five month period from 7 October 1980 to 10 March 1981 is as follows:

Week ending
7.10.80 14.10.80 21.10.80 28.10.80 4.11.80 11.11.80 18.11.80 25.11.80 2.12.80 9.12.80 16.12.80 23.12.80 30.12.80 6.1.81 13.1.81 20.1.81 27.1.81 3.2.81 10.2.81 17.2.81 24.2.81 3.3.81

Daily average number of
occupied beds
52 55 55 49 48 52 55 54 51 45 43 49 41 45 52 56 64 62 62 59 59 54

1772 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Weekending

Daily average
number of occupied beds

10.3.81

56

(3) The normal bed capacity of the four wards which have
been open is 60 but it is rare for all available beds to be occupied on a continuing basis. During the period January to February 191U, in respect of which figures are shown above, additional patients were admitted in excess of normal capacity to ease be4demand at the Repatriation General Hospi-
tal, Greensiopes, during commissioning of a new ward block there.

Institute ofHeaIth Epidemiological Survey
(Question No. 642)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 26 February 1981:
Will naval personnel who served in the Vietnam theatre during hostilities there be excluded from the epidemiological survey being carried out by the Commonwealth Institute of Health; if so, why.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Members of the Navy allotted for special overseas service in Vietnam will be included in an epidemiological study conducted by the Commonwealth Institute of Health. However, it may be necessary for the data on naval personnel to be considered separately from those in the main study.

Coastal Surveillance
(Question No. 652)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 3 March 1981:
(1) What is the name and address of (a) each company that has entered into a coastal surveillance contract and (b) the principals of each company.
(2) On what date was each contract concluded.
(3) For what area is each contractor responsible and when did each contractor begin regular surveillance.
(4) What sum was paid to each contractor in each financial year since the scheme was introduced.
(5) What (a) type and (b) number of aircraft have been used by each contractor.
(6) On what date did each aircraft type begin operations.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Eleven firms either have had or are presently carrying out contracts for the aerial search of the coastline using privately owned aircraft. A number of company reorganisations and name changes have occurred since the program commenced and listed below are the present names under which these firms are trading together with their present Boards of Directors:
Bush Pilots Airways Ltd (BPA)R. S. Williams OBE, Chairman, C/o BPA, P.O. Box
1381, Cairns; P. M. Mostyn, Craig Mostyn and Co., P/L, G.P.O. Box 5295, Sydney; R. G. Horseman, General Manager, Thiess Dampier Mitsui Coal P /L, G.P.O. Box 2206,

Brisbane; S. R. B. Anning, P.O. Box 116, Hamilton, Brisbane 4007; S. Christie, OBE, 41/341 Bowen Terrace, New Farm, Brisbane 4005; A. McInnes, MacDonnells Solicitors, 33 Spence St., Cairns 4870; A. Hope, C/o MIM Holding Ltd., MIM House, 160 Ann St., Brisbane.
Executive Air Charter (Executive)Peter Rickward (Sole Owner), P.O. Box 180, Manunda,
Qld,4870.
Reprographics Ply Ltd (Reprographics)J. J. O'Brien, Managing Director, 44 Launceston St.,
Salisbury; B. C. O'Brien, C/o Corporate Financial Services, Brisbane; D. Braidwood, Ampol Repco, Sydney; D. Harris, Ampol Repco, Brisbane.
Rundle Air Services Pty Ltd (Rundle)P. P. Rundle, 4 Lynd Street, Mundingburra, Qld; S. R.
Rundle, 4 Lynd Street, Mundingburra, Qld; G. S. Rundle, 4 Lynd Street, Mundingburra, Qld; P. J. Rundle, 4 Lynd Street, Mundingburra, Qld; N. J. Rundle, 4 Lynd Street, Mundingburra, Qld; T. L. Rundle, 4 Lynd Street, Mundingburra, Qld.
Townsville Aero Club (Townsville)R. Rees, P.O. Box 5616, MSO, Townsville; F. Marriott,
18 Fairfax St., Gulliver; J. Rogers, C/o Criterion Hotel, The Strand, Townsville; N. Kerrigan, 12 Sallows St., Pallarenda; A. Taylor, 29 Brighton St., Gulliver; A. Scott,S Wackett St., Pallarenda; J. Rume, 4 Laverack St., Mount Louisa; A. Dean, 3 Lister Cres., Wulguru; R. McCartin, 6 Maryvale St., West End; K. Sheard, 206C Ross River Rd., Townsville.
Arnhem Air Charter Pty Ltd (Arnhem)Edward Colston Osgood, 2 Wells Street, F;lnnie Bay,
NT; Shirley Ann Osgood, 2 Wells Street, Fannie Bay, NT.
Northern Airlines (Operations) PtyLtd (NAL)John Gerard Riley, 32 Daymore Place, Castlecove,
NSW; Ian George Parker, 44 Upper Street, Tamworth, NSW; Bruce Norman Teague, 4/74 Bream Street, Coogee, NSW; Robert James Ritchie, 12 Graham Avenue, Pymble; Noel Lytton Buntine, Carbeen Park, Katherine, NT; Victor Bruce Perkins, 1 Mauna Loa Street, Darwin, NT; John Francis Ryan, 73 Lackman Terrace, Alice Springs, NT.
Trans West Airlines Pty Ltd (Transwest)Walter Sulke, Hong Kong; William John Meeke, 8 Fer-
rer Place, Woodlands, WA; Richard Reynolds, 101 Melvista Ave., Nedlands, WA; Ernest Welch, Gill St., Mundaring, WA; Peter J. Paice, 4 Severn Rd., The Peak, Hong Kong.
Tropic Air Services Pty Ltd (Tropic)Keith Nelson Hasleby, 13 Brown St., Carnarvon, WA;
Terrence Vernon Cahill, 3 McLeod St., Carnarvon, WA; Richard John Scott, P.O. Box 26, Carnarvon, WA.
Skywest Airlines Pty Ltd (Skywest)Donald Kennerly, 20 Reserve St., Bicton, WA; John
Campbell Nicholson, 12A Venn St., Peppermint Grove, WA; Frank Reid Welch, 99 Grove Rd., Lesmurdie, WA; Gerald Benjamin Ivory, 59 Birdwood Pde., Dalkeith, WA; Robert Paul Martin, 110 Victoria Ave., Dalkeith, WA.
H. C. Sleigh Aviation Ltd (Sleigh)Peter Harold Sleigh, Chairman and Chief Executive, 42
Wallace Ave., Toorak, Vic., 3142; Michael Henry Searby, Managing Director, 56 Kensington Rd., South Yarra, Vic., 3141; Albert Gregory Jacobsen, Director, 54 Reserve Rd., Beaumaris, Vic., 3193; Robert Feldmann, Group General Manager, 11 Willcyrus St., Mont Albert, Vic., 3127.
(2), (3), (5) and (6) Details of the area covered and periods in respect of each contractor are given in the following schedule. Presently the littoral operation between Karratha WA and Cairns Qld is divided into thirteen sectors and provided weather permits eleven of these sectors are searched

Answers to Questions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1773

daily and the remaining two on alternate days i.e. twelve aircraft are used each day on the littoral search. A further two aircraft are used for offshore searches of the Great Barrier Reef and the sea approaches to Darwin. The utilisation of individual aircraft within each contractor's fleet, or on hire from

other operators, is not recorded. Contractors are required to provide reserve aircraft as necessary to cover periods of unserviceability of primary aircraft to meet contractual obligations. The schedule below also details aircraft types utilised or to be utilised by each contractor.

Area of search Geraldton-Karratha Cairns-Thursday Is. Cairns-Thursday Is. Cairns-Thursday Is. Geraldton-Darwin Karratha-Derby Karratha-Cape Leveque Geraldton-Karratha Cairns-Thursday Is. Darwin-Roper River Cairns-Thursday Is.
Darwin-Borroloola Geraldton-Karratha-Cape Leveque Geraldton-Karratha-Cape Leveque Geraldton-Karratha-Cape Leveque Karratha-Mitchell Plateau Kununurra-Borroloola Cairns-Weipa Darwin-Gove
Geraldton-Darwin Cairns-Weipa-Mornington Is.
Cairns-Weipa-Vanderlin Is.
Darwin-Vanderlin Is.
Darwin-Groote Is.
Weipa-Torres Strait
Cairns-Rantijirrity Pt Geraldton-Bigge Is. Bigge ls.-Darwin Darwin-BathurstfMelville Is.-Millingimbi
Millingimbi-Gove

Searches commenced
31.7.78 *24.7.78
1.8.78 *7.8.78 *9.8.78 17.8.78 21.9.78 *4.9.78 *3.9.78 *4.9.78 *1.10.78
*2.10.78 *2.10.78 *4.10.78 7.11. 78 *1.11.78
l . l l . 78 1.11.78 8.12.78
1.12.78 30.11.78
25.12.78
26.12.78
18.1.79
20.1.79
20.1.79 1.3.79 1.3.79 1.3.79
1.3.79

Searches completed Contractor

31.7.78 Transwest 28.7.78 Rundle

2.8.78 26.8.78 31.8.78

Rundle Rundle Transwest

18.8.78 Skywest

21.9.78 Skywest

29.9.78 28.9.78 27.9.78 30.10.78

Tropic Townsville Arnhem Rundle

31.10.78 Arnhem

28.10.78 19.10.78 21.11.78 29.11.78 7.12.78

Transwest Skywest Transwest Skywest Arnhem

29.11.78 Townsville 25.12.78 Arnhem

28.2.79 24.12.78

Transwest Rundle

19.1.79 Rundle

20.1.79 Arnhem

28.2.79 Arnhem
28.2.79 Rundle
28.2.79 Townsville 14.12.80 Transwest 30.9.79 Transwest 29.9.80 Arnhem

30.4.79 Arnhem

Aircraft type(s) used
Cessna 310 Aero Commander
AC500 Beech Baron Beech Baron AC500 C310 Piper Aerostar
P600 Piper Aerostar
P600 Partenavia P68
Baron P68 Baron C310 AC500
P68 Piper Navajo C310 P600 C310 P600 P68 Navajo Baron P68 Baron Navajo AC500 C310 Baron C310 AC500 Baron C310 AC500 P68 Baron Navajo Piper Aztec P68 Baron Navajo Baron C310 AC500 Baron AC500 C310 C310 AC500 Baron P68 Navajo Aztec Baron P68 Navajo Aztec

1774 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Area of search Gove-Torres Strait

Searches commenced
1.3.79

Searches completed
30.4.79

Contractor Rundle

Millingimbi-Cape Grenville Cairns-Cape Grenville

1.5.79 1.3.79

continuing 30.6.79

Sleigh Rundle

Cairns-Cape Grenville Cairns-Cape Grenville

1.7.79 1.10.79

30.9.79 14.4.80

Sleigh Executive

Bigge Is.-Darwin Bigge Is.-Darwin
Bigge Is.-Darwin Bigge Is.-Darwin
Darwin-Millingimbi. Darwin-Bathurst/Melville Is. Darwin-N.W. approaches (offshore) Karratha-Bigge Is.
Cairns--Cape Granville

1.10.79 1.12.79
1.2.80 14.4.80
30.9.80 30.9.80 31.8.80 15.12.80
15.4.80

30.11.79 Skywest 31.1.80 Transwest

13.4.80 Skywest continuing Transwest

14.12.80 continuing continuing continuing

Arnhem NAL NAL Transwest

continuing BPA

Darwin-Millingimbi Great Barrier Reef Darwin-Millingimbi-Bathurst/Melville Is. Biggels.- -Darwin

15.12.80

continuing

6.12.80

continuing

10.2.81

13.2.81

not yet commenced

NAL Reprographics Arnhem NAL

* Searches were not required to be conducted on every day during the period detailed.

Aircraft typc(s) used
Baron C310 AC500 AC500s NomadN22B Baron C310 AC500 NomadN22B AC500 Aero Commander
AC690 Baron P600 AC500 C310 P600 AC500 C310 P68 NomadN22S NomadN22S AC500 C310 NomadN22B BN3 NomadN24A NomadN22B NomadN22S P68 NomadN22B

-Fi-rm------------------------------1-9-78--7-9------1-9-79--8-0------1-98-0--8-1 ----D-a-te-pa-id-t-o

Transwest Airlines Pty Ltd

$ 775,114

$ 1,461,051

$ 1,366,594

*20.2.81

Rundle Air Services Pty Ltd

418,964

29,419

Skywest Airlines Pty Ltd Tropic Air Services Pty Ltd

9,943 4,810

314,472

7,075

Townsville Aero Club Arnhem Air Charter Pty Ltd H. C. Sleigh Aviation Ltd

126,555 340,399 86,693

788,955 1,912,098

346,377 1,414,147

*21.1.81

Executive Air Charter

333,650

NorthernAirlines (Operations) Pty Ltd

859,517

*6.2.81

Bush Pilots Airways Ltd . . . .

127,633

521,720

*15.2.81

Reprographics Pty Ltd

196,346

*20.2.81

*Current contracts.

Nugan Hand Bank
(Question No, 653)
Mr Willis asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 3 March 1981:
Has he requested, or directed someone to request on Australia's behalf, that the large stock of information reportedly held by American intelligence authorities on the activities of the N ugan Hand Bank be made available to facilitate an Australian investigation into the collapsed bank.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Allegations concerning the possible criminal activities of the Nugan Hand group in Australia are being investigated by Commonwealth and New South Wales authorities. I refer the

honourable member to my reply on II March 1981 to a question without notice asked by the Leader of the Opposition (Hansard, Pages 701-702).
Should the New South Wales/Commonwealth Joint Police Task Force on Drug Trafficking investigations involve a need to obtain information from abroad any such request for information would be taken up through appropriate law enforcement channels.
Australian Overseas Debt
(Questiou No. 664)
Mr WiUis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 3 March 1981:
What are the Commonwealth Government's (a) repayment and (b) interest payment obligations on overseas debt in

Answers to Questions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1775

Australian dollars at current exchange rates for 1980-81 and for each year of the next decade.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) and (b)-
ESTIMATED CONTRACTUAL OBLIGATIONS AND INTEREST PAYMENTS ON OVERSEAS DEBT 1980-81-1990-91

Financial year

Repayment Interest payment

obligation

obligation

1980-81 1981-82 1982-83 1983-84 1984-85 1985-86 1986-87 1987-88 1988-89 1989-90 1990-91

$'000
240,946 564,405 515,057 737,681 563,263 506,771 561,519 377,503 426,826 352,428 101,650

$'000
379,146 365,772 322,812 277,198 234,641 197,870 166,930 131,595 100,696 76,670
50,268

The figures above represent obligations and interest payments in respect of those securities detailed in Table 3 of 1980-81 Budget Paper No.6: Government Securities on Issue at 30 June 1980, with the exception that the DM 200 million 8.25 per cent borrowing of September 1980 maturing in October 1987 has also been taken into account.
The figures given above are calculated on the basis of 30 June, 1980 exchange rates. Certain assumptions have also had to be made in respect of loans with variable repayment obligations.
Newspaper Industry: Ownership and Control
(Question No. 715)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 5 March 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the inquiry being conducted in Victoria into the ownership and control of the newspaper industry.
(2) Is he able to say whether the inquiry was prompted by the attempted take-over of the Herald and Weekly Times Group by News Limited.
(3) Has his attention been drawn to the report of comments attributed to the Managing Director of the David Syme Group of Companies to the effect that the current mergers provisions of the Trade Practices Act are almost totally ineffectual.
(4) Is there any substance to these comments; if so, will he take necessary steps to ensure that (a) amendments to the Trade Practices Act are introduced to make sure that mergers involving companies which have a large share of substantial markets are regulated in the .public interest (b) the Trade Practices Commission is given adequate staff and resources to speedily and expeditiously investigate any such proposed mergers and (c) the Australian media does not become more heavily concentrated in the hands of one or two individuals or companies.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1), (2) and (3) Yes.

(4) In the proposed take-over referred to in the question, the Trade Practices Commission in fact stated its intention to take proceedings for a contravention of section 50 of the Trade Practices Act to prohibit the take-over. In the event that action was not taken because the acquiring party decided not to proceed with the proposed take-over.
Integrated Power Grid for South-east Australia
(Question No. 731)
Mr Burr asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 10 March 1981:
( 1) When does he expect to receive the report from Sir David Zeidler concerning an integrated power grid covering south-east Australia.
(2) Will he ask Sir David to provide an interim report as a matter of urgency in view of the breakdown in negotiations between Tasmania's 2 Houses of Parliament over power development in Tasmania.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Committee of Inquiry into Electricity Generation and Sharing of Power Resources in South-East Australia has been acquiring information relating to its terms of reference since its inception in Aprill980. In view of the technical complexity arising from these terms of reference it is not considered likely that the Committee's report will be available before mid 1981.
(2) As a relatively early final report is anticipated from the inquiry, there would be little advantage in asking it to produce an interim report. While the inquiry is directly concerned with the possibility of further integration of the particular States existing and planned electricity systems, the future pattern of development of the electricity supply system within a particular state is primarily a matter for the State Government concerned.
Commonwealth Offices at Port Augusta, South Australia
(Question No. 738)
Mr Wallis asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 10 March 1981:
(1) Who received invitations to the official opening of the new Commonwealth Offices at Port Augusta, South Australia, on Friday, 20 February 1981.
(2) What (a) Federal and (b) State Members of Parliament were invited to the opening and did the invitations include the wives of Members who were invited.
(3) Was the wife of the Federal Member who represents the area invited. -
(4) Were any Opposition Senators from South Austriliia invited.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Official Party-Senator D. S. Jessop and Mrs Jessop, Nominee of the Government to perform the opening ceremony; Mr W. Howard and Mrs Howard, Mayor of Port Augusta; Mr W. R. Lindner and Mrs Lindner, Acting Chief Property Officer, South Australia.
Parliamentary representatives-Mr L. G. Wallis, M.P., Federal Member for Grey; Mr G. Keneally, M.H.A., State Member for Stuart (South Australia); The Hon. A. Whyte, M.L.C., President of Legislative Council (South Australia);

1776 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Answers to Questions

The Hon. F. Blevins, M.L.e., Member of Legislative Council (South Australia).
COMMONWEALTH DEPARTMENTS
Administrative Services-Mr T. A. Hewitt, Planning Officer; Chief Superintendent A. Morley, Australian Feder~J Police.
Aboriginal Affairs-Mr A. J. Ayers, Secretary; Mr E. Powell, Director. South Australia.
Education-Mr K. N. Jones, CBE., Secretary; Mr K. Giddings, Director, South Australia.
Employment and Youth Affairs-Mr R. M. Taylor, Secretary; Mr A. B. Lovell, Director, South Australia.
Housing and Construction-Mr C. W. Freeland, Secretary; Mr L. Boord. Acting Director, South Australia.
Social Security-Mr P. J. Lanigan, OBE.- Director General; Mr A. D. Taylor, Director, South Australia; Mr R. Fisher-Brown. Executive Project officer; Mr D. Barlow, Senior Assistant Director.
State Government Departments and Local Government-Mr D. Busbridge, Regional Director, Department for Community Welfare; Mr R. Percy, Assistant Director, Department for Community Welfare; Mr T. Bywaters, Manager, South Australian Housing Trust, Port Augusta; Mr L. Purdie, Acting District Building Officer, Public Works Department, Port Augusta; Mr I. D. McSporran, Acting Town Clerk, Corporation of City of Port Augusta; Chief Superintendent D. Beath, South Australian Police, Port Augusta; Mr N. R. Wardrop, Principal Education Officer (Secondary) Department of Education; Mr R. J. Anstey, Principal Education Officer (Primary) Department ofEducation.
Employer representatives-Mr A. Byron, Manager, Electricity Trust of South Australia; Mr R. Mayes, Manager, Aus~ tralian National Railways; Mr J. Woodforde, Manager, Port Augusta Supermarkets; Mr C. Duregon, Manager. Better Home Builders, Port Augusta.
Welfare representatives-Mr C. E. Matthews, President, St. Vincent de Paul Society; Mrs Margaret Van Ruth, Community Development Association.
Churches-Rev. A. M. King, Anglican; Rev. R. W. Morris, Anglican; Rev. R. McEwin, Anglican; Fr. R. Bowker, Catholic; Fr.L. Durkin, Catholic; Rev. A. Davis, Uniting; Captain A. Gale, Salvation Army.
Service cIubs-Mr S. Parkins. Apex; Mr R. Morris, Jaycees; Mr J. Dunemann, Rotary.
Media-Mr A. Mathieson, Advertiser Newspapers Ltd, Adelaide; Mr W. Mardon, WhyaUa representative of "The News", Adelaide; Mr R. Edwards, Editor, "The Transcontinental", Port Augusta; Mr B. Rowe, Regional Manager, AB.C., Port Pirie.
Aboriginal community-Ms L. O'Donoghue-Smart, Member, National Aboriginal Conference; Mr G. Coulthard, Davernport Community Council; Mrs A. Kinnear, Community Affairs Panel; Mr B. Fielding, Aboriginal Legal Rights Movement; Mr D. Vorst, WOMA Committee.
Other guests-Mr and Mrs Peter Young, Young and Gordon Pty Ltd; Mrs E. F. H. Richardson, A local resident and former electorate secretary of Senator Jessop when he was the local member; Mrs A Whyte, wife of Hon. A. Whyte, President, Legislative Council (South Australia); Dr and Mrs J. A. R. Thompson, members of local community; Mr and Mrs J. e. Fullarton, members ofloeal community.
(2) (a) Federal Members-Senator D. S. Jessop, Mr L. G. Wallis, M.P.
(b) State Members-Mr G. Keneally, M.H.A., The Hon. A. Whyte, M.L.C., The Hon. F. Blevins, M.L.C.

Wives Invited--The wives of Senator D. S. Jessop and the Hon. A Whyte were invited.
(3) No.
(4) No.
Television Services for the Hearing Impaired
(Question No. 744)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 10 March 1981:
(1) Was his Department represented at a meeting concerning Television Services for the Hearing Impaired held on 10 October 1980.
(2) If SQ, what follow-up action has been taken by his Department to implement the recommendations of that meeting that (a) special funding be provided and a National Captioning Centre be set up (b) decoders be provided for eligible hearing-impaired individuals through the Department of Social Security's Rehabilitation Service, (c) research be initiated into problems and options for the introduction .of a capitoning service and (d) a policy regarding the standardisation of a video text technique be adopted.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes
(2) No formal recommendations were adopted at the meeting which took the form of exploratory discussions concerning captioned television for the hearing impaired.
Agreement was reached at the meeting to conduct research into the needs and priorities of the audience for a closed captioning system, standardisation of hardware and software, the possibility of using imported captioned material and the demand fDr a centralised captioning service.
In answer to your specific questions:
(a) The matter of special funding and the establishment of a National Captioning Centre are issues which have yet to be considered by Government;
(b) See the answer of the Minister for Social Security to Question No. 749.
(c) and (d) My Department has commenced-a technical evaluation of a system for closed captioning. Depending on the outcome .of this research as to the suitability of the system under Australian conditions, it may be possible to adopt a standard system for closed captioning of television programs.
Australian Overseas Missions
(Question No. 784)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:
(1) How many of Australia's overseas missions have militaryattaches.
(2) In which countries are these missions located.
(3) In (a) how many and (b) what countries have military attaches been (i) appointed and (ii) withdrawn in the last 5 years.
(4) In (a) how many and (b) what countries have the Australia-based staffs of the military attaches been (i) augmented or (ii) diminished in the last 5 years.
(5) Is he considering concurring in the appointment of military attaches to any additional countries in the next 12 months; if so, to which countries.

Answers to Questions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1777

Mr Street-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(I) 14.
(2) Britain, France, India (Also accredited to Nepal), Indonesia, Japan, Republic of Korea, Malaysia, New Zealand, Pakistan (Also accredited to Iran), Papua New Guinea, The Philippines, Singapore, Thailand (Also accredited to Burma), United States of America (Also accredited to Canada).
(3) (a) and (b) France: One Defence and Naval Attache appointed; Burma: One Defence Attache withdrawn.
(4) (a) and (b) France: One Warrant Officer Assistant appointed concurrently with Defence and Naval Attache; Japan: One Assistant Defence Attache (Translator) (Major Equivalent) appointed; United Kingdom: Several changes over the past five years have resulted in a net increase in Australia-based staff of one (from 42 to 43); United States: Several changes over the past five years have resulted in a net increase in Australia-based staff of three (from 88 to 91 ); Burma: One Warrant Officer Assistant withdrawn concurrently with Defence Attache; New Zealand: One civilian Defence Officer withdrawn; Thailand: One Assistant Attache withdrawn then subsequently reinstated.
(5) The requirements for Defence representation overseas are under constant review and at any one time a number of specific increases or decreases in representation is likely to be under consideration. It would not be appropriate, however, to identifiy a new position until it had been formally established and the agreement of the host country obtained.
The only new position for which host country agreement has been given in principle but to which an appointment has not yet been made is that of Defence Attache to the People's Republic of China. The selection procedure has been set in motion but I cannot yet say when an appointee will take up this position.
IrianJaya
(Question No. 785)
Mr Howe asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:
(I) Has he received any reports of the repression of indigenous people in Irian Jaya.
(2) What evidence is there that Irian Jaya is being managed as a colony of Indonesia.
(3) Is he able to say whether (a) decisions about the management of Irian Jaya are being made by the Indonesian Army in close co-operation with the police, (b) the procurements budget is made and approved in Jakarta, (c) outsiders handle nearly all business and (d) compulsory acquisition of land for trans-migrant settlement is deeply resented by the indigenous people.
(4) Will he investigate these matters and report his findings to the Parliament.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) There have been a number of press reports over a period of years concerning alleged repression of the indigenous people in Irian Jaya. The information that the Government has received indicates that Irian Jaya continues to be faced with serious problems of underdevelopment, isolation and low living standards, which the Indonesian Government is aware of and attempting to overcome.
(2) and (3) Irian Jaya is a province of the Republic of Indonesia and administered as such.

(4) In view of my answer to (2) and (3) above, I do not consider that it would be appropriate for me to make any further comment on the matters raised by the honourable member. As part of its routine activities the Australian Embassy in Jakarta reports to me on, and makes occasional visits to, Irian Jaya, as it does in the case of other Indonesian provinces.
Toxic Shock Syndrome
(Question No. 789)
Mr Howe asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to reports of the so-called toxic shock syndrome which it is believed may be associated with the use of Carefree and Meds tampons manufactured by Johnson and Johnson.
(2) Is he able to say whether there were 725 registered cases of the disease in the United States of America in 1980 and that 8 per cent of registered cases had been fatal.
(3) What research has been published in the USA or in Australia which might assist in defining the precise causes of the disease.
(4) What efforts has he made to investigate the safety of tampons manufactured by Johnson and Johnson.
(5) Will he ensure that these products are withdrawn from the market until (a) these investigations are completed and (b) there can be a public inquiry to determine their safety.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) My information is that approximately 725 cases of Toxic Shock Syndrome (T.S.S.) were reported in the USA. during 1980. The overall case fatality rate was 7.8 per cent.
(3) Most information is derived from American experiences and reports. Reports have been published in the New England Journal of Medicine, the Lancet, the British Medical Journal and other medical journals, as well as official publications of the Centre for Disease Control, Atlanta, and the Department of Health and Human Services, USA.
These articles have traced the recognition of the syndrome and its link with staphylococcal infection, menstruation and tampon usage, research into the characteristics of the causative organism and its toxins, factors associated with tampon use and detailed case reports.
All cases confirmed in Australia have been reported in the Communicable Diseases Intelligence Bulletins, published by my Department.
(4) Samples of all tampons manufactured by Johnson and Johnson on sale in Australia have been submitted to chemical and bacteriological testing. Samples of tampons made in New Zealand by Johnson and Johnson were extensively re-tested in Australia and New Zealand following reports of the first two cases ofT.S.S. To date there has been no evidence of contamination of unused tampons by Staphylococcus aureus bacteria. This confirms similar findings in the United States and Canada. Inspection of the manufacturing processes has been carried out.
(5) (a) All New Zealand made tampons were voluntarily withdrawn from sale by the manufacturers. On completion of the tests and in the absence of any positive findings the withdrawal was lifted on 5 March 1981.
(b) Investigations are proceeding and withdrawal from sale pending a public inquiry is not considered to be warranted.

1778 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Answers to Questions

River Murray Salinity Control
(Question No. 822)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:
(1) What is the current estimated annual cost of salinity control in the River Murray to (a) industry, (b) agriculture and (c) water reticulation authorities (i) along the river and (ii) in South Australia.
(2) To what figure will this cost rise if salinity levels in the River Murray continue to increase at the present rate.
(3) What is the Government's estimate in years of the remaining period of viability for present forms of irrigated agriculture in the Riverland area of South Australia.
(4) Is the cost of salinity control borne disproportionately by South Australia, and has South Australia no control over actions taken by upstream States which worsen salinity; if so, will the Commonwealth provide compensation to South Australia or seek it from the States upstream for the cost burden imposed by additional salinity problems they might create.
(5) Has the Government examined any legal obligations it might have to compensate South Australia for diminished water quality flowing into that State; if not, why not.
(6) Will the Commonwealth Government provide finance for alternative sources of water or desalination measures to supply South Australia, should River Murray water continue to decline in quality; if not, why not.
(7) Has the Government made any costing of these alternatives to River Murray water; if not, why not.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) and (2) There are no estimates available on a common basis of salinity control costs in the various categories of uses of River Murray water. However, this financial year the Commonwealth is providing assistance to the three States on a dollar-for-dollar basis for salinity control works to implement the Maunsell plan of action for dealing with salinity and drainage problems in the Murray Valley, as follows: New South Wales $2.23 million, Victoria $1.473 million, and South Australia $2.325 million. In addition, the River Murray Commission has budgetted for an expenditure of $118,000 this year on salinity control works within this area of responsibility.
(3) There is no evidence to suggest that irrigated agriculture in South Australia is likely to become non-viable in the foreseeable future. To the contrary, salinity control works now being undertaken in all three States, together with proposed new water quality functions for the River Murray Commission, could lead to a gradual reduction in salinity in River Murray water used for agriCUlture in South Australia.
(4) Estimates are not available to enable the costs to South Australia of salinity in its water supplies to be compared with those of the other States. The Commonwealth does not have responsibility for advising what control South Australia has on action of upstream States which worsen salinity in the Murray nor for paying compensation or secking compensation from other States in relation to salinity problems in South Australia. Nevertheless, the Commonwealth is making a significant financial contribution towards the cost of improving water quality in South Australia by funding salinity control projects in all three States, works undertaken by the River Murray Commission and by assistance towards the cost of filtration plants for Adelaide's water supplies.

(5) Yes. I have been advised that the Commonwealth has no legal obligation to compensate South Australia for water quality problems in the River Murray in that State.
(6) and (7) Action now being taken by the Commonwealth and the States in the control of salinity in the Murray Valley and proposed water quality responsibilities for the River Murray Commission should tend to ensure that river water quality in South Australia does not decline to a point where alternative sources of water or desalination measures are necessary.
Aborigines: Discrimination
(Question No. 828)
Mrs Darling asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 12 March 1981.
Further to his reply to my question without notice of 26 November 1980 (Hansard, page 53) concerning the document entitled 'Country Reports on Human Rights Practices submitted to the United States of America Congress by the US. Department of State, have misgivings been expressed officially or unofficially by his Government to the Government of Queensland that propagation of the fact that Queensland has been accused of administering certain laws relating to Aborigines in a way that has the effect of discriminating between the rights of white and black Australians (a) will have a pernicious effect on Australia's international relations and reputation, particularly with Third World countries and (b) will jeopardise the participation of some Commonwealth countries in the 1982 Commonwealth Games to be held in Brisbane.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) and (b): The Government will continue its policy of consulting with Queensland on matters which affect Aboriginals. It is my understanding that African countries are keen to come to the 1982 Commonwealth Games in Brisbane. I am aware that the possibility of a boycott to the Games has been raised in the context of domestic and external events. However, I believe that African nations are presently more concerned with events outside Australia.
Women's Refuges: Confidentiality of Addresses
(Question No. 834)
Dr Theophanous asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:
(1) Did a delegation consisting of a large group of women workers from all the women's refuges in Victoria visit Parliament House, Canberra, on Tuesday, 10 March 1981, and deliver strong submissions to him for the retention of the confidentiality of the addresses of these refuges.
(2) Will he agree to the women's submissions and allow the practice of confidentiality to continue; if not, why not.
(3) Does the Government intend to stop funding the refuges if his request for the address is not acceded to.
Mr MacKellar The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) I received no submissions from any delegatIon of workers from women's refuges in Victoria on 10 March. I did meet a national delegation of women's refuge representatives on 11 March, but recall no discussion on the confidentiality of addresses of Victorian women's refuges at that meeting. In Melbourne on 19 March, I met representatives of Victorian women's refuges specifically to discuss the provision of addresses of Victorian women's refuges to my Department.

Answers to Questions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1779

(2) My Department will continue its present procedures under which confidentiality is strictly applied to any residential addresses of women's refuges which it holds.
(3) The question of what action may be taken is currently under consideration.
Student Assistance Programs
(Question No. 835)
Dr Theophanous asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:
(1) Is his Department currently conducting an overall review of all student assistance programs, as stated in the draft 1979 Survey of Tertiary Student Finances, Final Report.
(2) If so, (a) what is the purpose of the review, (b) what kinds of information are being collected and utilised for thereview, (c) when is it intended that the review be completed, and when will he make available the results of the review and (d) will he consult with student representatives, including the Australian Union of Students, before any policy changes are implemented.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( 1) All Departmental student assistance programs are reviewed regularly. Projects currently in progress as part of the Department's Review and Evaluation Program concern the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme (TEAS), the Secondary Allowances Scheme (SAS), the Postgraduate Awards Scheme, and Isolated Children's Assistance Scheme.
(2) Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme (TEAS)-
(a) The purpose of the review is to determine patterns of income and expenditure of tertiary students, and to obtain information on the socio-economic background of students, on social mobility, and on course progress and attrition rates.
(b) Some information has been (or will be obtained) from questionnaires. Additionally, interviews will be conducted with randomly selected samples of students.
(c) The reports arising from the various components of this evaluation will be issued as a series entitled "Studies of Tertiary Student Finances". Volumes 1, 2 and 3 are expected to be published in the first half of 1981. Subsequent volumes will be available during 1982.
(d) The Australian Union of Students has participated in the planning of the evaluation. In addition, the views of student representatives, including the Australian Union of Students, are taken into account in the review of TEAS conditions which takes place each year in the Budget context.
Secondary Allowance Scheme-
(a) The purpose of the review is to discover the level of awareness of the scheme amongst students and parents potentially eligible to receive an allowance and to determine the extent to which the allowance influences decisions to continue schooling through the final two years of secondary education.
(b) Data collection involves questionnaires and interviews with Queensland metropolitan and country students and their parents; it also uses information collected for Sydney secondary school students for another research study.
(c) The final report is expected in mid 1981.

(d) It will not be possible to consult organisations representing secondary school level students. However, the nature of the review ensures that the opinions of students and their parents have been canvassed.
Postgraduate Awards Scheme-
(a) The purpose of the evaluation is to examine to what extent the scheme has met its objectives and to review these objectives.
(b) The in-house component of the study examines the progress of award-holders who commenced study in universities and colleges of advanced education in the mid-seventies. The externally commissioned component of the study will concentrate firstly on Research awards and will examine the effectiveness of the Scheme in meeting its objectives as well as the appropriatness of present objectives.
(c) The internal component will be completed before June 1981 and it is expected that the external evaluation will be completed by 1982.
(d) The Council of Australian Postgraduate Associations is represented on the Steering Committee guiding the external study.
Assistance for Isolated Children-
(a) The purpose of the review is to analyse the elfects of the scheme on individuals and schools, to report on any anomalies in its administration and to make recommendations for its future development in relation to general developments in rural education.
(b) Information will be collected from administrative records, and from surveys and interviews of parents of beneficiaries of the scheme. Some schools and hostels will be approached. The study will cover Western Australia, Queensland and New South Wales students.
(c) The report is expected to be completed by June 1981.
(d) The appropriate body to be involved in this study is the Isolated Children's Parents Association. This body has co-operated with the researchers in gaining parent participation.
Aluminium Industry
(Question No. 837)
Dr Everingham asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:
(I) Has the High Court ruled that Commonwealth Aluminium Corporation is in Australian hands and therefore cannot be taxed on profits at market rates received by its Hong Kong subsidiary for Australian alumina.
(2) Did Comalco structure its prices so that Australian profits, taxed at 47.5 per cent, were low, and Hong Kong resale profits, taxed at 12.5 per cent, were high.
(3) Did the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, in July 1980, criticise Australia's apparent undue subsidies to the aluminium industry by below-market pricing of coal for power generation and inclusion in electricity tariffs of historical capital costs instead of replacement costs, so that future consumers will have to finance borrowing for plant replacements.
(4) Does the Government accept the OECD conclusions that these subsidies could lead to poor allocation of resources, and the claims of other economiSts that efficiency, profitability and employment levels can be expected to suffer in other industries which are more labour-intensive and are attempting to increase Australian exports or increase their competitiveness with imports.

1780 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April J981

Answers to Questions

(5) Will the Government insist on adequate returns to Australia for our minerals and energy considering world prices, taxation law and government incentives to exporters.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The decision of the High Court in F.C. of T. v Commonwealth Aluminium Corporation Limited is reported in volume 80 of Australian Tax Cases at page 4373.
The report discloses that the case involved the application of section 136 of the Income Tax Assessment Act by the Commissioner of Taxation. That section applies where, among other things, an Australian business is either controlled principally by non-residents or is carried on by a company which controls a non-resident subsidiary and, because of those circumstances, the business produces less taxable income than might otherwise be expected.
The High Court held that the provisions of section 136 did not apply to the particular facts of the Commonwealth Aluminium Corporation case. The majority of the Court found as a fact that, in the years in question, the business of the company was controlled principally by directors who were residents of Australia.
As I indicated in my statement to the House of 12 March 1981, section 136 is under review with particular regard to the above mentioned case.
(2) There is no information on this matter contained in the published report of the case. The Commissioner of Taxation has advised that he is precluded by the secrecy provisions of the income tax law from commenting on it.
(3) The last OECD Survey of the Australian economy, released in June 1980, canvassed a number of issues relating to the pricing of energy resources and concluded that ". . . the pricing of some energy forms, particularly electricity, may not in some areas be ideal for proper resource allocation and would appear to involve undue subsidies" (p. 55).
(4) This conclusion by the OECD reflects its concern that the pricing of energy resources in general, including electricity, should be such as to ensure efficiency in the allocation ofthose resources.
The Government believes that resource allocation issues should be properly taken into account in energy pricing, as is evidenced by its policy of import parity pricing of indigenous crude oil.
The determination of the terms and conditions under which electricity is made available to particular consumers by State electricity authorities is the responsibility of the State Governments concerned.
(5) The Government is anxious that a fair share of the income generated by projects developing our minerals and energy resources accrues to Australians or is otherwise spent in Australia. Such projects, of course, generate considerable expenditure in Australia for the purchase of goods and services and the payment of wages and the effects of this flow on to the economy generally. Beyond that, the Government's foreign investment policy stipulates that, wherever practicable, Australians should have the opportunity to participate with foreign investors in major projects and this is a significant avenue for a share of the benefits arising from the development of national resources to accrue to Australians. Taxation of the income generated by major projects-both at its source and again if repatriated abroad-is another important avenue through which benefits accrue to Australians. The States, too, have a role to play through the tenns and conditions applying to the provision of projects' energy and infrastructure requirements.

Navigational Aids in Hazardous Areas
(Question No. 865)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(1) Has the recommendation of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation in its report on oil spills that the Minister for Transport review, as a matter of urgency, the provision of navigational aids in hazardous areas, with particular reference to the addition of two telemetric gauges in the Torres Strait, been carried out.
(2) What specific innovations to marine navigational aid technology have been implemented by his Department since 1978.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The provision of navigational aids in hazardous areas has been reviewed and a number of actions have been planned or taken since 1978. It is expected that tide monitoring and telemetry equipment will be installed at Turtle Head, Hammond Island in the Torres Strait by the end of 1981. Consideration is also being given to the installation of additional tide monitoring equipment at other locations in the Torres Strait.
(2) The more significant innovations which have been implemented since 1978 include the introduction of a standardised range of low maintenance lattice towers for supporting equipment in cyclonic areas, the installation of a solar powered light and the installation of a wind driven generator for powering a light.
Safe Oil Tanker Operating Procedures
(Question No. 866)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
What number of ships' personnel have undertaken short courses since 1978 in safe oil tanker operating procedures, either through the Australian Maritime College or through a training program initiated by his Department.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
A total of II tanker safety courses have been conducted since 1978.
A total of 139 ships' personnel have been identified as having attended these courses.
The next series of tanker safety courses commences at the Australian Maritime College on 11 May 1981.
Royal Australian Navy Hydrographic Service
(Question No. 867)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
What progress has been made towards the implementation of the recommendation of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation on its report on oil spills that the Hydrographic Service of the Royal Australian Navy widen the recommended tracks on navigation charts covering the Torres Strait and the Great Barrier Reef.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1781

There are marked differences of opinion among pro fessional mariners familiar with the waters of the Great Barrier Reef on the safety issues which the adoption of this rec ommendation would create. While on the one hand broadening the recommended track may lessen the chances of a collision, it may on the other hand increase the risk of grounding.
A working party consisting of senior representatives of Commonwealth and Queensland Departments and some of the major users of these waters has been convened by my De partment and is working to find the safest solution.
International Convention on Training,
Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers (Question No. 868)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 25 March 1981 :

1978-79

Amount Per cent

Commonwealth Government Other Government

$m 2,922 2,024

36.6 25.4

Total Government Private

4,946 3,031

62.00 38.00

Total Expenditure

7,977

100.0

1979-80Accurate figures for the total health expenditure by source of finance is dependent on receipt of information from other Government sources. As the information
required has not yet been received, it is not possible to provide a breakdown of expenditure by source. The information that
is available, however, suggests that total health expenditure will be of the order of $8,800m.

What steps have been taken toward the Australian Government's ratification of the International Convention on Train ing Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable
member's question is as follows:
Australia signed the International Convention on Stan dards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Sea farers, 1978 (STCW}, subject to ratification, on 30 November 1979. The Convention relates to both international and domestic shipping. It is necessary, therefore to ensure that not only Commonwealth legislation but also State and Northern Terri tory legislation gives effect to the requirements of the Conven tion before Australia ratifies the Convention. Action is pro ceeding through the Marine and Ports Council of Australia (MPCA) to develop the appropriate legislation.
The Commonwealth enabling legislation is contained in Navigation Amendment Act No. 98 of 1979 and subsidiary legislation in the form of regulations and orders is well under way.

Additional Payments to Pensioners
(Question No. 876}
Mr Good luck asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
What would it cost the Government to pay an additional week's payment to all pensioners one week before Christmas.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The cost to the Government of paying an additional week's payment of pension and allowances to all pensioners (including supporting parent beneficiaries) is estimated to be about $115 million, based on current rates of pension and numbers of pensioners current at December 1980. This cost would of course be greater if the additional week's payment was made in December 1981, as the numbers of pensioners and the rates of pension will increase during the year.

The States and the Northern Territory are also working towards adjustment of their legislation which will comp lement the Commonwealth legislation to give complete cover age for all of the requirements of the STCW Convention and thus allow for its ratification by Australia. It is hoped that this will be possible by the end of 1982 or early 1983.
The Convention will enter into force 12 months after the date on which it has been ratified by not less than 25 countries, the combined merchant fleets of which constitute not less than 50 per cent of the world tonnage. The latest report indi cates that 9 countries, representing 39 per cent of the world tonnage have ratified the Convention.
Health Expenditure (Question No. 875)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(1) What was the total health expenditure by source of finance for (a) 1978-79 and (b) 1979-80.
(2) What was the percentage of total expenditure of each source for these years.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Total health expenditure by source of finance and percent ages are:

Invalid Pensions (Question No. 881)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 25 March 1981 :
How many applications for invalid pensions have been (a} received and (b) rejected by the Department of Social Se curity in the last 5 years.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Separate statistics on claims received for invalid pensions are not available, only combined totals for age and invalid pensions are maintained. Separate information is, however, available on claims determined.The numbers of claims for invalid pension determined, and the number rejected, by the Department of Social Security during the period January 1976 to December 1980 inclusive, was respectively 388,800 and 69,400.
Social Workers (Question No. 882}
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:

1782 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) How many social workers are employed in each office of the Department of Social Security in New South Wales.

(2) What qualifications are these social workers required to hold.

Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) Regional Offices-

Camperdown

I

Bondi Junction

I

Chatswood

1

CrowsNest

I

Dee Why

1

Gosford

I

Maroubra

2

Marrickville

2

Redfern

I

Albury

I

Bankstown

2

Belmore

1

Campbelltown

1

Caringbah

I

Fairfield

2

Hurstville

I

Liverpool

2

Rockdale

I

Wollongong

2

Armidale

1

Broadmeadow

1

Lismore

1

Newcastle

1

Blacktown

I

Burwood

I

Dubbo

I

Hornsby

2

Lithgow

1

MtDruitt

1

Parramatta

2

West Ryde

1

Orange

I

Penrith

1

Manly

I

Charleston

1

Kcmpsey

I

Maitland

I

Murwillumbah

1

Auburn . . .

2

Other Offices/Centres-The Sydney City Office and the
Rehabilitation and other centres have 20 Social Workers on staff.

(2) The criteria for selection as a social worker to the Aus-
tralian Public Service have not changed since the honourable member last asked this question. See the answer to Question No. 5704 (Hansard,I7 April 1980, Page 1962).

Cost of Reducing Age for Eligibility for the Male Age Pension
(Question No. 903)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(I) What is the estimated (a) savings or (b) cost to revenue of reducing the age for eligibility for the male age pension to 60 years, during periods of high unemployment.
(2) What is the method of calculating the range of final figures.

Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) and (2). It is not possible to estimate with ac~uracy the additional cost of paying an income tested age pension to men aged 60 to 64 years because of the lack of data on their income distribution. In addition, it is not known what effect the lowering-of the pensionable age would have on workfo"ce participation rates of men aged 60 to 64 years.-
It is also not possible to -estimate with any accuracy the extent of any savings that would result from younger unemployment beneficiaries getting jobs consequent upon any reduction in the workforce participation of men aged 60 to 64 years. It is expected, however, that substantial additional costs would be involved. The estimated cost of paying an income test free pension to all men from age 60 gives some indication of the order of magnitude of the maximum gross costs which could be involved in lowering the pensionable age for men from 65 to 60.
The additional cost of paying an income test free pension to all of the 288,000 residentially qualified men aged 60 to 64 years would be about $550 million in a full year. This cost is additional to the estimated $300 million annual cost of existing payments to some 110,000 male invalid and repatriation service pensions and unemployment and sickness beneficiaries aged 60 to 64 years. These costs are based on the estimated number of residentially qualified males aged 60 to 64 years in the population, and male pensioners and beneficiaries aged 60 to 64 years as at December 1980, and pension rates applicable from November 1980. The costs are gross costs in that they make no allowance for the additional revenue that would resuIt from the inclusion of the payments in income for the purpose of income tax.
The actual gross costs that would be involved in lowering the pensionable age for men from 65 to 60 could be expected to be somewhat lower than the maximum cost set out above, particularly in the short-term since many older people would have already planned their retirement on the basis of age pension eligibility at age 65.
Budget Car Rentals
(Question No. 90S)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a claim by Mr R. G. Ansett of Budget Car Rentals that Trans Australia Airlines is paying $5m more than Budget for an identical facility at airports.
(2) Is there any substance to this claim, if so, what is the reason for this difference.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The results of tenders for car rental positions at Commonwealth airports were published in the Commonwealth Gazette on 9 October 1979. The two national facilities were won by Kay Rent-a-Car Pty Ltd, (operating as Hertz) with a guaranteed minimum bid of $8,014,435 and Budget Rent-aCar Pty Ltd, with a guaranteed minimum bid of $3,167,060, both over five years. Both companies are also committed to pay an additional ree based on the level of business conducted at airports over the five year contract period. Consequently, the difference in actual payments by the two national operators will not be known until the contracts have terminated. The respective bids, no doubt, reflect the commercial judgement of the two tenderers.

Answers to Questions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1783

ocoNTobwAinlcKniAtkgeraalaJdeytcsMibotsRy,naPesyTtndynotoAe-fLaAnt-KTdCoaarotanayrrdviTRPmeMlAtepynaAIotynLs-JndeatMe-udCas,NatnairyisrycinekaPeshlewTayPsbrhsta1oyPhvlttelyL1yie-ltLsuodntnwd,dodnu.nweseTrthdnhlt.1_'echesAuhsecAbPocIn,taiSydtrrMiJ.Laaroetcamdyntyu.ttnoalayefll

Road Fund Allocations to South Australia (Question No. 911)

Mr Porter asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:

(I) funds

Will he provide a table of te allocations to South Australia

cCoommpmaroendweWa.iltthh

road total

Commonwealth road grants to all States over the period

1975-76 to 1980-81, giving South Australia's percentage share

for each year.

(2) Do the figures show that South Australia now receives a smaller proportion of total Commonwealth road funds than in
1975-76.

(3) If so, will he give details of the formula used or detailed information and reasons why South Australia's proportion of Commonwealth road funds has decreased.

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Commonwealth road grants

South Australia

All states total

South Australia's percentage
share

1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

$'000 40,024
38,800 40,400
43,196 46,450 51,617

$'000 425,381
442,670 474,733 507,605 546,662 606,881

per cent 9.4 8.8 8.5 8.5
8.5 8.5

(2) Yes.
(3) During the years in question, there has been no fixed formula governing the distribution of Commonwealth road grants among the States. However, allocations to individual States have taken account of assessments of relative road needs undertaken by the former Commonwealth Bureau of Roads. The proportion of the Commonwealth grant provided to South Australia has generally been slightly in excess of the share recommended by the Bureau of Roads in its Reports 'Roads in Australia 1973' and 'Roads in Australia 1975'.

Tax Evasion (Question No. 917)
Mr Willis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 26 March 1981:
(l) Has the Australian Taxation Office undertaken any studies into the extent of tax evasion in Australia; if so, what are the estimates of the loss to revenue due to tax evasion.
(2) Has the Office compiled representative income profiles of various groups of non-Pay-AsYou-Earn taxpayers; if so, which groups are involved.
(3) How are these profiles used to prevent tax evasion and are they proving effective.
(4) Has the Taxation Office undertaken an investigation into tax evasion in the building and construction industry; if so, what is the extent of tax evasion in this industry and what is being done to prevent it.

(5) Are other measures being employed by the Taxation Office to prevent tax evasion; if so, what are the details.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable
member's question is as follows:
The Commissioner of Taxation has provided the following information:
( l) Research is currently being undertaken with the object of developing methods of estimating the extent of tax evasion.
(2) Profiles, or more correctly, analyses indicating the dis tribution of taxpayers according to specific criteria, e.g. industry and occupation, region, level of turnover and net profit, are compiled from data extracted from the income tax returns of all non-corporate business and professional taxpayers.
(3) These analyses provide a means, albeit elementary, of assisting field staff in the screening of income tax re turn data with a view to the selection of taxpayers for audit/investigation examination. Although the ana lyses are considered to be quite effective in achieving this purpose, research is being carried out to develop more sophisticated screening methods.
(4) In recent years taxation officers have carried out a number of specific projects designed to detect in stances of tax evasion in the building and construction industry. While these projects have been spread over a wide area of Australia it was considered that the re sults obtained would not form a sound basis for measuring the extent of tax evasion in the total industry.
(5) In addition to audit and investigation operations, the Taxation Office undertakes a number of information matching programmes whereby data (e.g. details of dividend and interest payments) are obtained from exterior sources and matched with information disclosed in income tax returns. The purpose of these programmes is not only to detect tax evasion but to en courage the highest possible level of compliance from taxpayers through the knowledge that such pro grammes are conducted. Enforcement activities also include action to detect persons who are obliged, but who have failed, to lodge income tax returns.
Statistics relating to the revenue results achieved from all enforcement programmes were detailed in the Commissioner's 59th Report to Parliament.
Australian Diplomacy
(Question No. 919)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 26 March 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to an article in the 'Week end Australian', 7-8 March 1981, page .B of the magazine section, entitled 'Australia's role in UN Tower of Babel'.
(2) If so, does the article point to weaknesses in Australia's diplomatic voice due to factionalism, deliberate nationalism, nepotism, sexism, lack of expert advisers and under represen tation and feelings among the staff of alienation from Australia to the detriment of Australia's interests especially in the use of outer space and the high seas.
(3) Will the Government set an example to other nations by giving an official role in UN negotiations to appropriate representatives of grass-roots Australian organisations, including experts in international law, satellite technology, mar ine studies and peace studies.

1784 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) Yes.

(2) and (3) As I understand the article, the allegations con-

cerning 'factionalism, deliberate nationalism, nepotism (&)

sexism' refer to the permanent staff of the UN secretariat and

not to any 'weakness in Australia's diplomatic voice'.

.

As for the alleged "lack of expert advisers and under rep-
resentation", it will be appreciated that it is not possible, given the need for financial restraint, for Australia to be represented at all United Nations conferences by specialists. In 1980 there were over 200 UN conferences and this figure does not in-
clude meetings of the specialized agencies. No member state is represented by specialists at all UN conferences. This is a fact of life not only for Australia but, to varying degrees, for all members of the United Nations.

In this respect, the question refers in particular to the fields
of outer space and the high seas. The chairman of the major sub-committee of the United Nations Committee on Outer Space is Professor J. H. Carver of the Australian National University, who is only one of a number of experts who rep-
resent Australia at UN conferences on outer space. Australian delegations to sessions of the Conference on the Law of the Sea include specialist representatives drawn from the Depart-
ments of Foreign Affairs, Treasury, Defence, Trade and Resources, Primary Industry, Attorney-General's, National Development and Energy, as well as from State Governments and the Australian mining industry.

The article also refers to Australia's non-representation on the "committee which is drafting the final agreement on rights of the sea". I believe that this is a reference to the Drafting
Committee of the Third UN Conference on the Law of the Sea. This Committee has only 23 members, and Australia is not one of them. However, Australia is a member of other important committees of the Conference, in accordance with the UN practice whereby membership of key committees is distributed equitably among all UN member countries.

On those occasions when it decided not to send a specialist representative from Australia to a United Nations Conference, members of our permanent missions to the United
Nations, who themselves have considerable experience-and often specialist training-are guided by detailed briefs which draw on expert advice available in Australia.

Toxic Shock Syndrome
(Question No. 923)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 March 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the report in the National Watchdog, 23 March 1981, that a senior officer of the National Biological Standards Laboratory visited the United States of America in October 1980, with his fares and expenses being paid by Johnson and Johnson Pty Ltd.
(2) Is the officer referred to Dr D. J. McKay, and is he the head of the Bacterial Products Section of the National Biological Standards Laboratory.
(3) Is the Bacterial Products Section of the National Biological Standards Laboratory currently undertaking an inquiry into bacteriological aspects oftampons in relation to the toxic shock syndrome.
(4) Is it a fact that Johnson and Johnson Pty Ltd and their subsidiary companies manufacture more than 80 per cent of the tampons used in Australia.
(5) Did Dr McKay disclose, according to the prescribed procedures, any interest which conflicts or might reasonably

be thought to conflict with Dr McKay's public duty or improperly to influence Dr McKay's conduct in the discharge.of the doctor's responsibilities in respect of some matter With which Dr McKay is concerned.

(6) Did Dr McKay inform his Chief Officer of the potential conflict of interest.

(7) Is the potential conflict of interest recorded (a) in the departmental subject file relating to the matter in respect .of which the conflict exists and (b) on a central record of conflict
of interest declarations and decisions maintained within his Department.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) and (2) Yes. Dr D. J. McKay, in charge of the Sterility Unit of the National Biological Standards Laboratory (NBSL), attended the 2~~ In~ernational ~ilmer Memori~l Conference on The StenlisatlOn of Medical Products, 111 Washington, USA on 16 and 17 October 1980.

The conference, amongst other matters, reviewed the
official requirements for sterilisation and sterility testing used in different countries. Dr McKay (and his official counterparts from USA, Canada, Great Britain and a number of other countries) attended so that industry could be ad-
equately informed of Australia's official requirements. Fares and expenses for the officials from other countries as well as Dr McKay, were met, it is understood, by Johnson and John-
son Ltd.

(3) The Sterility Unit, NBSL, has tested up to date 2423

tampons representative of all suppliers of the Australian mar-

ket for the presence of staphylococci. Mr Tribe, ChiefInspec-

tor and

NJoBhnSsL~ni.nsDprecLtaendgtshfeormda(nFuAfaDcGtu,riPnugbplircacHtiecaelsthaDt Jiovhisniosonn)

and Dr Howes (Assistant Director, NBSL) have di~cussed the

toxic shock syndrome and the manufacture, quality control

and labelling of tampons with Johnson and Johnson Ltd.

(4) It is understood that this is factual.

(5) There was and has been no. conflict of interest. The association of tampons with the tOXIC shock syndrome has be~n
recognised only recently and was not a matter of concern 111 Australia at all when the invitation to the USA was accepted
in April 1980.

(6) There was no potential conflict of interest. Dr McKay's Chief Officer was aware of the visit.

(7) There was no conflict of interest situation.

Medical Services
(Question No. 925)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 March 1981:
What was the cost of providing medical services by visiting private medical practitioners, for share~ ward. hospit~l patients for (a) each State, (b) the Australian Capital Terntory and (c) the Northern Territory in 1979-80 and what is the estimated cost for 1980-81.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The total costs of providing medical services to hospital patients (as defined in the Health Insurance Act 1973) by visiting private medical practitioners on a sessional, contract or modified feefor service basis for 1979-80 and the estimated costs for 1980-81 are as follows:

Answers to Questions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1785

1979-80 1980-81 *

(a)New South Wales
Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia
Tasmania (b) Australian Capital Territory (e) Northern Territory

$m
28.520 36.304
7.092 10.260 13.684 3.070 1.514 0.093

$m
39.738 43.267
8.569 11.117 15.313 3.762 1.777 0.127

* Estimates provided by State and Territories as at
November 1980.

Non-aligned Movement
(Question No. 927)
Mr McLean asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 26 March 1981:
(1) Is he able to state which nations and liberation movements are members of the non-aligned movement.
(2) Is he also able to say which of these nations have treaties of peace, friendship and co-operation with the Soviet Union.
(3) Is he further able to say which other nations of the nonaligned movement have other forms of understanding with the Soviet Union.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The following 94 countries are currently members of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM):
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana, Burundi, Cameroon (United Republic of), Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Comoros, Congo, Cuba, Cyprus, Djibouti, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Jamaica, Jordan, Kampuchea, Kenya, Korea (Democratic People's Republic of), Kuwait, Lao People's Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Peru, Qatar, Rwanda, Saint Lucia, Soa Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Surinam, Swaziland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tanzania (United RepUblic of), Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, Upper Volta, Vietnam, Yemen (Arab Republic of) Yemen (People's Democratic Republic of), Yogoslavia, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
In addition, the following two organisations are members of the Non-Aligned Movement:
Palestine Liberation Organisation (PLO); South West Africa People's Organisation (SWAPO).
Kampuchea's seat in the Non-Aligned Movement has been kept vacant since 1979, pending a resolution of the competing claims by the regimes of Democratic Kampuchea (DK) and the People's Republic of Kampuchea (PRK). Chile has not attended NAM meetings since the overthrow of the Allende regime in 1973, but has not been expelled from the Movement. At the NAM Foreign Ministers' meeting in N~w Delhi

in February this year, St Lucia was welcomed to NAM membership. Also at that meeting, Belize (formerly British Honduras, which is expected to attain its independence this year) was granted special status (honorary membership) with the right to address the meeting. Malawi was not represented at the New Delhi meeting. Burma withdrew from the NAM after the Havana Summit meeting in 1979, and at present appears to have no intention of rejoining the Movement. Moves by some members to have Egypt expelled from the NAM have not succeeded.
(2) The following countries have concluded treaties of peace, friendship and co-operation with the Soviet Union:
Afghanistan, Angola, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic People's Republic of Yemen, Ethiopia. India, Iraq, Mozambique, Syrian Arab Republic and Vietnam.
(3) The Soviet Union has bilateral agreements with many countries, the full details of which are not readily available from Departmental records. To research all of these would he particularly time-consuming but if the honourable member has in mind particular countries or types of treaties, I would be pleased to furnish further information.
Department of National Development and Energy: Television Advertising
(Question No. 936)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 26 March 1981:
(1) What sum was spent on television advertising by the Department of National Develupment and Energy and Instrumentalities under the Minister's control in 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred during the months of (a) December 1979 and (b) January 1980.
Mr AnthonyThe Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) $900,278.
(2) (a) 5 per cent; (b) 10.6 per cent.
Attorney-General's Department: Television Advertising
(Question No. 944)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 31 March 1981 :
(1) What sum was spent on television advertising by tho Attorney-General's Department and Instrumentalities under the Attorney-General's control in 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred during the months of (a) December 1979 and (b) January 1980.
Mr Viner-- The Attorney-General has provided the following answers to the honourable member's question:
(1) Nil.
(2) Not applicable.

1786 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Department of Social Security: Television Advertising
(Question No. 945)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(1) What sum was spent on television advertising by the Department of Social Security and Instrumenalities under the Minister's control in 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred duro ingthe months of (a) December 1979 and (b) January 1980.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) $121,464.39. (2) (a) $23,422.90; (b) $62,100.00. All of the above expenditure was incurred in advertising activities relating to the International Year of the Child.
Department of Science and Technology: Television Advertising
(Question No. 950)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(1) What sum was spent on television advertising by his De- .partment and Instrumentalities under his control in 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred duro ingthe months of (a) December 1979 and (b) January 1980.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Nil.
Department of Administrative Services: Television Advertising
(Question No. 951)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(I) What sum was spent on television advertising by his Department and Instrumentalities under his control in 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred duro ing the months of (a) December 1979 and (b) January 1980.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) An amount of $1,141 was incurred for costs related to television advertising by my Department and instrumentalities under my controlin 1979-80.
(2) Nil.
Department of Veterans' Affairs: Television Advertising
(Question No. 954)
Mr Mountford asked the minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(1) What sum was spent on television advertising by the Department of Veterans' Affairs and Instrumentalities under the Minister's control in' 1979-80.

(2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred duro ingthe months of (a) December 1979 and (b) January 1980.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) & (2) There was no expenditure on television advertising by the Department of Veterans' Affairs, or by an any instrumentalities within the jurisdiction of the Minister for Veterans' Affairs during the financial year 1979-80.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs: Television Advertising
(Question No. 955)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(1) What sum was spent on television advertising by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs and Instrumentalities under the Minister's control in 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred during the months of (a) December 1979 and (b) January 1980.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) and (2) None.
Latrobe Valley Ministerial Comicil
(Question No. 962)
Mr Cunningham asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
Has he reached agreement with the Victorian Premier, Mr Hamer, to have the Commonwealth Government take an active position in the Latrobe Valley Ministerial Council, if so, how is this participation to be achieved?
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Agreement has been reached with the Victorian Premier, over Commonwealth involvement in the Latrobe Valley Consultative Committee. Mr Hamer has accepted Commonwealth participation in the activities of the Committee in an advisory capacity.
The Commonwealth already has arrangements to partici. pate in an advisory capacity, on two committees in New South Wales dealing with regional adjustment problems-the Hunter Region Development Board and the Broken Hill Economic Review Committee. In each case officers of the Department of National Development and Energy attend meetings when matters of concern to the Commonwealth are being discussed. Similar arrangements will be instituted for the Latrobe Valley Consultative Committee.
Relief Advance to Distressed Australians Overseas
(Question No. 983)
Mr McLean asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 1 April 198\ :
(1) What is the standard maximum sum which consular officers are presently able to provide to distressed Australians in the form of a relief advance.
(2) When was this funding arrangement introduced.

nswers to Questions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1787

(3) Has there been any adjustment to the level of these ad-

vances since they were introduced.

.

(4) What was the total sum disbursed -in this manner in

1979-80.

(5) How much of the sum disbursed in 1979-80 was

recovered by the Department.

-

(6) Are penaltieS imposed on Australian.citizen who fail to

repay the relief adva

ff so, what are. the penalties.

Mr Streef::__The answer to the honourable
q ni.ember-;s uestion is as follows:

(1) Consular officers have discretion to grant a relief ad vance to distressed Australians up to an amount of $40. The Head of Mission may, at his discretion, grant a further amount of$40.
(2) Relief advances were introduced when the first edition
of the Consular Instructions were forwarded to overseas posts in 1948.

(3) Yes, in 1973 from$30 to$40.

( 4) $71,679.00.
(5) Recovery figures which relate specifically to only those advances made in 1979-80 are not available. The amount recovered during 1979-80, however, was$47,559.40.

(6) No.

Temperature Readings, Hobart
(Question No. 988)
Mr Good luck asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 7 April l981:
(1) In what locality does the Bureau of Meteorology deter mine the daily temperature of Hobart, Tasmania.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to the fact, that if the
temperature is gauged on the leeward side of Mount Welling ton, this tends to register the lowest temperature which has a detrimental effect on tourists wishing to visit Hobart and also on the morale of the local people.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Bureau of Meteorology's official temperature ob servations for Hobart are taken at the Tasmanian Regional

Office of the Bureau which is located about one kilometre to the south of the Hobart city centre. The site is well exposed in all directions.
(2) The prevailing wind streams over southern Tasmania
are westerly and therefore the observing site is often on the leeward side of Mount Wellington. However 1 am informed by the Director of Meteorology that the flow of air over mountains often leads to a warming of the air on the leeward side. This effect, known as the Foehn wind effect, is character istic of nearly all mountain areas and would tend to make the temperatures registered in Hobart higher than on the wind ward side of Mount Wellington.
Statistics on temperature at various locations in the Hobart area show there is very little variation from the readings obtained at the Bureau site and these official recordings are therefore a good representation of the temperatures experi enced by the majority of the population of Hobart.
Nuclear Power Stations in Warsaw Pact
Countries
(Question No. 995)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and En ergy, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
(1) Is the Minister able to say how many nuclear power stations are operating in each of the Warsaw Pact countries.
(2) How many of these have been built since 1975.
(3) Is the Minister also able to say whether the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics claims to be building eight nuclear power stations each year.
(4) If so, how many nuclear power stations are proposed to be built in the USSR under the latest five year plan an nounced at the 26th Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union held in February 1981.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) and (2) See Table for the number of nuclear power re
actors now operational in Warsaw Pact countries.

Country

Year of start of operation
------

Prior 1975

1975

1976

1977

1978

1979

1981 1980 current

Totai(MWe)

Bulgaria

Czechoslovakia

Germany D.R.

2

Hungary

Poland

Romania

USSR

17

2

--

-- -= -------

(3) In USSR at present there are 18 reactors in various
stages of construction at 11 different sites, but specific information such as the actual date of starts of construction of indi vidual units is not always available. Additional manufacturing capacity is being commissioned in the Atommash reactor
plant at Volgodnsk where plans call for the production of seven 1000 MWe pressurised water reactors (PWRs) in the 1981-85 period. The capacity of this complex will eventually be 8 reactors per year. Upgrading is also under way on other nuclear equipment manufacturing plants such as the lzhorsk

2(820)

2(820)

5(1715)

Nil

Nil

Nil

2

4

2

29(14080)

factory in Leningrad to produce components for the 1000 MWe PWR systems. Reactors of the smaller 440 MWe PWR class will be manufactured by the other Comecon partners in future. Czechoslovakia for instance plans to produce three or four 440 MWe PWRs annually, plus equipment and com ponents for a further 8 reactors per year to be sent to the USSR.
(4) Details of the latest five year plan (1981-85) have not yet appeared in the literature. Draft plan guidelines, to be pre sented for adoption at the 26th Congress of the Communist

1788 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Party of the Soviet Union (February 1981), were reported to include 24,000-25,000 MWe of new nuclear capacity within the USSR by the end of the period. Nine stations were mentioned specifically.
Within the past twelve months Communist news agencies have quoted overall targets of 100,000 MWe nuclear generating cap'acity within the USSR and 37,000 MWe capacity within other Comecon countries by 1990.
Oestradiol-17B
(Question No. 999)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 1 April 1981 :
Is it a fact that the use of oestradiol-17B in a form known by brandname as Compud08e avoids the concerns that have been associated with compressed tablet anabolic implants in livestock.
Mr Nixon-The answer to Mr Kerin's question is as follows:
The product known by the brandname Compudose consists of a silicone rubber implant impregnated with oestradiol-17B and is designed to allow removal prior to the slaughter of the treated animal. It is claimed that this form of administration

ensures that the oestradiol levels in treated animals are not in excess of natural levels at the time of slaughter. The product has not been evaluated for use in Australia by the relevant subsidiary committees of the Australian Agricultural Council and the National Health and Medical Research Council. These committees make recommendations to the States which have the responsibility for the registration and control of veterinary drugs.
Appointments to Statutory Authorities under the Minister for National Development and Energy
(Question No. 1009)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
What are the (a) names, (b) dates and terms of appointment and (c) salaries of all persons appointed to the Boards and Commissions of Statutory Authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction.
MrAnthony-The Ml'nl.Ster l~or Nal'lona1 Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

APPOINTMENTS TO BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS OF STATUTORY AUTHORITIES AS AT 1 APRIL 1981

Body/Office

Name

Dates and term of current
appointment

Salaryp.a.

Australian Atomic Energy Commission Commission-
Chairman (part-time) Deputy Chairman (part-time)
Member (part-time) . . Member (part-time) . .
Member (part-time) . .
Safety Review CommitteeChairman (part-time) Member (part time)
Member (part-time) . Member (part-time) .
The Pipeline Authority Chairman (part-time)
DeputyChairrnan (part-time) Executive Member
Member (part-time)
Member (part-time) Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric
AuthorityCommissioner (part-time)
Associate Commissioner (part-time)
River Murray CommissionCommissioner (part-time)- . . . Deputy Commissioner (part-time)
Albury-Wodonga Development Corporation-
Chairman
Deputy Chairman Deputy Chairman Member (part-time)
Member (part-time)
Member (part-time)

Professor D. W. George, A.O. MrA. J. Woods Professor H. Messel, CBE. Sir B. J. Callinan, CBE., D.s.O., M.C. Mr K. F. Alder
Mr D. J. Stevens, OBE. DrP.L.T.llbery Dr. J. D. Harley MrW.G. Webster
Mr J. D. Norgard Mr R. N. Townsend MrT. R. Baker MrA.Morgan Mr J. W. MacBean
MrT.A.O'Brien Mr D. W. Douglas
Mr T. A. O'Brien Mr A. Manderson
Mr G. F. Craig MiL. T. Muir MrM.K.Read Mr G. P. Mitchell Mr R. A. McLean Mr D. L. Hegland

27.5.76-26.5.83 11.4.78-10.4.85 5.12.74-4.12.81 31.5.79-30.5.81 27.5.76-26.5.81
11.1.80-10.1.83 11.1.80-10.1.83 23.1.79-22.1.82 25.6.80-24.6.83
8.7.80-7.7.81 8.7.80-7.7.83 13.5.80-12.5.85 1.2.80-31.1.83 17.1.79-16.1.82
5.2.81-4.2.84 5.2.81-4.2.84
12.2.81-11.2.84 8.5.76-7.5.81
21.1.81-20.1.82 1.7.79-30.6.84 13.8.79-30.6.84 1.3.80-28.2.83 1.3.80-28.2.83
30.4.80-29.4.83

$
12,825 (a)
5,725 5,725
(b)
lOOper day 80 per day
(c) 80 per day
11,375 6,420 48,089 180 per day 180 per day
(a) (d)
(a) (a)
48,089 41,286 41,286 5,725 5,725 5,725

(a) Messrs Woods, O'Brien and Manderson are permanent officers of the Commonwealth PUblic Service. No additional remuneration is involved.
(b) Mr Alder is employed full-time by the Australian Atomic Energy Commission. No additional remuneration is involved.

Answers to Questions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1789

(c) Dr Harley is employed full-time by the Health Commission of New South Wales. No additional remuneration is invo(ldv)edM. r Douglas is employed full-time by the Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Authority. No additional remuneration is involved.

Appointments to Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Social Security
(Question No. 1016)

Current term of appointment

Salary/ feep.a.

Mr Les "McMah,n asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notiCe, on 1 Apri11981:
What are the (a) names, (b) dates and terms of appointment and (c) salaries of all persons appointed to the Boards and Commissions of Statutory Authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction.
Mr Hunt-The"Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
See the answer of the then Minister for Social Security to Senate Question No. 2871 (Hansard, 23 May 1980, Page 2849).
That answer is stilI correct except for the salaries which are currently;
(1) John Oman Ballard-$47,323 plus $750 per annum expenses of office allowance;
(2) Bernard Joseph Dwyer-$38,265.
Appointments to Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Transport
(Question No. 1017)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 1 Apri11981 :
What are the (a) names, (b) dates and terms of appointment and (c) salaries of all persons appointed to the Boards and Commissions of Statutory Authorities under his jurisdiction.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is set out below:

Current term of appointment
The Australian National Airlines CommissionSir Robert Law-Smith CBE., A.F.C. (Chairman) . . . . . . 12.8.79-30.5.81

Salary/ feep.a.
$
17,025

Robert William Brack, A.O.

(Vice-Chairman)

12.8.79-25.10.83

Alan Eric Blanckensee

10.10.79-9.10.84

David Thomas Buchanaq,

CBE.

15.6.78-14.6.83

Leslie Trevor Froggatt

23.2.81-22.2.86

Bruce Whyte Lithgow

14.10.80-13.10.85

Frederick Eugene Peterson 14.10.80-13.10.85

The Australian National Railways Commission-

Louis Edward Marks

(Chairman)

16.3.8] -15.3.86

Harold FelixBell OBE. 14.10.80-13.10.85

Charles Frederick Clements 14.10.80-13.10.85

David Murray Fowler

14.10.80-13.1 0.85

Derek Scrafton

14.10.80-13.10.85

Ralph Clarence Taylor

29.1 0.80-28.10.85

The Australian Shipping Commission-

Neville George Jenner

(Chairman)

18.4.80-17.4.85

Robert Michael Whyte

(Vice-Chairman)

14.10.80-13.10.85

Charles Henry Fitzgibbon

1.10.79-30.9.84

Hugh Thomson Rogers

28.2.79-27.2.84

Edmund Alexander Rouse 14.10.80-13.10.85

Rae Martin Taylor

16.3.78-15.3.83

$
8,575 5,725
5,725 5,725 5,725 5,725
47,500 5,725 5,725 5,725 5.725 5.725
51,800
8,575 5,725 5,725 5.725

Appointments to Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Science and Technology
(Question No. 1021)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :
What are the names, dates and terms of appointment and salaries of all persons appointed to the boards and commissions of statutory authorities under his jurisdiction.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Name DrJ.P.Wild .

Date of appointment

*Termof appointment

Anglo-Australian Telescope Board (Australian members)

. . . . . . . . . . 4.5.73

4.5.73-1.5.82

Salary $ Nil

Dr. J. L. Farrands

7.11.77

7.11.80-6.11.83

Nil

Professor J. H. Carver DrJ.S.Bunt

1.9.78

1.9.78-1.9.81

Director-Australian Institute ofMarine Science (AIMS)

. . . . . . . . . . 22.8.78

22.8.78-22.8.85

Nil 39,424

1790 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Name

Date of appointment

*Termof appointment

Dr. J. A. Allen (Chairman) Pr()fessor K. J. C. Back Professor B. R. Morton Professor M. G. Pitman DrP.J.Cook

Council of the Australian Institute ofMarine Science

11.7.77

11.7.77-30.6.82

1.7.72

18.8.78-30.6.81

1.7.72

18.7.79-17.7.82

17.8.78

17.8.78-30.6.81

18.7.79

18.7.79-17.7.82

Metric Conversion Board

Mr J. Norgard (Chairman)

Mr G. Hastie (Deputy Chairman)

Mrs M. Fitz-Gerald

Mr P. B. Free (Public Servant)

Commissioner R. Sweeney

.......

Mr A. F. Harper (Executive Member) (Public Servant)

Mr W. I. Stewart

1.7.70 1.7.70 1.10.73 18.11.71 30.10.72 1.7.70 1.7.70

Mr A. F. A. Harper (Chairman)

National Standards Commission 1.9.78

Mr M. J. Puttock Mr J. A. Servin

1.8.78 1.3.78

Professor R. Williams

17.10.79

1.7.80-30.6.81 1.7.80-30.6.81 1.7.80-30.6.81 1. 7 .80-30.6.81 1.7.80-30.6.81 1.7.80-30.6.81 1.7.80-30.6.81
17.10.79-16.10.81
17.10.79-16.10.84 17.10.79-16.10.82
17.10.79-16.10.84

Australian Industrial Research and Development Incentives Board (AIRDIB)

Mr J. A. Clark (Chairman)
Mr A. A. L'Green MrT. F. W. Jackson Mr I. E. Newnham

(Permanent Public

Servant)

28.2.79-30.6.81

23.9.78

23.9.80-30.6.81

13.9.78

1.7.80-30.6.81

23.9.78

23.9.80-30.6.81

* Current appointment.

Name

Term of appointment

Full-timeDr J. P. Wild (Chairman) Dr N. K. Boardman DrW.J.McGTegart
Part-time-- MrP.D.A. Wright Mr W. L. Hughes Professor D. P. Craig Mr H. M. Morgan MrR.K. R.Morris
Sir Peter Derham (Chairman) MrA.Boden Mr L. C. Brodie-Hall Mr J. E. Harris MrJ.E.Kolm Mr E. P. S. Roberts Professor P. Scott Professor L. M. Birt Professor F. Fenner Mr,T, Heussler

CSIRO executive

14.12.78-24.9.85 14.12.78-24.9.85 1.2.79-31.1.86

CSIRO advisory council

1.12.79-30.11.82 14.12.78-13.2.81 26.3.80-25.3.83 14.12.78-13.12.81 14.12.78-13.12.81
1.2.81-31.1.84 1. 7. 79-30.6.81 1.7.79-30.6.81 1.7.79-30.6.81 1.7.79-30.6.81 27.11.79-26.11.81 1.7.79-30.6.81 1.7.79-30.6.82 1.7.79-30.6.82 1.7.79-30.6.81

Salary
$
100 per day sitting fee 80 per day sitting fee 80 per day sitting fee 80 per day sitting fee 80 per day sitting fee
12,825 6,420 4,300 Nil 4,300 36,738 4,300
Nil (Public Servant) Nil 80 per day sitting fee 80 per day sitting fee
31,367 4,300 4,300 4,300
Salary
$
53,976 49,495 49,495
5,725 5,725 5,725 5,725 5,725
170 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80perday

Answers to Questions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1791

Name

Term of appointment

Professor P. Karmel Mr B. 0. Jones

Dr G. Letts

Sir Ian McLennan

Mr J. Michael

Dr Dr

B. V.

SAc.oBttrown

Senator A. Thomas

MrN.Currie

Mr L. P. Duthie . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Dr. J. Farrands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

ProfessorP. Fink . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . '

MrA.Woods ...................

1.7. 79-30.6.82 23.3.81-Term of Current Parliament
1.7.79-30.6.82 1. 7. 79-30.6.81 1.7.79-30.6.81 I. 7. 79-30.6.81
9.9.80-8.9.83 23.3.81-Term of Current
Parliament 1.7.79-Term not exceeding five years while in present
Public Service Position 7.7.80-Term not exceeding five years while in present
Public Service Position 1.7.79-Term not exceeding five years while in present
Public Service Position 1.7.79-Term not exceeding five years while in present
Public Service Position 1.7.79-Term not exceeding five years while in present
Public Service Position

New South WalesMr A. Boden (Chairman) Dr D. G. Badger Dr C. S. Barnes . . Mr W. J. Hucker Mr D. J. McGarry . Dr D. G. MacLennan Mr H. E. Mitchell
MrC.H.Monk Mr G. R. Peart . . Dr D. A. J. Swinkels
MrN.RTiek MrN.A. Whitfen VictoriaMr J. E. Kolm (Chairman) Mr J.D. Brookes Dr A. J. Farnworth Mr A. G. Gibbs Mr R. Gottliebsen Professor K. H. Hunt MrF.C.James . MrJ.A.Kelly MrL. M.Muir
Mr E. F. Sandbach MrS. D. M. Wallis SouthAustraliaMr J. E. Harris (Chairman) MrD.Andary
Sir Ben Dickinson Mr J. M. Kerin . Mr M. Knapman
Mr J. C. McColl
Mr R. J. Mierisch Professor J.P. Quirk
Mr K. J. Shepherd . Mr P.M. South . . Mr I. E. Webber
QueenslandMe E. P. S. Roberts (Acting Chairman) Dr G. I. Alexander Dr. J. A. Allen . . . . . . . .

CSIRO state committees
1.7. 79-30.6.81 27.11.79-26.11.81 27.11.79-26.11.81 27.11. 79-26.11.81 27.11.79-26.11.81 27.11.79-26.11.81 27.11.79-26.11.81 27.11. 79-26.11.81 27.11.79-26.11.81 27.11.79-26.11.81 27.11.79-26.11.81 27.11.79-26.11.81
1.7. 79-30.6.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81
l.7. 79-30.6.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.1.81-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.78-12.11.81
27.11.79-26.11.81 27.11.79-26.11.81 27.11.79-26.11.81

Salary
$ SOper day
Nil 80perday 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
Nil
100 per day 80perday 80 per day 80perday 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80perday 80 per day 80perday
100 per day 80 per day 80perday 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80perday 80perday 80 per day 80 per day 80perday
lOOper day SOper day 80 per day 80perday 80 per day 80 per day 80perday 80perday 80 per day 80perday 80perday
lOOper day 80 per day 80 per day

1792 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Answers to Questions

-N-a-m-e- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -T-e-r-m-of appointment

Mr A. J. Allingham Mr G. L. Baker .
Mr W. G. Hamilton Mr J. C. Rivett Mr D. M. Traves Professor D. H. TroJlope Mr H. N. Walker Mr C. D. Williams . . Western AustraliaMr L. C. Brodie-Hall (Chainnan) Mr E. N. Fitzpatrick
Mr E. R. Gorham Mr R. M. Hillman Mr R. D. Ireland Mr J. B. Kirkwood Dr T. R. de Lacter Dr M. J. Mulcahy
Mr J. B. Oliver Mr W. T. Peart . Mr J. Shepherd .
Professor R. Street Tasmania-
Professor P. Scott (Chairman) Mr J. R. Ashton Professor D. Caro Mr M. C. Courtney Mr R. J. Downie Mr P. J. Fountain MrA. G. Kemp Mr J. B. Piggott Mr J. G. Symons MrP.T.Unwin
Captain D. M. Waters
MrB. Wilson

27.11. 79-26.11.81 27.11.79-26.11.81 27.11.79-26.11.81 27.11.79-26.11.81 27.11.79-26.11.81 27.11.79-26.11.81 27.11.79-26.11.81 27.11.79-26.11.81
1.7.79-30.6.81 3.7.79-2.7.81 3.7.79-2.7.81 3.7.79-2.7.81 3.7.79-2.7.81 3.779-2.7.81 3.7.79-2.7.81 3.7.79-2.7.81 3.7.79-2.7.81 3.7.79-2.7.81 3.7.79-2.7.81 3.7.79-2.7.81
1.7.79-30.6.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.S1 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81 13.11. 79-12.11.81 13.11.79-12.11.81

Salary
$ 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80pcrday
100 per day SO per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day SO per day
lOOper day SO per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day SO per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day 80 per day

Aircraft Noise
(Questiou No. 1029)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
(1) Did the report of the House of Representatives Select Committee on Aircraft Noise, dated October 1970, recommend that as a noise abatement measure, the glide slope at Australian airports should be standardised at 30 wherever possible.
(2) On which runways at Kingsford-Smith Airport is an Instrument Landing System (ILS) operative.
(3) What is the glide slope on each runway served by the ILS.
(4) What procedures have been introduced to ensure that the angle of the glide path is observed by pilots (a) when using the ILS and (b) when using a visual approach.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) Runway 07, Runway 16 and Runway 34.
(3) The angle of the glide slope on each runway is 3 degrees.
(4) The following instruction (in Aeronautical Information Publication, Terminal Area Procedures, page TMA-4-2, Paragraph 1.7) has been issued to pilots. Pilots are not to make approaches to land below the visual or electronic glide paths for the runway in use.

Aboriginal Voter Education Program
(Question No. 1036)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :
(1) Will the Aboriginal voter education program conducted by the Australian Electoral office be sending a team to Western Australia during 1981.
(2) If so, to which communities and on what dates will it be
sent.
(3) What does this program involve.
(4) Is it possible for Aboriginal people in the remote communities to obtain assistance from the voter education unit in enroliing for State and Commonwealth Electoral rolls.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) The team will be visiting Aboriginal communities in the south west of the State up until the end of June 1981 and will then move its activities to communities in the Pilbara and Kimberley regions. Specific dates of visits cannot be given since the team's itineraries are only worked out several weeks in advance after consultation with the Aboriginal communities in the areas to be visited.
(3) The program seeks to inform Aboriginal people about Commonwealth and State parliamentary and electoral systems. Using a range of specially developed audio-visual teaching aids the program covers the role of parliament, the

Answers to Questions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1793

qualifications for and process of enrolment and the procedures for casting a formal vote. The actual content and level of the program varies from one community to another depending on the previous experience of individuals and their understanding of the electoral system.
(4) Yes.
Australian Taxation Office: Issue of Taxation Notices
(Question No. 1047)
Mr Kent asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 2 April 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that the introduction of computers into the Australian Taxation office resulted in the issuing of taxation notices to businesses earlier than in the past thus requiring payment of taxes at an earlier date.
(2) Will he consider allowing small businesses a longer interest free period to pay taxes than the 33 days currently allowed in view of the changed arrangements and having regard to the high rate of bankruptcy among small businesses.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Taxation Office has used computers to issue notices of assessment since 1966. The rate of issue of notices is marginally higher in 1980-81 than it was in 1979-80 but the reasons for this are more related to earlier lodgment of returns and growth in the taxpayer population than to the use of computers to prepare the notices. The overall effect of these changes is that slightly more tax becomes due for payment by 31 March which is the earliest due date for payment by persons subject to provisional tax. Most taxpayers have not been affected but some have been required to pay a little earlier than in previous years.
(2) In performing his statutory functions, the Commissioner of Taxation must have regard to the fiscal requirements of the Budget which are framed on the assumption that taxpayers will meet their obligations as they become due and that most of the tax due in a financial year will be collected within that year, i.e., by 30 June. For these reasons it is the established practice to grant extensions of time to pay only to those taxpayers who are able to demonstrate that they are experiencing serious financial difficulties caused by unforeseen circumstances. This procedure seems to be no more than fair to the great majority of taxpayers whose financial affairs are arranged so as to enable their taxation commitments to be promptly met.
Cyclone Prediction
(Qnestion No. 1052)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
Further to his reply to my question No. 526 (Hansard. 12 March 198 ~, page 803) concerning a joint Austrahan/Amencan cyclone research program known as Project Stormfury, for what reason has agreement not been reached with the Government of the United States of America on the conditions under which the project could be undertaken.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Australian Government has not been able to agree with the United States Government on the arrangements for sharing liability in the event that damage is perceived to have occurred from any activities under the project.

Concessional Bus Travel for Children
(Question No. 1055)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
What concessions exist in each State and Territory for bus travel by children.
Mr HuntThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The information sought by the honourable member is not held by my Department, as the provision and regulation of bus services is primarily the responsibility of the State and Territory Governments.
Canberra-Sydney Rail Link
(Question No, 1056)
Mrs Kelly asked the Ivlinister for Transport, upon notice, on 2 April 1981:
(1) Have negotiations been undertaken between the Commonwealth and New South Wales Governments in relation to the development and upgrading of the Canberra-Sydney rail link; if so, what are the details and has any costing or feasibility study been completed on this malter.
(2) In relation to the feasibility study of the electrification of the Melbourne-Sydney line, is a spur line to Canberra being considered; if not, why not.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am adviscd by the Minister for the Capital Territory that negotiations betwecn him and the NSW Minister for Transport and by officers of their Departments are continuing. The outcome of the negotiations will have to be considered by both the Commonwealth and State Governments and it is therefore not possible to provide details at this stage.
(2) The study examining the proposal to electrify the Sydney to Melbourne railway also examined the electrification of the Goulburn to Canberra railway. The study found that the economic return on the electrification of the Goulburn to Canberra railway was significantly less than for the Sydney to Melbourne railway and recommended that the decision on electrification of the Goulburn to Canberra railway should be deferred at least until the completion of the electrification from Sydney to Goulburn.
Housing Construction Program at the Warmun Community in Turkey Creek, Western Australia
(Question No. 1063)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 2 April 1981:
(1) Is his Department responsible for the housing construction program at the Warmun Community in Turkey Creek, Western Australia.
(2) If so, how many housing units are being constructed there during 1980-81 and what is the cost per unit.
(3) How many units are proposed for construction during 1981-82.
(4) Will he provide a breakdown of costs involved per unit for (a) material, (b) Aboriginal labour, (c) builders' wages and (d) administration costs.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

1794 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Answers to Questions

(1) The Department of Housing and Construction is managing a program of works on behalf of and in co-operation with the Warmun Community. Works already completed include provision of water supply, toilet-abultion and laundry units and a welfare clinic.
(2) 13 units are being constructed during 1980-81. The estimated cost is $18,000 per unit.
(3) Four (4) additionai units are proposed for construction during 1981-82.

Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No. However I have had a number of representations from the fishing industry on this question, including discussions with representatives of NFCA.
(2) See (1).
(3) I will be happy to consider the NFCA report if, and when, it is received.

(4) The breakdown of costs of the 1980-81 units is:

Summit Conference

(a) Materials (b) Community labour (c) Sub-contractors (d) Administration

$ 8,200 4,600 4,000 1,200
18,000

Australian National Railways Concessional Freight Rates
(Question No. 1076)
Mr Wallis asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(\) Does the Australian National Railways offer concession freight rates to the major road hauliers for the transport of their containers and road freight vehicles on railways operated by ANR
(2) If so, how do these freight rates compare with rates charged to individual consignors of similar type traffic on ANR.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(\) Yes. The Australian National Railways Commission makes special contract container and pick-a-back rates available to all customers who are able to satisfy the minimum requirement of the Australian rail systems in regard to annual tonnages and terminal facilities. Under the provisions of the Australian National Railways Act my approval of these rates is not required.
(2) The relationship between rates charged under forwarding agent contract conditions and rates available to customers who do not satisfy the requirements associated with those rates is a matter for the commercial judgement of the Commission, or, in the case of intersystem consignments, of all the railway systems co-operating through the Railways of Australia Committee.
Distillate Prices: Effects on Prawn Exporting Countries
(Question No. 1089)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) Was he recently presented with a report prepared by the Northern Fishing Companies Association (NFCA) showing the effects of rising distillate prices on the prawn exporting companies.
(2) If so, did this report state that unless relief was given to prawn exporting companies during the next 12 to 24 months there would be business failures in the fishing industry amounting to tens of millions of dollars.
(3) What action has he taken in response to the representation by the NFCA.

(Question No. 1117)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 7 April:
(1) Can he say whether (a) Algeria, (b) Bangladesh, (c) Brazil, (d) Guyana, (e) the Ivory Coast, (f) Nigeria, (g) the Philippines, (h) Sweden, (j) Tanzania, (k) Venezuela and (1) Yugoslavia are given greater pre-eminence in world affairs than Australia.
(2) Is he also able to say why those countries have been invited to attend a summit meeting to be held on 22-23 October 1981 and not Australia.
(3) Is it widely accepted in the world community that Australia's foreign affairs position is now so indistinguishable from that of the United States of America that the US. representatives, alone, adequately represent Australia's interests.
(4) Will he seek to gain admission to the summit meeting through diplomatic representatives, or otherwise.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) to (4) The countries which are to be invited to the summit meeting to be held in Mexico on 22 and 23 October were selected with the intention of providing a balanced representation of regions and of developed and developing countries. There has been no suggestion that the list of invitees represents the countries of greatest pre-eminence in world affairs or that any country will act as the representative of Australia. As an active and responsible participant in the North-South dialogue and in particular as host country of the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, Australia will take a keen interest in events at the summit meeting in Mexico.
Examination of the Commonwealth Electoral Act
(Question No. 1123)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :
(1) Further to his reply to my question No. 349 (Hansard. 25 February 1981, page 216), in the course of the examination by him and the Chief Australian Electoral Officer of the Commonwealth Electoral Act, will he call for public submissions or submissions from Commonwealth members of parliament and senators, or will the inquiry be closed.
(2) When will the review be completed.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) I am now concluding the review of the Commonwealth Electoral Act referred to in my reply to Question No. 349 (Hansard, 25 February 1981, page 216).
Members and senators are, of course, at liberty at any time to make representfltions on amendments to Commonwealth electoral legislation, or, for that matter, on any Commonwealth legislation.

Answers to Questions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1795

Defence Service Homes Corporation Homes in North Brisbane: Hailstorm Damage (QuestionNo.1125)

Mrs Darling the Minister for

asked the Minister representing Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on

7 April1981:

JD ienes(cns1eto)hmrHatbhnoerw$B15rm90is80ab0,naBy(nbreD)igesbhfueetfotnfwencreeheeSadneilrsd$vta5oim c0rem0aHgadeonismdaases$ts2eaCr,0,o0arre0mpsuooalruntandtotioi(fncng)thhtm ooemo(1are6)es

than $2,000.

(2) What percentage of each of the three categories of damaged homes were (a) totally and (b) partially covered by Defence Service Homes Corporation insurance.

Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(1) As a result of the hailstorm that struck the north Bris bane area on 16 December 1980, 856 insurance claims were lodged by the owners of homes insured through the Defence Service Homes Corporation's Insurance Scheme. Of these claims 128 were for less than $500, 103 were for between $500 and $2,000 and 625 were for more than $2,000.

(2) All the homes on which claims were lodged were pro tected by the Corporation's standard insurance cover which provides for full replacement value.

Export of Mineral Sands
(QuestionNo. 1166)
Mr West asked the Minister for Trade and Re sources, upon notice, on 8 April l981 :
(I) What companies and projects have been given approval for the export of mineral sands from Australia since 1978.
(2) Have any companies applied for approval of export of mineral sands from Moreton Island, Queensland.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Since 1978, the following companies have received approval to export mineral sands products from mines currently in production:
Associated Minerals Consolidated Ltd Mineral Deposits Ltd Consolidated Rutile Ltd Currumbin Minerals Pty Ltd Rutile and Zircon Mines (Newcastle) Ltd Allied Eneabba Limited Cable Sands Pty Ltd Westralian Sands Ltd
In addition, exports weremade by the following companies, since 1978, from mines now closed:
Dillingham Mining Company of Australia Jennings Mining Ltd
(2) No.

Zeranol
(QuestionNo. 1167)
Mr West asked the Minister for Primary Indus try, upon notice, on 8 Aprill981:
(1) Is Zeranol, marketed under the trade name Ralgro, used to stimulate growth in animals in Australia; if so, on what kinds of animal is it used.

(2) What hormones or hormone-like chemicals are used in Australia to stimulate growth rates in animals and on what animals are they used.
(3) What antibiotics are used to stimulate growth pro
duction in animals in Australia, on what animals are they used
and are they supplied on prescription.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The registration and control of veterinary drugs in Australia is the responsibility of the States. However, co ordination is achieved through subsidiary committees of the Australian Agricultural Council and the National Health and
Medical Research Council. I understand that Zeranol has
been registered for use in the States for approximately 18
months but is available only on veterinary prescription. It is
approved for use only in steer cattle.
(2) None other than (1) above.
(3) Antibiotic growth promotants are used principally in pigs and poultry. Avoparcin, bacitracin, erythromycin, fiavophospholipol, oleandomycin, tylosin and virginiamycin are approved antibiotic growth-promotant feed additives which are available without prescription.
Other a n t i b i o t i c s , in c l u d in g the p e ni c i l lins a n d tetracyclines, are available only o n prescription in most States and are not approved for use as growth promotants. A growth promotant effect may be incidental to their use for prophylac tic purposes.
2,4,5-T
(QuestionNo. 1169)
Mr West asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 8 April1981:
(1) Did the Australian Government Analytical Laboratory receive a sample of material from the Industries Assistance
Commission suspected of being 2,4,5-T containing a high con
centration of TCDD in March 1981.
(2) Did the Laboratory carry out any analysis of the sample; if not, why not.
(3) Did the Laboratory suggest any method of permanent disposal of the sample.
(4) Was the sample sent to Western Australia on or about 1 Aprill980; if so, to whom was the sample sent and is he able to say what was the use to which the sample was to be put by the receiver of the sample.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Australian Government Analytical Laboratories
(AGAL) received a sample which the Commission believed to be fire-damaged KTCP.
(2) No. The AGAL have suspended work on this type of analysis until the provision of new facilities later this year.
(3) No. It was not asked for advice on disposal methods.
(4) Part of the sample was forwarded to the Director of the Western Australian Government Chemical Laboratories on 24 March 1981 for analysis.
Cost of Answering Parliamentary Questions
(QuestionNo.l173)
Mr Donald Cameron asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 9 April l981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to questions numbered
1091 to 1151 on the Notice Paper.

1796 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) If so, will he request each Department to keep a record of the time spent in answering each question and then have that time costed in terms of wages, holiday pay and superannuation,
(3) Will he provide those details on a Department by Department basis,
,Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes,
(2) and (3) The gathering and preparation of answers to Questions upon Notice cleady makes demands upon resources of Ministers and their departments; those demands can be considerable in particular cases. The Government accepts of course the need to provide as far as possible information sought by honourable members save where the cost of so doing would be unreasonable. The gathering of information of the kind requested by the honourable member would itself require commitment of considerable resources that I would not regard as fruitful.
Tax Exemption for Interest
(Question No. 1186)
Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(1) Is he, in his pre-Budget deliberations, considering lax exemption for interest yielded from bank and building society savings accounts up to certain base amounts such as $500 per annum.
(2) !fnot, as such tax exemption would (a) serve to encourage young persons saving for a deposit to buy a house and (b) assist persons saving for their retirement, will he consider doing so.
Mr Howard-The answer' to the honourable member's question is as foHows:
(1) and (2) The proposal referred to is of a kind that is normally considered in the Budget context. Now that the honourable member has raised the matter, I shall have it listed for consideration in the 1981-82 Budget deliberations. I point out, however, that taxation inducements that encourage investment only in respect of certain selected institutions and forms of investment can have serious and distorting side effects both on the financial system and on the pattern of investment generally.
Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 1388)
Mr Bungey asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) Have any officers and employees of his Department been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many.
(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment approved in each case.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) One.
(2) Third Division; $21,491-22,359; to publish occasional articles on aspects of the arts and architecture.

Home Telephone Rentals: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 1524)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many officers and employees of his Department have their home telephone rentals and-or charges (a) fully or (b) partially paid by his Departmen t.
(2) What was the cost to his Deparlment 'of this expenditure in 1979-80..
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) No officer of my Department has his home telephone rental and-or charges fully paid by the Commonwealth,
(b) 93 official telephones are located in private residences of officers of my Department in respect of which the Commonwealth accepts partial liability as laid down in Finance Direction 13/12.
(2) The cost of the above official telephone rentals and charges to the Commonwealth in 1979-80 was $18,854.00.
Recycling of Paper: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 1576)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Has any action been taken by his Department to re-cycle paper; if so, what action.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No commercial recycling of paper is undertaken by the Department of Primary Industry.
Tea Services: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 1602)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many (a) full-time and (b) part-time staff are employed on tea making and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (ii) other offices of his Department.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in his department in 1979-80,
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) (i) Five; (ii) Four; (b) (i) One (20 hours per week); (ii) One (30 hours per week).
(2) (a) $83,315,52; (b) Nil.
Export of Live Horses
(Question No. 1646)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(J) How many horses were exported from Australia in each of the last 3 years for (a) slaughter and (b) other purposes, and what were the ports of destination.
(2) Have checks now been introduced to ensure that horses exported are in a satisfactory condition for travel; if so, what are these checks.

Answers to Questions

29 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1797

Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Total horse exports during the past 3 years have been:
1978-79-1,967; 1979-80-1,918; 1980-81-756 (to February 1981).
The number of horses exported for slaughter would have been approximately 500 in both 1978-79 and 1979-80 and approximately 50 in the current year.
T4e remainder of the horses, some 1,500 in 1978-79, 1,400 in 1979-80 and 700 in the current year were exported for the purp-oses ofbreeding, racing or other sports.
The countries to which Australia has exported horses during the past three years are:
Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Japan, Korea (South). Kuwait, Macao, Malaysia, Mauritius. New Caledonia, New Zealand, Norfolk Island, The Philippines, Sabah, Singapore, Thailand, Tonga, United Kingdom, United States of America and West Germany.
(2) Horses for export are subjected to health certification requirements administered by the Australian Bureau of Animal Health and to the requirements for issue of a Restricted Goods Export Permit.
All horses for export are examined by veterinary officers of the various State departments acting as agents for the Commonwealth. All horses must be free from all infectious and contagious diseases. Fitness to travel is determined by compliance with a set of Standards for the Carriage of Horses by Sea ana the professional examination by Government veterinary officers of all horses presented for export by sea or by air.
Foot and Mouth Disease Eradication Trust Account
(Question No. 1647)
. Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) Is the Foot and Mouth Disease Eradication Trust Account still in existence; if not, why was it abolished.
(2) If it does still exist (a) what payments, and for what purpose, have been made from the account and (b) what payments, and from what source, have been paid into the account, since 30 June 1976.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes, the Foot and Mouth Disease Eradication Trust Account that was established under the Foot and Mouth Disease Act 1961 continues in existence under the name Livestock Diseases Eradication Trust Account of the Livestock Diseases Act 1978, and is a Trust Account for the purposes of Section 62A of the Audit Act 1901.
(2) No payments have been made into or out of the account since 30 June 1976.
Home Made Aircraft
(Question No. 1687)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many self-constructed or homemade planes are licensed in Australia.
(2) How many of these planes have crashed during the last 10 years and what fatalities or injuries resulted.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) At March 1981 124 amateur built aircraft of 32 different types were on the Australian register of aircraft.
(2) In the ten year period 1971-80, there were 33 accidents involving aircraft registered in the amateur built category, seven persons were killed, three persons sustained serious injury and thirty-one had nil or minor injury.
Deaths from Gliding and Parachuting Accidents
(Question No. 1688)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
How many persons have been killed in (a) gliding, (b) hang gliding and (c) parachuting accidents in each of the last 10 years.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980

(a) (b) (c)

0

0

4

2

0

3

0

0

3

0

0

9

4

0

1

2

5

2

2 10

2

1

2

4

2

3

2

4

2

3

Lassa and Marburg Fever
(Question No. 1729)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What cases of (a) Lassa and (b) Marburg fever have been recorded in Australia.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
None.
CSIRO Stock at Ginninderra, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 1748)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many (a) sheep and (b) cattle are normally held in Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation paddocks at Ginninderra. Australian Capital Territory, (i) east of the Barton Highway, (ii) west of the Barton Highway and south of Kuringa Drive and (iii) west of the Barton Highway and north ofKuringa Drive.
(2) How often is stock driven across the bridge spanning Kuringa Drive and how many are driven, on average, on each occasion.
(3) Is there a need to take stock across the Barton Highway; if so, how often and how is it done.
(4) What is the current value of CSIRO improvements on each of the three areas referred to in part (1).
(5) Did the CSIRO specially request the bridge over Kuringa Drive; if so, why.

1798 REPRESENTATIVES 29 April 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (i) 800 sheep; no cattle. (ii) 600 sheep; no cattle. (iii) 1,600 sheep and 150 cattle.
(2) 200-400 sheep are driven across the bridge four or five

(I) Which electoral divisions had enrolments above or below the statutory requirements applying to a redistribution of electoral boundaries as at 18 October 1980.
(2) What was the enrolment in each of these divisions, and how far above or below the statutory levels was each.

times per week.

Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable

(3) Yes, for shearing, crutching and similar activities. Sheep member's question is as follows:

are taken across the Barton Highway by trucks once every 3-4 months.
(4) The approximate current values of buildings on the . three areas of land referred to in question (1) are: $30,000, . $300,000 and $460,000 respectively. The approximate value of improvements to the property such as fencing, roads, dams,

(1) If State quotas had been determined on the basis of the enrolment for the 18 October 1980 Federal elections, the en-
rolment in the electoral divisions of Grayndler, Macquarie, Mitchell, Robertson and Werriwa in New South Wales; in the divisions of Holt and Lalor in Victoria; and in the Divisions of Fadden, Fisher, Kennedy and McPherson in Queensland

irrigation works and pasture is of the order of $200,000; would have deviated by more than 10 per cent from the re-

$500,000 and $600,000 for the three areas of land referred to in (1).

spective State quotas. These notional quotas may be equated with the State average enrolments.

(5) CSIRO requested the National Capital Development Commission to provide a safe means of moving stock across Kuringa Drive because certain facilities such as animal handling yards and weighing equipment occur only to the north of

(2) As at 18 October 1980 the enrolment in each of the above divisions and the deviation from the respective State averages was as follows:

Kuringa Drive. 40 to 50 crossings of the bridge are made each

day by trucks, tractors or other farm vehicles.

Enrolment for

Deviation from

Parliamentary Relieving Staff

State- -Division

the election on 18 October 1980

State average on 18 October 1980

(Question No. 1749)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

New South Wa\esGrayndler
Macquarie

66,598 85,771

-10.09
+ 15.80

(1) Since the decision to permit members and senators to

Mitchell

83,449

+ 12.66

employ relieving staff, what are the reasons for retention of Parliamentary relieving staffin each State:
(2) Has he considered the abolition of State relieving staff; if not, will he do so.

Robertson
Werriwa
Victoria-Holt

85,141 85,037
81,258

+ 14.95 + 14.81
+ 11.01

Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable Lalor

80,651

+ 10.18

member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) Senators and members have always been able to engage relief staff directly to cover absences of electorate

Queensland-Fadden
Fisher

83,876 83,351

+ 17.48 + 16.74

secretaries, though it is only since May 1979 that relief has
been approved for electorate-legislative assistants, either from the relief pools or by direct engagement.

Kennedy McPherson

61,793 82,876

-13.45
+ 16.07

Relief pools have not been abolished because there has been
little change in the demands placed on them by senators and members for relief staff. For example, records held in my department show that, for the nine months to 31 March 1981,
77.5 percent of all relief was sought from the pools and only 22.5 percent was recruited direct by senators and members.

Christmas Island Special Fund
(Question No. 1860)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

The purpose of the pools is to ensure so far as possible that
members always have a full complement of staff. Pool requirements are kept under constant review and, should there be a change in the pattern of demand, I will take appropriate action to adjust their size.

(1) What sum was in the Christmas Island Special Fund as at 30 June 1980.
(2) What receipts and expenditure were made from that sum in 1979-80.

Electoral Enrolments
(Question No. 1761)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

Mr Newman The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) $3,797,026.06.
(2) Receipts: $433,654.41; expenditure: $220,000.00.


