House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 123, 1981 Wednesday, 3 June 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2973

Wednesday, 3 June 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2.15 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) the financial situation of students enrolled at Australian post-secondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) the imposition of post-secondary tuition fees of comparable levels to those imposed prior to 1971 would force many currently enrolled students to discontinue their studies and deter many persons willing and able at present to undertake post-secondary study from doing so.
(iii) those students and potential students from social groups currently under-represented and disadvantaged in the post-secondary education system would be most severely affected by the re-introduction of fees for post-secondary education.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
I. post-secondary tuition fees not be re-introduced for any courses or for any category of students.
2. the visa charges upon private overseas students be removed immediately.
3. the Minister for Education immediately clarify the Government's attitude to the re-introduction of postsecolldary tuition fees.
And YOllr petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett, Dr Cass, Mr Cunningham, Mr Free, Mr Fry, Mr Howe, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Barry Jones, Mrs Kelly, MI' Kent, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Mr Morrison, Mr Mountford and Mr Wallis.
Petitions received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) the financial situation of students enrolled at Australian post-secondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) the imposition of post-secondary tuition fees of comparable levels to those imposed prior to 1974 would force many currently enrolled students to discontinue their studies and deter many persons willing and able at present to undertake post-secondary study from doing so.

(iii) those students and potential students from social groups currently under-represented and disadvantaged in the post-secondary education system would be most severely affected by the reintroduction of fees for post-secondary education.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
(i) post-secondary tuition fees not be reintroduced for any courses or for any category ofstudents
(ii) the imposition of visa charges upon private overseas students be ceased and desisted from immediately.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr N. A. Brown and Mr Duffy.
Petitions received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
1. The proposal to introduce fees for higher and second degrees will mean that access to post-graduate and recurrent education will be limited to the rich; Australian research and ability to cope with technological change will suffer; this proposal must be seen as a step in the direction of the introduction of fees for all tertiary students.
2. the proposed introduction of a loans scheme for students will mean graduating with a heavy debt or being denied a tertiary education if loans are refused because a student is seen as a 'poor risk' (particularly affecting women and those doing non-vocational courses); only the rich will be able to get a tertiary education without course restrictions and the burden of indebtedness.
3. in regard to the proposal to restrict eligibility for TEAS and the foreshadowing of reviewing TEAS levels only in the light of the availability of loans, it should be noted that any further downgrading of TEAS, which is already inadequate, can only further limit access to education.
4. the proposed restriction of Adult Secondary Assistance to those needing qualifications for employment will severely restrict access to a full high school education and necessary bridging education to tertiary education for those who left school early.
5. the proposal not to fund 30 Colleges of Advanced Education if they are not rationalised is an attack on teacher education. This attack will create teacher shortages in the mid 1980s, restrict access to education now and endanger the future quality of teaching available to Australian children.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
(i) post-secondary tuition fees not be introduced for any courses or for any category of students;
(ii) that the TEAS scheme be extended so as to more fully meet the real financial needs of students.
(iii) that a comprehensive loans scheme not be introduced. (iv) that there be no restriction of Adult Secondary
Assistance; (v) that the proposal not to fund 30 CAEs unless they are
rationalized be rescinded.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley, Mr N. A. Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Charles, Mrs Child, Mr Cunningham, Mrs Darling, Mr Free, Mr Holding, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Milton, Mr Morrison and Dr Theopltanous.
Petitions received.

2974 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Petitions

Trans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in:
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic airfares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles, Mrs Child, Mr Hurford, Mr Jacobi, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Kent, Mr Mildren, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.
Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. The hotel industry in Australia is long-established and a valuable part of the community of this nation, providing places where the people may partake of the three basic needs of life; a place to eat, a place to drink, a place to sleep.
2. The hotel industry is accepted throughout the nation as occupying an important place in the social and economic activities of Australia.
3. The hotel industry is almost entirely within the private sector and makes a large contribution to the government in taxes of various kinds.
4. The hotel industry has a need to sustain an appropriate level of turnover and growth, to make profit, and to sustain and improve the level of employment.
5. The hotel industry of Australia is gravely concerned at published reports that the Government intends to increase excise charges on beer in the forthcoming Budget.
6. Sales of beer constitute the major source of income of most of the industry's 5,811 hotels in Australia.
7. The very steep rises in beer excise in 1975 and 1978 severely retarded growth of the Australian hotel industry.
8. Any further increases in excise on beer in the 1981 Budget would further retard the industry at a time when growth is essential to maintaining economic viability and the ability to serve the constantly growing needs of the community.
9. Such is its significance as a community requirement, beer occupies a place on the Consumer Price Index, and any alteration to its cost to the community would have an inflationary effect.
10. Any increase in excise would result in and force the hotel industry to pass on such increases to the consumer by way of higher prices for beer.
11. Higher excise would be only the starting point for an upward spiral in beer prices because of the presence of other

factors, such as State Licence Fee taxes, which are directly linked to excise rates.
12. The hotel industry of Australia already is gravely handicapped by heavy excise and other tax imposts, its growth is at a standstill; and, inevitably must decline if beer excise is increased.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives:
1. Recognise the importance and place of the Australian hotelindustry in the social and economic life of the nation.
2. Accept that the viability of the hotel industry is essential to the maintenance ofemployment opportunities and stability of the industry is essential to enable it to continue to provide for the hotel needs of the nation in this period of growing population and increasing tourism.
And further, that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives resist and reject any move to increase excise on beer.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Adermann, Mr John Brown, Mr Fisher, Sir Phillip Lynch and Mr Thomson.
Petitions received.

Soviet Passenger Cruise Vessels

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully
showeth:

Owing to an overwhelming and continuous demand by the

Australian people for a cruise service within the economic

scope of the working man and his family, we request the

Government to lift the ban placed on Soviet Passenger Cruise

Vessels entering Australian Ports.

.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Les McMahon and Mr Mountford.

Petitions received.

Telepbone Charges
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Telephone charges from Wedderburn and district to Bendigo and Melbourne are crippling to small business owners who are trying to decentralise industry by supplying service and goods to the local community at reasonable rates.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that telephone charges be examined and modified so that telephone calls from Wedderburn and district, Victoria, to Bendigo be classed as a local call.
And your petitioners as in duty hound will ever pray.
by Mr Bourchier.
Petition received.

Toxic Shock Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth:
That your petitioners are gravely concern~d by the threats to women's health and lives posed by Toxic Shock Syndrome, and urge the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:

Petitions

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2975

(1) Tampons, sanitary napkins, vaginal deodorants and similar sanitary products to be re-classified under Therapeutic Agents (not under 'Cosmetics' as at present), in order to bring them under the scrutiny of the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee. We believe manufacture must be under the strictest hygienic conditions.
(2) After re-classification, we urge an immediate government-funded inquiry into all aspects of manufacture and content of these products. This must lead to: (i) contents of product and instructions for correct usage to be shown on packaging; (ii) removal of synthetic fibres, chemicals or ingredients that are potentiallyor actually harmful to users.
(3) Allocation of extra funding for ongoing research by the National Health and Medical Research Council into these products, results of this research to be made public to cnsure all health workers and potential users are fully informed. This campaign of public education would necessitate multilingual distribution of the information where appropriate.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert possible threats posed to women's health by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Overseas Aid
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of 1,mdersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That Australia, as an affluent and developed nation, should be able to expend more of its resources on the alleviation of human suffering and deprivation in other less developed countries.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government will:
Increase overseas aid to 0.7 per cent of Australia's GNP. Increase to 4 per cent the proportion of overseas aid channelled through recognised non-government organisations such as World Vision.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Health Costs
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we strongly condemn any action taken by the Federal Government which will lead to the destruction of the Free Hospital and Medical Services of the State of Queensland.
And your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Parliament reject the proposed health cost sharing arrangements between the Commonwealth and the State governments and guarantee the maintenance of the present scheme whereby all Quecnslanders who wish to avail themselves of these services may do so.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling,
Petition received.

Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That public investment in tertiary education in the form of federal government funding is an investment in Australia '5 future and enables Australia to meet the demands of technological innovation;
That grave concern has been generated as a result of the Government's decisions to:
(a) abolish the education research and development committee,
(b) terminate special support for educational research, (c) scale down in-house and contracted research activities
of the Department of Education, (d) scale down participation in international education
activities, particularly UNESCO and OECD, (e) further tighten already restrictive eligibility guidelines
for TEAS, (f) supplement TEAS assistance by means of a loan
scheme, (g) phase in tuition fees for students undertaking degrees
and diplomas subsequent to an initial tertiary qualification, (h) reduce grants to universities and colleges to take account of fee income, (i) completely abolish 30 colleges of advanced education, and (j) scale down various engineering schools in colleges of advanced education around Australia;
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will rescind these regressive decisions and desist from obvious attempts to pave the way for a complete re-introduction of tertiary fees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Privacy and Personal Information
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Paragraphs 107 and 108 of the Privacy and Personal Information discussion paper number 14, brought down by the Law Reform Commission in JUlle 1980, undermines the family unit and the authority of parents, which is the Christian basis of OUf society, by proposing that 'between 12 and 16 years, a child should be entitled to object to disclosure of information to a parent '.
It is your petitioners sincere belief that:
(a) an adolescent between the ages of 12 and 16 is not at a mature enough stage of life to decide whether or not the disclosure of information to a parent will be in the best interests of the adolescent.
(b) as a record keeper has no responsibility for the child, and as his moral standards may be different to those of a parent, he should not be permitted to come between child and parent.
(c) a parent has a unique position which may enable him/her to perceive a situation that the record keeper does not. The parent must therefore be aware of the problem if remedial action is to be taken, and has the right to guide the child in the direction he/she feels fit.
Your petitioners therefore pray:

2976 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Petitions

That the Members of the House of Representatives will reject the recommendation of the Law Reform Commission and find some other means to protect children from the excessive abuse of some parents.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dobie.
Petition received.
Proposed New Constitution
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we believe that Australia's constitution is undemocratic and should be replaced by a democratic constitution, particularly as regards the new standard for regulation of Vitamin and Mineral Supplements.
We believe: 1. This legislation will curb our individual freedom to care
for our own health according to need, environment, climate, et cetera. 2. These substances have proven their efficacy in maintaining health rather than destroying it and should remain freely available. 3. Why curb these substances while other noxious and toxic substances are freely available to the obvious thorough detriment of our society-e.g. commercial alcohol and tobacco.
This new constitution should be drafted at a representative directly elected people's convention following extensive public debate, and then put to a referendum of the people. The petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament, as a matter of urgency, will help to promote such public debate and will arrange for the holding of such a people's convention and referendum.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Good luck.
Petition received.
Defence Service Home Loans
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That all members of the Women's Services 1939-45 War qualify as 'Australian Soldier' under the Defence Service Homes Act for loans because on voluntarily joining the Australian Forces they took the oath to resist His Majesty's enemies making themselves available for combat duty in War Zones, and according to Acts and Regulations of the period the Military women had enlisted for service anywhere, some Naval women to sail in any waters, with all servicewomen available for service in Papua New Guinea.
As those members of the Royal Australian Navy, the Australian Imperial Force and the Royal Australian Air Force of 1939-45 War who were not sent to War Zones are granted loans, refusal to grant eligibility to all Ex-servicewomen of 1939-45 War is unjust and unfair.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you amend the Defence Service Homes Act by repealing Sub-section 4 (2A) (b) (c) (d) of the Principal Act as amended by No. 137 of 1978, and grant eligibility to all members of the Women's Royal Australian Naval Service, the Australian Women's Army Service, the Women's Auxiliary Australian Air Force, the Australian Army Medical Women's Service, and the Voluntary Aid Detachment of 1939-45 War.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Jarman.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is not fulfilling its responsibility in ensuring an adequate standard of living for all Australians, which is causing untold hardship on relief agencies' limited resources, and require the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
1. That the Commonwealth Government raise the level of all pensions and benefits at least to the poverty line.
2. That the Commonwealth Government reconsider its.recent decisions in relation to the health system and cutS to Commonwealth activity.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert further poverty and suffering in our community by implementation ,of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Jenldns.
Petition received.
Plant Variety Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth, do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
I. Note that legislation establishing plant breeders' rights in other countries has had serious adverse effects, namely: (a) Virtual monopoly control of seed production has passed into the hands of a few large international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation. (b) The varieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and will not grow without the aid of artificial fertilisers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers. (c) The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, rendering them vulnerable to disease and other environmental threats.
2. Recognise that maintenance of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to prevent exclusive control over plant genetic materials from falling into private hands.
3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gardeners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden produce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment of plant breeders' rights in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition received.

Petitions

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2977

Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of we, the undersigned citizens of Australia, respectfully showeth:
That we oppose any expansion of the facilities of Kingsford-Smith Airport which entails the building of a new runway as it would have the following detrimental effects:
(1) The loss of one mile of waterfront including Lady Robinson's Beach and a huge part of Botany Bay;
(2) The loss of up to 1,230 houses and a drop in value of remaining neighbouring properties;
(3) The creation of more noise pollution in the area;
(4) The creation of more traffic congestion on streets leading to and from the airport;
(5) The forced diversion of Cook's River and further damage to the ecology of the area.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government will not consider satisfying the airport needs of Sydney by extending Kingsford-Smith Airport and that any decisions related thereto are not taken before there is an opportunity for adequate consultation with any community particularlyaffected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.

Public acknowledgement of the fact that unemployment is the result of insufficient jobs and not the fault of any minority group, the education system or the unemployed themselves. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Milton. Petition received.
Women's Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should take action as it deems appropriate to ensure the continuing functioning of the Betsy Women's Refuge and the network of shelters in Australia.
We ask that the Federal Government acknowledge that 'Betsy' and its counterparts provide housing and care for women and children in violent situations, and the Government agree to meet the financial responsibilities for continued and effective Refuge functioning.
The Federal Government should be informed that one in every five applicants are not accommodated at the Betsy Refuge due to overcrowding or full occupancy.
We therefore petition for full and adequate funding, and as petitioners for this we humbly pray.
by Mr Mountford. Petition received.

Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of children's services, which has been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 Budget. And further, that annual Budget allocations in the area of children's services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon.
Petition received.

Trade Unions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-
that we are gravely disturbed by the actions of militant unions, the ACTU and the failure of the President of the ACTU to assist positively in settling the dispute which has caused massive losses to Qantas our national airline, and we applaud the action of the Government in using RAAF planes to rescue Australians stranded abroad.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament and the Government should be of firm resolve not to permit SUCll unions to hold the country to ransom and continue to take a forceful and resolute stand against such union militancy.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.

Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully calls for:
The immediate and unconditional withdrawal of any proposals to deny Unemployment Benefits to unemployed people under 18 years old.
That the level of Benefits for all unemployed people, and including people receiving sickness benefits and pensions, be raised to at least 120 per cent of the poverty line.
That future employment policies be devoted to job creation and the restoration of full employment rather than the evasion of this responsibility by hiding the unemployed in short term training and education schemes.

Interest Rates
The Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth that:
(1) Interest rates, rather than falling by 2 per cent as promised by the Prime Minister in November, 1977, are now between 2 per cent and 5 per cent higher than when that promise was made, and are at historically higher levels.
(2) This prevents many potential home buyers from borrowing to purchase a house; causes severe hardship to many people who are paying off a housing loan, causing some to default and lose their home; prevents or restrains the establishment or expansion of many businesses; and is directly responsible for increasing numbers of bankruptcies.

2978 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Petitions

Your petitioners, therefore, pray that:
Minimisation of interest rates be adopted as one of the aims of economic policy;
the money supply target be relaxed to accommodate income growth without forcing credit restrictions and exorbitant interest rates;
regulation of borrowing rates be reintroduced to prevent the financial institutions raising lending rates to compensate for higher borrowing rates; and
foreign investment be more rigorously controlled in order to prevent destabilising inflows of foreign funds.
byMrScott.
Petition received.
Rodeos: Australian Capital Territory
To the Honourable the Speaker and the Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of the Australian Capital Territory respectfully showeth:
That we are opposed to Rodeos as we believe them to be cruel and to cause Animals to suffer needlessly. We can see no useful purpose to humanity by Rodeos nor do we feel that Animals should be exploited in this manner.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that an Rodeos be banned within the Australian Capital Territory.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fry and Mr Hodgman.
Petitions received.
Women's Refuges
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned residents of Tasmania showeth that your petitioners are concerned about the uncertain future funding for women's refuges in Australia.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Commonwealth Government maintain responsibility for the National Women's Refuge Program by continuing to fund them on a 75-25 per cent Federal-State basis.
Your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.
Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Parramatta respectfully showeth:
That beer is the drink of the working man and that any increase in the excise on beer will place it in the luxury bracket and beyond the means of ordinary people.
Australians are already the highest beer taxed people in the world; further increases in beer prices will both harm the brewing industry and fuel inflation.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government not proceed with any proposals it may have to increase the excise on beer in the 1981-82 Federal Budget as such a move would be unacceptable to all beer drinking voters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr John Brown.
Petition received.

Australian Broadcasting Commission: Melbourne Showband
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
As regular viewers and listeners of the ABC Melbourne Showband we were disappointed to learn of the dismissal of seventeen members of this outstanding orchestra.
We have had a great deal of pleasure over the past eight years viewing and listening to this band's fine music. It is the only full-time light orchestra in Australia and we are disgusted to think that such talented musicians should be dismissed in this manner.
We therefore call on the Federal Government to rescind this decision and make more money available for the continuance of the full Showband.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles.
Petition received.
Staging of American B52 Bombers
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned in the Northern Territory respectfully showeth:
That the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a refuelling and Rest and Recreation base for American B52 bombers:
Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the USA and another power.
Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of whether B52s:
(a) Carried nuclear weapons (b) Were engaged in bombing missions against another
State. Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign policies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy. Violates democratic procedures in committing the Australian nation to participation in future wars without due consultation and informed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the militarisation of the Indian Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region. Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin, in that noise pollution and the threat of accidental radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents" Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation ofpeace in the Pacific region and violates Australia's commitment to the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the' offer of Darwin, or any other . location in Australia, as a base or depot fQr American B52 bombers. And that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrKent.
Petition received.

Questions Without Notice

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2979

Two-airline Policy
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:

canker, a great social evil, a maggot growing as it eats its way through society'.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

That we protest most strongly against the present two airline domestic policy of the Commonwealth Government.
That this policy has resulted in expensive air fares and poor service and discourages tourists from the Eastern States visiting WA and vice versa.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition and formulate an Airline Policy providing for greater competition so that prices and service are determined by free market forces.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr McLean.
Petition received.
TASMANIAN WILDERNESS AREAS
Notice of Motion
Mr WEST (Cunningham)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That, in the opinion of this House, the Government should instigate an inquiry under the Environmental Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act of 1974 into-
(I) the environmental value of the Tasmanian south-west wilderness and wild rivers area to Tasmania and the nation;
(2) the most appropriate way of conserving that environment consistent with necessary State development, and
(3) whether Federal assistance is desirable and, if so, the nature of that assistance.
COMMONWEALTH-STATE FINANCIAL RELATIONS
Notice of Motion Mr GROOM (Braddon)-l ~ve notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House(1) notes with alarm the aggressive Big 'V' political cam-
paign being mounted by Premier Thompson of Victoria to secure a greater share of Commonwealth funds for his State, and (2) calls upon the Government-
(a) not to give in to blatant political pressures at the Premiers Conference but to assess the claim of each State on its merits; and
(b) not to overlook the political danger of ignoring the special needs of the less populous and smaller States.
UNIFICATION CHURCH
Notice of Motion
Mr KERIN (Werriwa)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House calls on the Government to investigate the business practices of the Unification Church with a view to determining whether or not it should be registered as a charity, having regard to the London court case of Mail v. Moonies, the decision of the Judge in that case and the statement of Lord Rawlinson that the Unification Church was 'a

COMMONWEALTH-STATE HOUSING AGREEMENT
Mr HOWE-My question is directed to the Minister for Housing and Construction. I seek clarification of his confusing answer to a question yesterday concerning the net value of Commonwealth payments to the States for housing. I ask the Minister: Is it a fact that total State repayments of advances and interest to the Commonwealth in 1980-81 amount to $200.3m? Is it also a fact that the base payment for the States and Territories for housing in 1981-82 and the subsequent four years is only $200m, of which $54m is for special groups in need? Is it a further fact that in 1981-82 New South Wales will receive $45.5m of loan funds for housing but will pay back $56m? Does that not mean that New South Wales will pay back more than it receives from the Commonwealth in 1981-82? Will the Minister confirm that next year Victoria and South Australia will also be paying back more than they receive for housing under the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement?
Mr McVEIGH-The answer to the first two questions is yes. As to the other questions, surely the honourable member can understand this simple fact of life: Since 1945 the Commonwealth Government has made available to the States funds which have been topped up by State funds and surpluses accruing to the States because of concessional rates of interest on which loans have been made available. Last year in Australia $630m was made available for housing. Net profit accruing to the States was $142m. Payments. to the Commonwealth are not made by the States; they are made by the people who pay rent and repay loans granted for home purchase. In reply to the last part of the question, I say that the funds available for next year will be decided in the total Budget context.
COMMONWEALTH GRANTS COMMISSION REPORTS
Mr HARRIS-My question is directed to the Prime Minister. When are the Commonwealth Grants Commission reports due? Has the Victorian Premier-elect asked for an extra meeting between the States and the Commonwealth to discuss those reports, and has such a meeting been agreed to?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-There has been some doubt about the precise date on which we

2980 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

will have available, not only to ourselves but also to the States, the Commonwealth Grants Commission report examining the relativities of Commonwealth payments to the respective States. As we are advised, it will be available some time in June. On present advice, we will probably have the report in time for people to look at it but not to examine it before the Premiers Conference on 19 June. I think it would probably be agreed that substantive decisions will not be able to be made at that meeting because, clearly, all State governments and the Commonwealth will want to examine the document very closely. At this point, nobody has any idea of the recommendations that might be contained in it, and whether or not they could pose particular complications for some States. As a result of that, Mr Thompson, the Premier-elect of Victoria, asked the Commonwealth whether it would be possible to schedule a special Premiers Conference to discuss these matters. I have told him that I think that is the only way to handle it and that such a conference will have to be held. We will need some flexibility about the date, but it would need to be some time during the winter.
PERMANENT BUILDING SOCIETY LOANS
Mr LES JOHNSON-I ask the Minister for Housing and Construction: Has the total value of housing loans provided by permanent building societies fallen from $91m in April 1980 to $57m in April this year? Has the number of building society loans fallen from 2,963 in April 1980 to 1,953 this year? Since permanent building societies provide one-third of all housing loans, does the Minister accept this decline as a serious deterioration in the availability of finance for private home buyers? Is this a major reason why home ownership has fallen to the lowest level for a decade?
Mr McVEIGH-The answer to the first and second parts of the question is yes. When we look at the amount of funds made available to permanent building societies, we see that again the figures are correct, and I congratulate the honourable gentleman for at least doing his homework. However, I question his figure for the percentage of funds to total housing made available by permanent building societies. From the information given to me at 2 o'clock, the figure was 28 per cent, not 33 per cent.
I indicate to the honourable member for Hughes that when we look at the totality of funds made available for housing we find that for the March quarter this year, compared with the March quarter last year, there was a slight drop of

3 per cent. However, we must remember that last year was a record year for loans made available to home owners-240,345--and of those people 106,000 were buying their first home.
On account of the responsible financial decisions made by my colleague the Treasurer, in December last year there was a return to the traditional lending and borrowing patterns in Australia. Because of a distortion in the money markets more money was made available in 1980 to permanent building societies than to banks. We have returned to the traditional ratio of 63 per cent for banks and 28 per cent for permanent building societies. We have to look at the total picture of finance made available for housing.
Again I question the accuracy of the honourable gentleman's figures. The total figures for home ownership in Australia show that this Government can claim a proud record. In 1949, 53 per cent of Australian people owned their own homes or were in the process of purchasing them. In August last year, from the most recent statistics made available by the Australian Bureau of Statistics, 71.9 per cent of Australian people owned their own homes. That is a record that this free enterprise Government can be proud of.
We are about home ownership for all Australian people. We do not subscribe to the proposition adopted by those who sit opposite. They should recall that one of their previous housing ministers said: 'We do not believe in home ownership. That will make a nation of capitalists'. I sat on the Opposition side of the chamber and listened to a former Minister for Housing say: 'We want to cut costs in Australian housing. We will make Australian people own smaller homes'. We do not subscribe to that proposition.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS DISPUTE Mr CADMAN--My question is addressed to the Minister for Communications. What is the current situation in regard to the Telecom Australia dispute? Are there any signs of an early settlement or will there be continuing reduction and disruption of services?
Mr SINCLAIR-Discussions are still continuing. Just before I came into the House, I endeavoured to determine what the prospects were for the breakdown of services. With respect to the international network, I understand that people trying to plug into the Sydney Overseas Telecommunications Commission network switch are finding it a little difficult getting through the trunk arrangements, but, with the exception of a few countries, the international subscriber dialling service is still functioning effectively. Where it is not

Questions Without Notice

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2981

operating, it is possible through reference to a trunk operator to obtain connection to most countries.
However, within Australia there has been a breakdown of a number of trunk systems and that is of major concern to the Government. The Government is very conscious that within the conciliation and arbitration procedures there is a fair and equitable opportunity for the representatives of the two unions to pursue their claims. It is totally opposed to the implementation of bans. A number of personnel have been stood down as a result.
The Government is obviously very anxious that services should be resumed at the earliest possible moment. However, it does not believe that in conditions where the service continues to deterioriate it can remain completely at arm's length from the dispute. Therefore, 1 have initiated a number of approaches to Telecom management to try to ascertain the exact state of play. I hope that out of the discussions before the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission it is possible for the dispute to be settled. If not, the Government will of course have to consider what measures it needs to take to ensure a resolution of the dispute even if those steps lead to having to close down Telecom.

building societies the interest rate increased from 8 per cent to 11 t per cent. How can the Opposition talk about an increase in interest rates? After five and a half years of responsible government interest rates are basically the same as they were when we took office and tried to get this nation back on the rails.
If we look at the control of interest rates we find that one of the problems in New South Wales is the New South Wales Government, which is not able to cope with financial responsibility. I remind those honourable members who sit opposite that by world standards interest rates for home loans in Australia are very low. I will fill in honourable members opposite on statistics from the rest of the world.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister is defending himself valiantly but he does not really need so much time. I ask him to draw his answer to a conclusion.
Mr McVEIGHInterest rates in the United Kingdom are 13 per cent, in the United States of America they are 15.5 per cent and in Canada they are 16.5 per cent. So Australia is not doing too badly by world standards. Our housing interest rates are amongst the lowest.

HOVSING LOAN INTEREST RATES
Mr VREN-Will the Minister for Housing and Construction agree that housing loan interest rates with banks and building societies are now at a record level? Is it a fact that because of the tight liquidity in the banks and building societies interest rates are under pressure to rise again? What action is the Government prepared to take to prevent the housing industry from suffering still further under its restrictive monetary policy?
Mr McVEIGH-Mr Speaker, firstly I crave the indulgence of the House for two brief seconds and thank honourable members for giving me an opportunity to reply to the scurrilous charges made by the Opposition in the debate on the Housing Assistance Bill last night, when it would not give me the opportunity to reply.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister is not entitled to refer to that debate. I will rule him out of order if he does so.

Finally, the honourable member [or Reid asked
what the movement in interest rates would be. r
let the honourable member know that he is not going to draw me into any debate on the likelihood of increased interest rates. One of the problems in containing interest rates in Australia is the enormous demand made on the available resources including household savings by the borrowing programs of State, local and semi-
government authorities in Australia. r hope that
those who sit opposite will ask their State Premiers, who will be coming to the Loan Council and the Premiers Conference later this month, to show a bit of the infectious enthusiasm for responsibility and financial control that this Government maintains in all its undertakings. If they did that they would at least be doing something for the housing aspirations of all Australian people.
SYDNEY (KINGSFORD-SMITH) AIRPORT: CURFEW

Mr McVEIGH-Mr Speaker, I accept your guidance and am grateful for it. In answer to the series of questions asked by the honourable member for Reid I will itemise what happened when the Opposition was on the Government side of the House. Interest rates for savings banks
loans increased from 7 per cent when the Opposition took office to II per cent. For permanent

Mr DOBIE-I refer the Minister for Transport to an article in today's Canberra Times wherein its aviation reporter has alleged that Trans-Australia Airlines has made an application to the Minister's Department to have the curfew at Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport lifted to allow
more efficient use of T AA 's about to be introduced Airbus aircraft. Is the Minister in a

2982 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Questions Without Notlce

position to assure the House that-should such an application from TAA exist-no decision has been made, nor any indication given, to advantage TAA while totally disadvantaging the people who live within the environs of Sydney (Kingsford Smith) Airport?
Mr HUNT-The maintenance of the curfew at Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport has been a policy of this Government for some considerable time. Any application by TAA for an easing of the curfew would be a matter of policy consideration. I can assure the honourable member that no decision has been taken and no decision will be taken without giving very serious consideration to the people living in the region of Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS DISPUTE Mrs KELLY-Is the Minister for Communications aware of the survey undertaken by Telecom Australia management and the Australian Telecommunications Employees Association of comparably qualified tradesmen in various areas of public employment and accepted by Telecom management as a representative survey? Does the Minister agree that the survey shows Telecom employees as being amongst the very lowest paid of those employed by the 25 employers in the survey and that, for instance, tradesmen employed by the South East Queensland Electricity Board are paid 16 per cent or $34 a week more than tradesmen with the same qualifications employed by Telecom? Does the Minister agree with the management of Telecom that this is not an acceptable position for Telecom and its employees in this industry which is characterised by high technology and unquestioned financial capacity and which is of critical importance to the Australian community?
Mr SINCLAIR-J am very indebted to the honourable member for Canberra for having demonstrated how generous the tax reimbursementarrangements entered into by this Government have been to the State governments. Indeed, it is true that particularly the New South Wales Government, but to a degree the Victorian Government, for example through the Victorian power authority, and the other State governments have entered into arrangements outside the wage indexation guidelines which have created enormous problems for the 80 per cent of employees who are employed under the private sector in this nation. The honourable lady referred to a specific questionnaire relating to a number of parallel wages paid within selected areas of Public Service employment. Had that survey ranged across the whole breadth of employment, taking into

account private sector as well as public sector employers, she would find that there are many areas in the private sector where the wage disparity with Telecom looms in favour of the Telecom employees. The concern we have is for the whole nation and not just for those who work within the public sector.
KING'S HALL: REMOVAL OF DEMONSTJUTORS
Mr COLEMAN-My question is directed to the Minister for Administrative Services as the Minister responsible for the Australian Federal Police. Will he inform the House whether the police used brutality in removing demonstrators from King's Hall yesterday afternoon?
Mr NEWMAN--I do not think I have to remind all honourable members of the very unruly and, I must say, unnecessary demonstration that took place at the entrance to Parliament House yesterday. To answer directly the honourable member's question, let me say that I believe that the police acted with considerable restraint in the face of a very vigorous, hostile crowd that physically set out to attack the police. I reject utterly some allegations that have been made by members and senators of the Opposition that the police acted brutally or with undue hostility to the crowd. I have taken the trouble to'--
Mr Barry Jones-Undue hostility?
Mr NEWMAN--Without any hostility to the crowd. I make no qualification at all. I have taken the trouble to look at some of the video tapes of the incident. I have spoken to reporters who were there. They watched the police ask the demonstrators to leave King's Hall and then physically try to remove them.
Those tapes show many incidents that demonstrate what I was saying about the hostile nature of that crowd. One policeman was having his hair pulled, and was being pushed and pulled headlong down the steps of Parliament House. If they had got him there, there would have been a possibility of quite serious injury. A young woman police officer was being punched in the chest and crushed against the doors of Parliament House by the crowd.
The police were acting under the orders of their superior officer on this occasion. They were asked to act with physical restraint. They were acting under the principles of common law. I say once again that I reject the allegations made by some honourable members opposite about the actions of the police. I go further, and commend the police for the most considerate way in which they

Questions Without Notice

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2983

dealt with these people under undue provocation which mean~ physical injury.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS DISPUTE
Mr HAWKE-My question is directed to the Minister for Communications. Firstly, did the Acting Chairman of Telecom Australia, Mr May, write to the Minister on 16 April seeking approval to negotiate with the Australian Telecommunications Employees Association in respect of the union's wage claims? Secondly, is it a fact that by the time the matter was called on before Commissioner Clarkson on25 May Telecom management had received no reply from the Minister? Thirdly, I ask whether it is a fact that in these circumstances Telecom, having acknowledged that Telecom employees have a legitimate claim for a significant wage increase, put on record before the Commissioner the following words:
The recent decision of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission on wage indexation guidelines does not provide a ready basis for advancing such a claim.
Finally, as Telecom management and the unions believe that a significant wage increase should be negotiated and as they, together with the arbitration commissioner, believe that this cannot be achieved appropriately under the guidelines, why does the Minister persist in a course of action which is against the public interest and which Telecom management believes is against the interests of Telecom?
Mr SINCLAIR-The answer to the first part of the honourable gentleman's question is yes. The answer to the second part in respect of contact with the Acting Chairman of Telecom is that verbal discussions were held with both the Acting Chairman and members of the executive of Telecom regarding the details of the basis on which negotiations could proceed. Thirdly, with respect to the whole of the basis of public interest which the honourable gentleman seeks to assert, I point out to him, as I did in answer to the honourable member for Canberra, that it is imperative that the interests of the whole Australian community be taken into account.
In this present dispute, while there was a review analysing comparable wage levels between members of some sectors of the Public Service and Telecom, that review did not embrace the private sector. It did not embrace wage levels paid to people in similar wage and salary classifications in areas where people were called on to do similar jobs and where the wage levels do not show the wage disparity which appears in the review undertaken by Telecom and its employees. Fourthly, it is true that within the conciliation and arbitration system there is a capacity to refer to an anomalies

procedure through which there is an ability for the genuine public interest and the interests of the employees of Telecom to be properly taken into account. It is in that forum that the Governm mt believes wage negotiations should occur and it is within that forum that the Government has been encouraging both Telecom and its employees to resolve the present dispute.
SHEEP SHEARING
Mr FISHER-The Minister for Science' and Technology would be aware that a search for a safe, reliable and effective chemical for the harvesting of wool has been carried on throughout the world for decades, particularly in the United States of America and the Soviet Union. Is the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation involved in such research into finding an alternative to the manual shearing of sheep? If so, what progress has been made?
Mr THOMSON-The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation has been engaged in research on biological defleecing for some time. This has been sponsored by the Australian Wool Corporation. It has been a most interesting and successful piece of research so far. The research has been aimed at finding a substance which, when injected, will cause a break in the fleece. The fleece can then be pulled off either manually or automatically.
Mr Young-Round the paddock.
Mr THOMSON-I hope the honourable member for Port Adelaide will be interested in this great example of Australian science.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Port Adelaide will remain silent. The Minister will proceed with his answer and ignore the interjection from the honourable member for Port Adelaide.
Mr THOMSON-CSIRO has discovered a protein which causes shedding of the fleece in about 48 hours. The protein is a substance called epidermal growth factor which, very fortunately, occurs naturally in body tissues in small quantities. The advantage of this natural occurrence is that there is unlikely to be any drug residue problems or harmful side effects. The next step in this research is field evaluation and development of management techniques which will take some time. I hope that honourable members will join me in congratulating CSIRO on what appears to be a breakthrough in what has been world-wide research.

2984 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

UNITED STATES: NUCLEAR WEAPONS Mr SCOTT-My question is addressed to the
Prime Minister. I refer to extensive reports that the United States has introduced nuclear weapons to Japan which is contrary to law and without informing or consulting the Japanese Government which is contrary to an oral agreement to consult in advance. I also refer to the official response by the United States to questions on this issue which are that it neither confirms nor denies the presence of nuclear weapons in any circumstances. Has this issue been discussed with the United States Administration? What assurances has the Prime Minister been given that similar non-binding oral undertakings given to Australia in relation to B52s will not also be evaded?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Japanese and United States relations have not been discussed between Australia and the United States because we happen not to be responsible for the policies of Japan or responsible for relations between Japan and the United States. We are responsible for relations between Australia and the United States. In matters of concern and interest to this Government and to the Australian people I have no doubt that the United States's word can be relied on.
FRENCH NUCLEAR TESTING Mr SHIPTON-Has the Minister for Foreign Affairs seen reports that the French Government intends to continue underground nuclear testing in the Pacific? Is this true? Does the Australian Government agree with the French Government policy? Does this mean that French policy in the Pacific has not changed under the new President of that country? Finally, will countries in the South Pacific be concerned?
Mr STREET-I have seen a statement attributed to sources in the French ministry of defence which appears to indicate that the French Government does plan to resume underground nuclear testing in the South Pacific. If this in fact happens, I greatly regret it. It would be all the more disappointing coming so soon after an announcement made in Paris a few days ago, on 29 May, that testing would be suspended pending a review of the French nuclear weapons program. The' Australian Government has consistently made clear its opposition to France's nuclear testing program in the South Pacific. Of course, we have devoted considerable efforts in working actively for a ban on the testing of all nuclear weapons.

COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING
Mr ARMITAGE-I refer the Prime Minister to his remarks in the House last week in which he strongly defended his decision to send five Ministers and six back benchers to deliver personal invitations to 40 Commonwealth political leaders to attend the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne in September. I ask: Has the Prime Minister's attention been drawn to wide editorial criticism of the Government's decision in the Australian Press? In particular, has he noted the comments in an editorial in today's Sydney Morning Herald which describes the decision as an affront and the Prime Minister's public explanation of it as eyewash? Finally, in view of the Government's professed determination to impose austerity in government spending, will the Prime Minister now abandon his expensive and unnecessary scheme and leave the matters of conference invitations and agenda discussions to the Commonwealth Secretariat and our own diplomatic representatives in the various countries?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I have advised the House on more than one occasion of the reasons for the Government's decisions. Those decisions stand. But, for the benefit of the honourable gentleman, let me repeat the arguments and the reasons. Over the last decade when the Canadian Government or the United Kingdom Government was responsible for holding the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting it adopted the practice of sending people to some Commonwealth countries for the very reasons that we have adopted-to seek the views of other countries about the nature of the agenda, the sensitive issues that might have to be handled and what progress the Commonwealth can make in contributing to a resolution of significant issues. The one difference on this occasion is that instead of sending emissaries to some Commonwealth countries-a practice which we believe was not in the best interests of the unity of the Commonwealth, in which all members, large and small, have a significant part to play-we are sending people to all Commonwealth countries. This is part of the process of building into the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting an agenda which has had an input from all Heads of Government from all Commonwealth countries, wherever they may be.
Earlier, I advised the House that at the end of July I will be having discussions in the United Kingdom with the Secretary-General, Mr Ramphal, who very strongly supports this process of consultation before the conference begins. On this basis the program will continue. I do not think

Questions Without Notice

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2985

the honourable gentleman has really shown much think most of us in this place would be appalled to

appreciation of or concern for the importance see applied to the ballot boxes used for the elec-

with which many people regard the Commontion of members of this place.

wealth and its relevance to modern day issues.

There is only one other thing I would like to

EXXON CORPORATION

say. Austerity in government does not mean, and Mr HAYDEN-My question is directed to the

never has meant, that in all things we spend less or Minister representing the Minister for National

are necessarily restrained in expenditure. In Development and Energy. Has the Minister's

programs for the disabled and disadvantaged attention been drawn to the recently released

people within the community the expenditure of financial report of the Exxon Corporation? Did

this Government is almost double that of the prehe note that Exxon's after tax profit per barrel of

vious Labor Administration. That is because we oil produced in Australia, as stated in the report,

give it a very high place on our list of priorities. is higher than Exxon's profit on oil produced in

We are able to do that only by being restrained in the United States and Canada, and the average

those matters which are of less importance. A for all foreign operations? Is he also aware that

Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, Exxon's profits on oil refining and marketing out-

which will take place in Australia maybe once in side the United States are almost four times those

50 or 60 years, is something which this Governin its United States operations? Will the Minister

ment and, I believe, much of the Australian comacknowledge that his Government's generous

munity will regard as being something of imtreatment of the Esso company has been one of

portance, even if the honourable gentleman does the main factors in Exxon's world-wide massive

not.

profits? Will he acknowledge that his Govern-

ment's oil pricing policy and its failure to regulate

TELECOMMUNICATIONS DISPUTE

properly downstream oil industry activities have

Mr TUCKEY-I address my question to the Minister for Communications. Is it a fact that a ballot conducted by the Telecom Australia unions to authorise the present industrial action was shown on television? Did the television camera clearly show that one ballot box was marked in large letters with the word 'Yes' and the other was

made Australia one of the most lucrative targets for operations of foreign oil companies? Finally, will he have the activities of Esso and other foreign oil companies operating in Australia immediately investigated and appropriate policies introduced promptly to stop this rip-off of the Australian public?

marked in large letters with the word 'No' and that voters were obliged publicly to indicate their intentions?

Mr ANTHONY-First of all, I have not seen the report to which the Leader of the Opposition referred. I do want to say how grateful Australia is

Mr SINCLAIR-One of the features of a comthat the Exxon Corporation-or Esso, its Aus-

munist society which most of us are' completely tralian subsidiary-joined the Broken Hill Pro-

appalled to see is the extent to which authorities prietary Co. Ltd in Australia and managed to dis-

generally try to direct those who live within their cover oil in Bass Strait, enabling Australia to

countries to cast their votes in a particular direcbecome approximately 70 per cent self-sufficient.

tion. I think one of the features not to be commended in current union practice where ballots are called fods the apparent adoption of a some-

Mr Jacobi-That is not so. Weeks found the oil in Bass Strait. Don't talk nonsense.

what similar tactic. Not only is it to be deplored that the ballot boxes are so identified, but also that television cameras were played on the indi-

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Hawker will remain silent.

viduals casting their votes and that each individMr ANTHONY-Let us accept that it was a

ual was required to go out and put his vote in the joint effort with the technology of Esso and

box in front of his colleagues. Even where a vote is Exxon which enabled that discovery to take

taken not through the ballot box but through a place, and that the development of the field has

show of hands, one sometimes doubts the extent been with Exxon technology. That has been of

to which a person holding a genuine and sincere enormous advantage to this country, to our econ-

view which might be contrary to the view of the omy and to our general well-being. Under the

majority is prepared to get up and express it. I arrangements that were made some years ago it

think it is to be regretted, therefore, that the cirwas decided that the price that Exxon would

cumstances of the present dispute have originated achieve, along with BHP, on old wells in Bass

in a ballot which has taken place in somewhat Strait would slowly progress up to 50 per cent of

dubious circumstances and in a manner which I the world parity price. That is the return that

2986 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Questions Without Notice

BHP and Esso now get from oil from those old fields.
Opposition members interjecting Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable members for Melbourne, Hawker, Hotham and Hindmarsh have interjected continually throughout Question Time. I ask all four honourable members to remain silent; otherwise I will have to deal with them. Mr ANTHONY-The oil from Bass Strait comes from what are known as old wells and new wells. I mentioned that the old wells attract 50 per cent of the world parity price. Any new fields, developed since September 1975, attract the world parity price. The previous Labor Government decided that those new wells would attract the world parity price, so it ill becomes the Leader of the Opposition now to complain of the returns that those companies might be getting for oil because it is partly Labor's policy that is giving them that return.
FARM OVERDRAFTS Mr HICKS-I ask the Treasurer whetper, in view of the very high interest rates operating for overdrafts and farm loans, now in the vicinity of 16 per cent, he will as a matter of urgency consult the New South Wales Government to see whether it will immediately lift or completely eliminate the iniquitous 1t per cent levy it places on high interest rate loans. Mr HOWARD-The loan instrument duty which is imposed by the New South Wales Government has been in operation in that State for a number of years. It is a revenue measure which I think is duplicated in most, if not all, the other States of Australia. Whilst I share very much the concern of the honourable member for Riverina about the level of interest rates charged on overdrafts around Australia, and of course noting his particular interest in the rural communities of Australia, I would have thought that the New South Wales Government could make a more constructive contribution towards moderating interest rates, not only in that State but also throughout the rest of Australia-a moderation that might not involve the forgoing of a significant source of revenue for that State. I refer in particular to the capacity of the New South Wales Government to moderate significantly the borrowing appetite of its authorities and to cooperate with the Commonwealth Government in bringing about a sustainable and proper reduction in the size of the total public sector borrowing requirement.

TAXATION: MINERS' HOUSING Mr HUMPHREYS-My question, which I direct to the Treasurer, refers to the crippling strikes on the central Queensland coal fields in 1978 and again last year in response to the Government's decision to tax the housing provided to miners. Does the Treasurer recall that in order to settle this dispute he promised in a statement on 13 October last year to amend the Income Tax Act so that only one-tenth of the market rental value of the miners' accommodation would be subject to tax? Does the Treasurer also recall saying in his statement that until the law was changed the miners would continue to be assessed on the basis of the existing law? Does the Treasurer intend to introduce these promised amendments into the Parliament this session? If not, does this mean that if the law is 110t changed by 30 June the Commissioner of Taxation will continue to tax the Queensland miners on the value of their housing, thus precipitating another wasteful and prolonged dispute on the coal fields? Mr HOWARD-I recall both that strike and the terms of settlement and the statement that I made in October oflast year. Mr Dawkins-Which one? Mr HOWARD-The one to which the honourable member's colleaguereferred. The legislation will not be introduced during this session. I can inform the honourable gentleman that I had already anticipated the possibility of this question arising. I have discussed the matter with the Commissioner of Taxation, who is responsible for the administration of the Act. On the basis of that discussion, I can say to the honourable gentleman that it is. plainly unthinkable that the law would be administered in a way contrary to the clearly stated intention and understandings embodied in that statement in October.
MOTOR VEHICLES: LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS
Mr GOODLUCK-Is the Deputy Prime Minister aware that motor vehicles can and do run economically and efficiently on liquefied petroleum gas? In view of the stated objective of the Government to encourage alternatives to the petrol-driven motor vehicle, will the Government consider, firstly, converting all Commonwealth Government vehicles to LPG; seoondly, introducing incentives to local motor vehicle manufacturers to offer as an option a dual-powered vehicle-petrol and LPG; thirdly,. calling for an inquiry into the reasons why the efficient Datsun LPG-only vehicle failed and was condemnedso

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2987

unfairly in the market place; and fourthly, encouraging more LPG filling stations throughout Australia, supported by constructive publicity?
Mr ANTHONY-I am not a salesman for Datsun; nor can I explain why that company's liquefied petroleum gas conversion car was not a success. However, I can make some inquiries and advise the honourable member. Certainly it is the Government's policy to encourage LPG as an alternative type of fuel. We have been encouraging people to convert. We have been using Commonwealth vehicles as an example. I know that in some of the capital cities a considerable number of vehicles in the Commonwealth fleet have been converted to LPG. I think all these vehicles are capable of running on either LPG or gasolene. One of the encouraging features about LPG is the recently reduced international price. I note that the price from Saudi Arabia and some of the other Gulf states has decreased by about $50 a tonne by the recent announcements at the meeting of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries. If this decrease reflects on to the Australian market it means that LPG prices will come down. Certainly, that in itself ought to be an added encouragement for people to convert to LPG.
BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE
The following Bills were returned from the Senate without amendment or requests:
Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Bill 1981. Customs Amendment (Securities) BiJl1981. Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Bill 1981. Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill 1981. Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Bill 1981. Minerals (Submerged Lands) Bill 1981. Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Bill 1981. Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Bill 1981. Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Bill 1981. Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Bill 1981. Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration .Fees) Bill 1981.
SINAI PEACEKEEPING FORCE
Discussion ofMatter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion,
n~mely:
The inability of the Australian Defence Forces to respond to the open ended commitment to a Sinai force and at the same time develop basic Australian defence requirements.

I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (3.13)-It is not my intention to deal with the foreign policy or political implications of the commitment of an Australian defence force outside Australia. My concern is the effect that such commitments have on the Defence Force, the development of Australian defence policy and the directions of planning for the defence of Australia which, to say the least, is currently inadequate and is rendered even more inadequate by ad hoc commitments which do not necessarily reflect the Government's planning for the Defence Force, nor the capacity of the Defence Force to respond in such instances.
It is known that during 1978-79, when a force was requested to serve in the proposed United Nations force in Namibia, the Defence Committee and the Defence Force leaders made it clear to the Government that the capacity to provide a force of the size and type which was being suggested did not exist. Ultimately, a force of 250 non-combatants was agreed upon, with 50 security troops to protect that force. If accepted now, this commitment would place a serious strain on the capabilities of the Australian Army. This commitment was strongly argued against, because of its effects on the Defence Force, by senior defence personnel and members of the Australian Defence Committee. The current offer is not in response to a United Nations commitment and, according to correspondence exchanged between the Australian Government and the United States recently, it does not reflect a necessity. The Government has made it clear in statements that it believes the capacity to supervise the withdrawal in the Sinai exists within the two powers party to the agreement, which are not at this stage seen to be under any threat, or likely to be under any threat from a power other than one of those in agreement to the withdrawal. The force proposed is not a United Nations force, as was suggested. It is to be a United States formed multinational force made up of unknown components. Australia has been requested to make a commitment to provide forces for two years, or, as would be more acceptable to the United States, three years. The minimum period is two years. The countries acceptable to the two parties and of whom a request has so far been made are Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Canada, Equador, Fiji, Italy, the Netherlands, Singapore, Mexico, Nepal, New Zealand and Uruguay. A substantial number of those countries will not accede to the request

2988 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

unless some form of pressure is applied or unless to remove a battalion or a substantive part of a

they are offered incentives which would make it battalion from Townsville would leave not even a

difficult for them to reject the United States skeleton force to provide the reinforcements

request.

which must be ready to replace the Middle East

These countries do not constitute substantive
military powers. The United States has indicated
it is prepared to provide up to half of the force requirements. One country of that number is
expected to provide a force equivalent to battalion size-in this case a truncated battalion of

force on a reasonably regular basis. We are looking at a two-year to three-year commitment. In the documents, as the Minister would surely be aware, there is a request from the United States for the option of a further commitment beyond
the three-year period.

between 500 and 600 men. It is suggested that the The effect on the Australian Defence Force

force be lightly armed, which places it in the would be to remove the Army's potential for op-

category of a token commitment, not a real comerational activities within its own region and to

mitment, and in a situation where if any hostilities take away its capacity for training. During the

of any description break out in the area the force period of our commitment we could not even pro-

will be totany incapable of self-defence. The force vide an adequate force to participate in exercises

will be going into an area where technicany milisuch as Kangaroo II or III, or Kangaroo IV, which

tary capabilities are of the highest levels in the is now coming up. We could not provide ad-

world. It is a fact that the highest per capita levels equately the force which would be expected of us

of military expenditure in the world are now if the Namibia offer, which has been made by

taking place in that region. It is also true to say Australia, is taken up. We would be placing at

that any force which goes into that area goes into serious risk our relations with a number of Arab

a region of uncertainty and hostility and cannot countries which are hostile to any force which is

be guaranteed secure, peaceful tenure during its United States based going into the Middle East.

period of service-and peace is the only thing for which it will be armed.

The matter which is before us for discussion and decision today concerns what the planning for

Mr Harris-You want 100 per cent and use of the Australian defence forces is all

assurances.

about. In the priorities the Government has set,

Mr SCHOLES-It would be nice to have some assurance. I do not expect the honourable
member to have any serious regard for the defence of Australia. An he is interested in is the
political mileage he might make out of the com-
mitment of Australian forces but not the risk undertaken by them. The serious question that must be asked--

and in statements which have been presented by members of the Department of Defence to the
Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence, it is clearly indicated that commitment to United
Nations forces, whilst an important objective of
defence policy, is not a significant priority in the planning of the Defence Force. As far as the Army is concerned, no attempt has been made
over the past five years to equip the Army for any

Mr Newman-If you want to be rude about form of combat whatsoever. Its priority is nil in

people do not be rude about him. He has done the equipment purchasing programs of the

more than you will ever do.

Government. As a result of decisions taken on

Mr SCHOLES-I am not questioning what the honourable member has done. I am saying
that in this Parliament the Government is not taking a serious position on the defence of
Australia or the security of Australian forces which the Government is prepared to commit for

major equipment items and deferment of commit-
ments made in 1976, the Defence Force commitments for the next several years are almost exclusively in the area of provision of major equipment items for the Air Force and, subsequently, the
Navy.

purely base political reasons. If Australia provides The major equipment purchases for the Army

a force approaching battalion strength, which in the past four years have been in the nature of

would be expected from Australia if it is to make a trucks, not armaments. There is an argument at

significant contribution rather than a token conthe moment about whether the Rapier missiles

tribution, one of the task forces in Australia will which the Army had acquired for its use will, in

be rendered almost totany inoperative. It is fact, be under Army control or will be transferred

reasonable to expect that the members of the to the Air Force. The Air Force is certainly mak-

force will be taken from the operational bating a bid. The Government's own advisers have

talions at Townsville, although they could be expressed serious concern at this type of oper-

taken from other areas where a different type of ation. Those advisers include the most senior

training and preparation is currently in hand. But advisers in the defence area. The Government is

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2989

well aware of this situation. It is also true to say, to the personnel involved, who will not be armed

and I repeat, that the Government's foreign polto cope with the situation in the area. If we com-

icy advisers have advised the United States that mit a serviceman to an area I believe we have an

they are not happy with the request for this comobligation to ensure that he has both the protec-

mitment, but they feel an obligation to meet it. It tion and the military equipment which is compar-

would serve Australia's defence interests best if able, competent and capable of being effectively

the Government determined what it expects its utilised in the area. It would be ludicrous in this

defence forces to be able to do because within day and age to suggest that we would send horse

their budget they cannot carry out a multi-role cavalry into a modern battle, but with the Middle

function. The Government certainly has not East situation the relevance of the armaments

equipped, or sought to equip, the Army for available to the Australian Army is not greatly

foreign policy extension operations such as this. different from that. If any form of hostilities in-

That is what we are talking about.

volving the Australian forces broke out in that

There is certainly no real need, other than the demands of one of the parties concerned, for a force to go into the Sinai. The force would not be capable, if formulated even in the maximum form requested, of providing any form of protection should any hostilities break out. It is not an isolated area as is generally accepted. It is not an area where hostilities are currently taking place.

area they would be totally incapable of defending themselves with what is available and what could be made available in existing circumstances. It is all right to say 'a light force in a peaceful operation'. Anyone who is prepared to predict that the Middle East will remain peaceful for any period, let alone the next three years, is prepared to take risks with other people's lives.

But it is in close proximity to those areas in the Middle East where conflict is at present taking place. The force could, by certain parties in that area, be seen to be performing a role of releasing forces of one party to go into operational areas on another border.
The Australian Defence Force is being treated in a cavalier manner. Firstly the Government's determinations suggest that the Australian Army should have the last priority in defence reequipment programs, especially in armaments. It

The Opposition believes that a commitment to this type of force, irrespective of the political consequences or the political motivations, will involve a diminution of the capacity of the Australian defence forces to carry out the role which should be their prime objective, that is, the preparation and carrying out of tasks associated with ensuring the security of Australia. This is a commitment by the Government to a reduction in that capacity.

then makes commitments for operations of the Australian Army which will make impossible the training and development programs which the Government has announced for the Army, limited as those may be. Certainly, the removal of a substantial number of troops from the Townsville area or from the training areas at Ingleburn in New South Wales will render whichever task force is involved practically inoperable because of the lack of available manpower. Their training programs will be disrupted to an extremely high degree over a long period. If the Namibia proposition is also taken up the Australian Defence Force will be rendered impotent because the manpower commitments to foreign policy objectives of the Government rather than the defence of Australia will be sllch that the defence forces, because of the limitations of finance and other limitations which have been placed on them, will be rendered incapable of providing a capacity for the defence of Australia which is desirable and which is, at least, announced Government policy, although it is not terribly often applied.

Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services and Acting Minister for Defence) (3.27)-1 begin by saying that I am surprised that the Opposition raised this subject as a matter of public importance. The suggestion that the Australian Defence Force may not be capable of making the kind of commitment that the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) has been talking about is sheer nonsense. In fact, it is absolutely fundamental to our force structure planning that we do have the capability to respond to a task of this nature. Before I expand on that, 1 think it is necessary to make a few points clear. By implication, the honourable member for Corio made some assertions which are simply not correct. The position was made quite clear by my colleague the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) on 26 May, when he made his statement on the Sinai peacekeeping force. We have received no request for this commitment. I repeat that: We have received no formal request for this commitment. Obviously it has been admitted that there is suggestion that we might receive a request, and

This proposal could also lead to much more that has not been in any way concealed from this

serious problems for Australia, apart from the risk Parliament.

2990 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

The second point that has to be made is that beAustralia; the joint forces exercises which he men-

fore we agree to the request, when it comes, we tioned and which have been planned with allies

have to have a great deal of information before us and neighbours within our region; the major exer-

about what the role and size of this force may be, cise of our troops of the defence forces planned

what other forces it will co-operate with, and so for this year, Kangaroo 81; the capital equipment

on. There is absolutely no way that the Governprogram already laid down in Defence Force

ment will make the commitment, when the replanning; and the development of Defence Force

quest comes, unless we are in possession of all the facilities in Australia would not be affected.

proper information that would be required for our defence advisers and, of course, the Government to make a proper decision on the request. I make that absolutely clear. Therefore, it is folly for the Opposition to speculate on the level of the force that may be committed if the decision is finally made along that line. I stress again that no request has been made. We would need to have a lot of information before we met the request. Therefore, it is wrong to start speCUlating on what size of force may be involved.

Mr Scholes-That is not what the Defence people are saying.
Mr NEWMAN-I made a very precise statement. The Government stands by that statement that I have just made. In fact, arising out of those very firm precise statements that I have made, and I might say, on the precise advice of our advisers, this commitment therefore adds up to this: If we had to make a commitment of the force predicated by the Opposition, that is, a battalion, in fact, far from disrupting the defence forces, it

I wish to make one other point before I come would be a demonstration of the degree of pre-

back to the assertions made by the Opposition paredness that we have now in the forces. Not

speaker, the honourable member for Corio. He only could we meet this role but also we could

mentioned the reaction of Arab countries. That is meet all the tasks and the activities previously

one of the questions that we are seeking to find planned and which I have just set out. In fact, this

out about, to establish, to analyse. I think that has commitment would test our ability to make this

been made clear by the Minister for Foreign kind of deployment, and not only to make the de-

Affairs on several occasions. In all, far from treatployment but also to support it properly from

ing this proposition that may come to us in a cavaAustralia. It is the very kind of training, if it is put lier fashion, the Government makes it clear that it in that context, that will benefit the Defence

will take the matter extremely seriously. It will Force from time to time.

assess the information that it receives very carefully. Then it will make a decision. That is far from making a cavalier statement.

The deployment of an infantry battalion, as the Opposition suggested, would be an illustration of our ability to get our force there and, once we got

Let me come back to the technical part of the it to the Sinai, to support it. My colleague, the

debate. I said that it is fundamental to our force honourable member for Higgins (Mr Shipton),

structure planning that we have a capability to rewill talk about the methods that we would use to

spond to this type of operation. Let us take as an get it there. That will demonstrate the ability to

example the force predicated by the Opposition move our forces out of Australia and deploy them

spokesman; that is, a battalion. Let us say that the to operational areas. He will be talking about our

request is for a battalion and let us say that we capacity with our 707s, C130s, HMAS Tobruk,

responded to that request. I want to stress again HMAS Jervis Bay and all the rest. I make the

that I am simply speculating. I think it is an point again so that everybody will hear it loudly

interesting point to take the example of a batand clearly: The support of an infantry battalion

talion deployment because then we can see how to the Sinai as an example is within our present

correct or incorrect the Opposition is in describing capabilities. Of course, it would not operate

what effect that would have on the Defence independently. It would have to be part of a much

Force. The honourable member made several asbigger multinational peacekeeping force. Perhaps

sertions about our request to take part in the I could take time to answer the point that the Op-

United Nations Transition Assistance Group position spokesman was making about that force.

force in Namibia and about training. Let me deal He tried to suggest that there is already a force in

with those precisely. First of all, the deployment being and countries have suggested that they will

of a battalion would not affect the following: The go and that it will be on that basis that we will

availability in Australia of the operational deployagree to the deployment. Again, I make it very

ment force, the ODF; the availability of the enginclear that before we would make the com-

eering unit set aside for possible use in the United mitment, one of the vital pieces of information

Nations operation in Namibia; the force specially that we would need to know would be what coun-

trained to meet the anti-terrorist operations in tries we would be co-operating with and what

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2991

countries would be subscribing to the force, what Mr Scholes-You are being childish.

their capabilities would be and so on.

Mr NEWMAN-I am not being childish at all.

The point that I think the Opposition is trying to make is that somehow the Army has been left out in the force development; that it is an unbalanced development. Let us look at what the Army is doing. The Army is now preparing, plan-

Mr Scholes-We are quoting from the evidence which Defence advisers have given before parliamentary committees. That is what we are quoting. Ifthey are telling lies, say so.

ning and testing its ability to meet a number of Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The

commitments. For example, I have already menhonourable member will not use unparliamentary

tioned the anti-terrorist plan that has been put in language. He will remain silent.

place. I think it is now common knowledge that the Special Air Service regiment is training to have a capability to meet the plan. If we are unfortunate enough to have to bear the brunt of an

Mr Scholes-He has made personal reflections which he is not entitled to make. He doesn't know what he is talking about, that is his trouble.

international-type terrorist activity such as we Mr NEWMAN-I am not making any per-

have seen occur around the world where terrorists sonal reflections at all. I am merely taking up the

such as diplomats take hostages in our country false accusations that have been made here today.

then of course,although it would be principally a If they reflect on the honourable member person-

State ot' police action to solve the problem, the deally, so be it. I am only taking up the points that he

fence forces have the capability to back up that is purporting to make in this debate. There are

police effort if it were requested. So the ability of two other elements that I would like to reaffirm.

the SAS which principally would meet that reAnother question raised was in relation to the

quest for additional defence support has been nature of the Army and its training to meet a

trained to a high capability to assist the police in range of contingencies. Although it is not certain

such an action. Those who have been fortunate that finally the Army would end up with a force of

enough to see the high degree of capability this nature, it has to be accepted that it is training

already reached by the SAS, can only describe it to meet a number of contingencies with its bat-

as a superb level of training. I suggest, although talions. Work is being done, for example, to pro-

fortunately, it has never been tested in real battle, duce a mechanised infantry battalion that would

it would meet any of the standards that have been be able to range and operate in a number of

set by other such forces around the world. That is environments. Likewise, we have just seen an ex-

one example of a principal support element of the ercise conducted in Tasmania, quite successfully,

Defence Force.

where a force was deployed from the Royal Aus-

I have already mentioned the fact that if a battalion, as has been predicted by the Opposition, were deployed, it would not affect the ODF. It simply would not affect it. I am assured by our advisers that our ability to meet contingency plans from that force is not impeded at all.

tralian Air Force base in Townsville into Tasmania. It landed by parachute and conducted the exercise which was very successful and which demonstrated the flexibility of the deployment of a battalion in yet another role. I use these examples to show how the Army is training to meet a range of contingencies and a range of oper-

Mr Scholes-That is not what they are saying ations. That hardly sounds like an Army that

in their documents.

somehow has not the wherewithall to meet this

Mr NEWMAN-I do not care what sort of documents the honourable member has. I am giving him the facts. On many occasions, in this

training requirement and to meet new roles. We all know that the roles that the Army has to meet go across a wide spectrum.

place, we find the Opposition quoting from I summarise what I have been saying. Using the

unnameq documents or documents that it picks illustration given by the Opposition, I have tried

out of rubbish tins and so on and it then asserts to to demonstrate that if we had to deploy-I only

the Australian people that these are facts. say 'if'-an infantry battalion the Defence Force

Honourable members opposite do not do this would be more than capable of meeting that de-

nation any good by doing that. Instead of supportmand. At the same time it would be capable of

ing the efforts being made by the defence forces meeting without any detriment to it at all not only

and giving the nation some confidence in the its continued planned force development but also

training, ability and standards of our defence other contingencies for which it has been pre-

forces, they go a long way to undermining that pared. The deployment would not in any way im-

confidence which is necessary in our nation. It pair the Government's fundamental plans for the

does them no credit.

continued development of the Defence Force.

2992 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

Mr MORRISON (St George) (3.41)-1 was interested to note in the comments made by the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman), who at the moment is Acting Minister for Defence, a backpedalling on the commitment for a force to the Sinai. For the first time he has introduced a number of very serious qualifications. He certainly does not reflect the enthusiasm shown by his colleagues, the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) and the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). 1 believe that this serves to underline that the defence forces are not enamoured of the prospect of a deployment to the Sinai force. That very concept in the manner in which it has been presented, particularly by the Minister for Foreign Affairs, runs counter to the present planning and the philosophy of Australia's defence.
Let me take up one very important point which is reflected in the matter of public importance before the House. The commitment to a Sinai force is an open-ended commitment. I use these terms advisedly. The Minister for Foreign Affairs in his statement said that it would be difficult for the Australian Government to consider an openended commitment but, throughout the speech that he made to this House, he sought to convey the impression that this was only of a temporary nature.
Let us look at the realities. There is no cutoff date or fixed term in the Camp David Accords for the force. The commitment is indefinite. According to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the commitment will be maintained as long as either party believes it to be necessary. It could go on for years. I wish to make it very clear that the terms for the presence of a force in the Sinai are indisputably open-handed.
What then would be the commitment for the individual participants? What would be Australia's commitment? Again, let us look at the realities. We all know that there is a widespread and understandable reluctance by countries throughout the world to get involved. The responsibility of maintaining the continuity of that Sinai peacekeeping force will be in the hands of only a very small group of countries. That very small group of countries will be left to carry the baby. The Minister will be aware of the discussions that have been going on. The United States of America has made it clear that the commitments of participants to the Sinai force will be for at least two years and, more likely, three years. The Minister will be aware also that the United States has told the Australian Government quite clearly that the forces of participating countries could well be asked to remain beyond that period.

The commitment is open-ended but this Government is very likely not to resist United States pressure for Australian participants to stay on and on. The Minister has spoken of our capacity to put a force into the Sinai but he has not spoken about our capacity to maintain a force of one battalion year after year, which is the likely consequence of a commitment to the Sinai force. This can serve only to distort the planning for the defence of Australia. It will become irreparably distorted.
Australia is not, as we well know, a superpower and it has limited resources. These resources are most properly devoted to our main defence responsibility-the defence of Australia. 1 thought this proposition had been accepted on a bipartisan basis. It is a singularly sensible statement arising, as it does, from the philosophy and the administration of the Australian Labor Party when in office in the years 1972-75. There is a very distinct and delineated area of Australia's primary strategic concern. I wish to quote from the White Paper on defence issued by this Government in November 1976 which put forward a number of propositions that were carried over from the Labor Party's administration of defence. The White Paper states:
For practical purposes the requirement and scope of Australia's defence activity are limited essentially to the areas closer to home. These are our adjacent maritime areas; the south-west Pacific countries and territories; Papua New Guinea, Indonesia; and the South-East Asia region.
It continues:
Events in distant areas such as Africa, the Middle East arid North East Asia (assuming there were international sanctions for Australia's involvement) are beyond the reach of effective defence activity by Australia.
That sums up the standing of Australian Defence Force thinking, not only in 1976 but also through the period 1972-75 and, I trust, now.
I want to turn to the role of the Sinai force to which this Government is seeking to commit Australia. On any reading there is an Alice in Wonderland haze about the whole concept of the Sinai force. Does anyone really believe that a put together force of 2,000 lightly armed personnel is anything more than a token, the worst form of plate glass diplomacy? A small force of that nature, if smashed, will bring on to the scene the major insurance policy holders. The concern of the Australian Labor Party is that Australians should not be sacrificed as one of the splinters from that plate glass diplomacy.
We all know that the force will be concentrated in two areas-in the north at Rafau on the Mediterranean and in the south at Sharm El Sheikh on

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2993

the Red Sea. These areas are separated by something of the order of 250 miles of the Sinai Desert. Not even the Israeli Government would regard the proposed Sinai force as anything more than a flimsy security blanket unless-this is the important qualification-United States forces were directly involved.
One could well be excused for believing that the repeated references to a UN force in the Camp David Accords are a sham. Israel, for a variety of reasons-undoubtedly it thinks they are good reasons-is insistent that the United States should guarantee its security and, to that end, wants the United States directly involved in the force. As we all know, paragraph 8 of Article VJ of Annex I of the Camp David Accords states that the United Nations force and observers will be drawn from nations other than members of the Security Council. This automatically excludes the big powers, including, of course, the United States. However, we have all noted that President Carter's letter of 26 March 1979 provides the let out by agreeing to provide an acceptable alternative multinational force if a United Nations force did not eventuate. In a recent question addressed to the Minister for Foreign Affairs, I asked:
As both Israel and Egypt have a direct and significant interest in ensuring that the Camp David Accords are successfully implemented, will the Minister urge both governments to assume responsibility for managing the withdrawal of Israeli forces without the necessity for a multinational force?
We should realise that already there has been a major withdrawal from the Sinai area. Israeli troops have withdrawn from over two-thirds of that area. This has all been handled by a Sinai field mission of some 200 civilians. A simple proposition which I think we should put, and which we should urge the Minister to put to the United States, is: Why cannot that Sinai field mission continue to handle the withdrawal processes? It has certainly been successful up to now. I see no reason why it cannot be successful in the future.
The important point is that the Camp David Accords are agreements between two governments. Both of those governments have a vested interest in ensuring the success of those Accords. They have a responsibility to themselves, to peace in the Middle East and to the rest of the world to ensure that their conduct under the Accords is such that there is no necessity for a peace force in the Sinai. There is certainly no necessity, as we on this side of the House see it, for Australian participation in a non-United Nations force in the Sinai area.
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins) (3.51)-The matter of public importance raised by the Opposition today is an attack on the Australian defence

forces. Besides being an attack on the defence forces, it is an attack on attempts in this place to have a bipartisan approach to defence policy. I find that very disappointing indeed. This is an attack on all the forces-the Royal Australian Navy, the Royal Australian Air Force and the Army-and an attack on the institution and morale of those forces. The defence forces must quiver when they hear members of the Opposition in this place carryon the way they do. They only denigrate the defence institutions of this country. They talk down the good things and are negative about the Australian defence forces. It is quite disgraceful to have the Opposition spokesman on defence matters, the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes), and the honourable member for St George (Mr Morrison), a former Minister for Defence, speaking in the way they did, attacking the defence forces of Australia. The whole policy of members of the Australian Labor Party on this matter, as in so many other matters, is to knock, to whinge and to talk Australia down but not up. In their speeches they ought to express pride in the Australian defence forces rather than be puerile about them.
The position of the Camp David Accords and the peace treaty is clear. Israel has withdrawn from two thirds of the Sinai and, under the arrangements, planned to complete its withdrawal by the end of April 1981. Both parties, Egypt and Israel, envisaged United Nations supervision. We did not hear from the Opposition today that the Soviet Union effectively vetoed the proposition to have a United Nations force. The United Nations Security Council has been unable to reach agreement; the Soviet Union has vetoed the United Nations peacekeeping force proposed under the Accords and the peace treaty. The United Nations has failed to fulfil its role under the peace treaty. Israel, whose security is threatened, regards the establishment of an effective peacekeeping force as an integral part of the treaty and a prerequisite for final withdrawal. That is perfectly sensible and reasonable because the security of the State of Israel is involved.
Let us look at the Opposition's position. Its members have come into this House today to talk about the capacity of the Australian defence forces, denigrating that capacity. But they have hidden under this smoke-screen their real policy, which is that they are against any peacekeeping force other than a United Nations force. They fail to face up to the fact that the Soviet Union has vetoed such a force. It is a smoke-screen, and an attack on the defence forces. They have put up that smoke-screen for a number of reasons, one of which is the confused ALP policy on the Middle

2994 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

East. They are ashamed of their policy, so they have attacked the defence forces in this House today. They are confused about their Middle East policy and wish to hide their actual policy, which is against peace. They wish to hide behind this smoke-screen a number of things, including the power of the socialist Left in the Australian Labor Party. As well as the battle going on between the socialist Left and the rest of the party, they wish also to hide the leadership dispute in the Australian Labor Party. They are the four or five things they are trying to hide behind the smokescreen they have put up by talking about defence in this House today.
The Opposition is against anything other than a United Nations force. One assumes, from the comments of the honourable members for Corio and St George that they are against other peacekeeping forces and bodies in the world, that they were against the Commonwealth heads of government initiatives in getting peace in Zimbabwe. I assume from what they both said today that they are against Australia's contribution to the election peace processes in Zimbabwe. They should have been working for peace at all levels. There ought to be some of that lateral thinking about which the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) talks. Honourable members opposite ought to consider, if the United Nations fails to deliver peace, whether any other bodies or institutions can bring about peace. I would have thought they ought to be interested in peace itself. That is what they should be about. I regret that the bipartisan support that one would hope for in this area, which was inherent in the statement of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) to this House in September 1978, on the Camp David Accords, no longer exists. That is a shame. On 26 May of this year, in relation to the statement made in 1978, the Leader of the Opposition stated:
. . . were comments of a somewhat hopeful expectation on the basis of the Camp David Accords as we understand them.
That statement was a shame and it also clearly attacks Israel. The Parliament of the people of Australia deserves a clear statement of why the Labor Party no longer supports the Camp David Accords. A possible explanation which emerged after a special meeting of the Labor Caucus on 14 May this year is that the Accords are yet another victim of the policy of the Leader of the Opposition to curry favour with the left wing elements of his party.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member for Higgins is not addressing the matter before the House. There

has been a continuing drift from that matter during the course of this debate. I require the honourable member to address himself to the matter of public importance before the House.
Mr SHIPTON-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. I am addressing my remarks to the matter of public importance. I am also addressing myself to the matters raised by the two previous speakers, who clearly analysed and talked about foreign policy aspects of this matter and the foreign policy implications of Government policy, expressing tacit commitment to the Opposition policy. I believe I am enabled, by their raising matters in that way, to answer the points made.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Chair will rule on the matter. The Chair's requirement of the honourable member stands.
Mr SHIPTON-I believe that the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) has succumbed to the pressure of Labor Party politics and has supported the undermining of the bipartisanship which existed until recently towards the Camp David Agreement. It will be interesting to watch how he balances the inconsistencies of his present stance with his statements during the 1979 Boyer lecture entitled 'The Resolution of Conflict'.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Chair is reluctant to interrupt the honourable member but the matter of public importance hinges on the inability of the Australian defence forces to respond to the open-ended commitment to the Sinai force. In the course of debate on that issue some latitude was given to enable a description of the type of commitment that might be required in the Sinai, but the remarks of the honourable member for Higgins now depart totally from relevance to this matter.
Mr SHIPTON-The honourable members for Corio and St George canvassed the foreign policy aspects of this matter. I have notes of what they said. J believe that in responding I should be entitled to meet the points made.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Chair is not unmindful of the departures made by the honourable members to whom the honourable member for Higgins referred. Any latitude that might relate to these breaches has already been extended to the honourable member for Higgins.
Mr SHIPTON-I think that the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) clearly analysed the nature of Australian defence forces required to meet. a potential commitment of this type. In a defence context he proved that we have developed a core structure in Australia to meet potential situations, of which the present Middle

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2995

East situation is one. He pointed out that the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) and he made no commitment to this force in any form. It is worth remembering what the Foreign Minister has said in relation to this matter. He said that, as far as Australia is concerned, such a force would need to be considered as broadly based, politically and geographically.
In speaking about the capacity of Australian forces to respond to this type of situation, the Minister referred to the ability of the forces to deploy. I believe that Australia, through the transport squadron of the Royal Australian Air Force with its Boeing 707s and C130 aircraft, and the Nwy with HMAS Tobruk, HMAS Jervis Bay and the aircraft carrier HMAS Melbourne, has proved that it has a capacity to respond to situations from time to time. The response by the Navy and HMAS Melbourne to the Cyclone Tracy disaster in Darwin some years ago proves that the Australian defence forces have the capacity to respond to the potential situations that were mentioned today.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired. The discussion is concluded.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I claim to have been substantially misrepresented.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Does the honourable member for Corio seek to make a personal explanation on the basis of being misrepresented?
Mr SCHOLES-I seek to correct the record because some of my remarks have been substantially misquoted.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Corio may proceed.
Mr SCHOLES-The Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) said that some of the documents to which I had referred relating to the capacity of the Australian Defence Force were recovered from some rubbish bin, or some such remark. The document to which I referred was a document presented to the Defence Subcommittee of the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence and refers to the capabilities of the Australian Defence Force to respond to requests for participation in United Nations peacekeeping forces. To put the record straight, I would like to quote the passage of that document to which I referred so that there can be no question as to the authenticity of my source. I think it is a serious reflection on me that a document presented to a parliamentary committee can be described in the Parliament by a Minister as a

load of rubbish and not being accurate. I ask that I be permitted to quote from the document.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-If the quote is short, the honourable member may do so.
Mr SCHOLES-It is short. The only reason it may be long is because I am a slow reader. The document stated:
In responding to such approaches, it is necessary to determine the effect of the requested contribution on the Defence Force capability to meet its overall functions and roles in the strategic circumstances pertaining. A contribution which would result in a serious imbalance in residual capacity-or even complete denial of a particular capacity-might be judged to be unacceptable having regard to the effect on the ability to react to other contingent situations, on training, or on, for example, the planned introduction of new skills or equipment.
I make that point because I think it is important. I also make quite clear-I think this is important because our approach to defence has been challenged-that at no stage have I reflected on the capabilities or training of personnel in the Australian defence forces. I have reflected on the inability of the Government to provide equipment, and that is a quite different matter.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member has made his point.
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-As a matter of personal explanation, just for the record--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Does the Minister claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr NEWMAN-Yes. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Minister may proceed. Mr NEWMAN-Just for the record, the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) has just identified the document from which he quoted. When I described it as rubbish, I had no idea from what document he was quoting.
BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Sinclair, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications) (4.5)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942 to provide for changes covering:
(a) supplementary licences for radio stations; (b) public interest criteria; (c) ownership or control provisions;

2996 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill

(d) the Australian Broadcasting Commission's merchandising and contractual activities; and
(e) other minor amendments.
The House will l'ecall that in a statement on 9 October 1980 my predecessor, the Hon. A. A. Staley, foreshadowed legislation to introduce supplementary licences as a means of increasing the range of broadcasting services available in nonmetropolitan areas. The Government recognised that in those areas where an additional fully competitive commercial station was not a viable proposition an alternative needed to be found which widened the choice of services. The supplementary licence concept was conceived as a means of providing additional radio and television services, while protecting the commercial viability of existing services in the area and preserving the principle oflocalism in broadcasting.
The Bill provides for the introduction of supplementary licences for commercial FM radio in areas outside Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide and Perth. While commercial FM services have begun operation in mainland metropolitan areas, no commercial FM services are available in regional areas. Many such areas cannot support fully competitive FM services, and accordingly the only means of providing these services in those areas is through the supplementary licence concept. This will enable an existing commercial AM operator to provide an FM service in any area not able to support a fully competitive service.
Honourable members will note that the Bill does not provide for supplementary television licences. The Government has decided not to proceed at this time with supplementary television licences, following extensive discussions with the television industry and following representations by regional television operators that in many cases supplementary television licences would not be commercially viable without a subscription television component. Before any introduction of subscription television services is contemplated, a number of issues will need to be considered, not the least of which is the desirability of such services and the ground rules within which they should operate. Furthermore, the Government believes it WOUld, in any case, be anomalous to introduce subscription television into regional areas without also considering such services for metropolitan areas. Accordingly, the Government has referred the matter of SUbscription television to the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal for consideration in conjunction with its inquiry into cable television. No decision regarding subscription television will be made until the Tribunal has

presented its report, which is expected in March 1982.
The Government is conscious of the fact that in a limited number of areas supplementary television licences may be viable without a subscription television component. However, the Government is not prepared to make separate provision specifically for those areas at this time. It believes that any introduction of supplementary television licences to increase commercial services should be considered in a wider context. The Government is anxious that large regional cities and the smaller capitals such as Canberra should have the opportunity for increased services at the earliest practicable opportunity. It is anticipated that Government will be making further decisions on the subject following receipt of the Tribunal's report. In particular, representations have been received from the CTC7 group in Canberra and a station in Hobart in the expectation that two supplementary licences would be provided for their use in those two centres. The Government has considered theil' representations. However, as with the other major sub-metropolitan area of Newcastle, where again the population base and the nature of the commercial television coverage is such as perhaps to justify more than one supplementary licence, it is felt that the introduction of specific provisions to accommodate their peculiar circumstances could not properly proceed in isolation from consideration of the matters that will be under debate in this Parliament following receipt of the report of the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal on the cable television and subscription television inquiry that I mentioned a little while ago.
The House will also recall that on 9 April 1981 I announced to the Parliament the broad thrust of the conclusions reached by the Government after its review of aspects of the Act. I foreshadowed amendments covering:
1. The machinery and procedural aspects of sections 90 to 92KA of the Act; and
2. inadvertent breaches of the Act by shareholders in companies acquiring interests in radio and television broadcasting licences through share trading on the stock exchange.
Necessarily that statement did not express with the same precision as legislation the changes proposed to the Act. Honourable members will note that in some respects the Bill differs from the proposals then outlined. The changes follow from further consultation with the industry. However,

Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2997

that statement did outline in general terms a package of proposals with two major themes which certainly remain relevant.
Firstly, the amendments will maintain the basic structure of decision making that has been in operation since 1977. The amendments will provide the means for more effective administration of the broadcasting system in accordance with government policy. The lack of reference points for the Tribunal in deciding whether a particular licensing decision would be in the public interest has led to some uncertainty in Tribunal proceedings. The incorporation of legislative guidelines for public interest will provide a clearer statement of government policy in relation to the major discretionary powers of the Tribunal.
Secondly, the amendments are designed to ensure that the ownership or control provisions will remain effective and appropriate to the commercial environment of the 1980s. Restrictions on the free transfer of interests should be no greater than are necessary to achieve a reasonable balance between the desirability of preventing uncontrolled trading in licences and the need for a vigorous share market. It has become apparent that the present share transaction procedures, which, of course, require the Tribunal's approval prior to any purchase, may operate to prevent a large diversified industrial corporation, for example, from lawfully purchasing shares on the open market in another such corporation, if the second corporation has an indirect interest in a radio or television station of as little as 6 per cent of issued capital. The Government regards such a result as inappropriate for an Act which is designed only to regulate radio and television, and unnecessary to achieve the aims of the legislation. This applies even more strongly in the case of third party breaches of the Act. It is only in exceptional circumstances in our system of justice that a person should be immediately liable for an offence as a result of some other person's actions. In this instance, the circumstances certainly do not warrant such a result. In the Government's view, any person being put into inadvertent breach of the Act should not face possible prosecution, without first being allowed at least six months to comply with the ownership limitations.
On 9 April last, my colleagues the Attorney General (Senator Durack) and the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner), representing the Attorney-General, tabled in Parliament a report by the Administrative Review Council on the inquiry procedures of the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal. In my statement to the House on the same day I said that there would not be any decision as to specific recommendations until the

public and the broadcasting industry had the opportunity to comment. I have, through my Department, recently contacted interested individuals and organisations asking for their comments on the report by the end of July. Therefore, I expect the Government to be in a position to consider specific recommendations of the report later in the year.
I also point out that during the preparation of the Bill and particularly following my announcement to the House on 9 April there has been considerable public debate. In particular, details of the proposals have been discussed extensively with a wide range of broadcasting and television groups and all those who have made contact with my office. The idea, of course, was to ensure that in the application of the ownership or control amendments those who were immediately affected should have some opportunity of expressing the consequences as they saw them. Certainly, overall the objective was to assess the impact of suggested changes before the details of the Bill now to be presented to the Parliament were finalised.
In summary, the intention of the present amendments is to streamline procedures, avoid delays in the Tribunal's consideration of transactions, minimise the necessary number of inquiries and provide clearer guidance in relation to the Tribunal's major discretionary powers. I turn now to the detail of the proposed amendments.
Supplementary Licences for Radio Stations
The Bill will enable commercial AM licensees, in areas other than Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide and Perth, to apply for a supplementary licence to operate an FM radio service in their areas. Provision has also been made to allow licensees, in areas where there is more than one AM station, if they so choose, to form a consortium to apply for one supplementary licence on a joint basis. Because of the different propagation characteristics of FM as opposed to AM signals, provision is also made for the Minister to invite an applicant to apply for associated commercial translator licences. The intent behind this provision is to ensure that an area currently served by a commercial AM station and its associated translator stations will as far as possible be able to be served by a supplementary FM station together with its associated translator stations.
Applicants will make their applications to the Minister in accordance with a form approved by him. Applications can be made by commercial AM operators only to provide a supplementary

2998 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill

FM service in their own areas. Unlike other licence applications, where applicants apply in response to an invitation by the Minister, applicants for supplementary licences will be able to apply at any time. The Minister will, however, be able to refer the application to the Tribunal or to reject the application on grounds relating to technical matters or to the planning or development of broadcasting and television services. This provision arises from the Minister's statutory responsibilities for the planning and development of these services. There is, after all, only a limited spectrum and it is essential that there is a capacity to regulate the available area within it.
In considering applications for supplementary licences the Tribunal will follow similar procedures to those applying to other licences. For example, in considering an application for a supplementary licence, the Tribunal will be required to take account of the criteria applying to the grant of other licences. However, an additional provision will enable the Tribunal to refuse to grant a supplementary licence in any area which can sustain a fully competitive commercial broadcasting station without endangering the viability of existing services. If the Tribunal finds that an additional commercial station would be viable then it will be required to inform the Minister of its determination and the reasons for it.
Supplementary licences will be granted for up to five years and renewed for up to three years. The Tribunal shall, in considering any renewal of a supplementary licence not less than eight years after the initial grant of a supplementary licence, determine whether an additional commercial station is reasonably likely to be viable in that area. If it finds that such a station would be viable, it shall recommend to the Minister that he invite applications for a commercial licence and shall give the supplementary licensee three years' notice of its intention not to renew the supplementary licence. A licensee, but not a consortium, will be able in such a case to opt to retain the broadcasting station operated under his supplementary licence and instead forgo the station operated under his commercial licence. This provision is intended to cover a broadcaster wishing to retain his supplementary FM station rather than his commercial AM station. In this case the supplementary licence will convert to a normal commercial licence.
I need to comment oil some aspects of supplementary licences which have been the subject of some recent concern by the broadcasting industry. A decision to seek a supplementary licence is

entirely a decision for the licensee in the area concerned. The ministerial discretion to dismiss applications can be on only technical grounds or for planning and development reasons, for example, where no frequencies are available or where the calling of applications for a fully competitive service is contemplated. I emphasise that the ministerial discretion must be interpreted within the scope, purposes and objects of the Act, which are all laid down and are available for everybody to see and understand. The minimum duration of a supplementary licence is 11 years with no consideration of non-renewal before eight years. The procedures for renewal impose what I believe is reasonable protection for the licensee on the one hand and the public on the other. The Government believes this provides an adequate period for licensees to recoup their investment.
Finally, it is not correct to suggest that there are no appeals against decisions by the Tribunal which apply to other classes of licence. The appeal provisions in section 119A apply equally to supplementary licences as to other classes of licences, the only difference being that there is no appeal against non-renewal ability after eight years. Special provisions have been inserted to allow the supplementary licence to continue in operation in circumstances where the Tribunal has decided not to renew the licence but for one reason or another competitive licences have not been issued.
The Bill includes a number of special provisions relating to localism and arrangements with other radio stations. Specifically, supplementary licensees will need to seek Tribunal approval for arrangements entered into with other stations for the regular broadcasting of:
(i) the programs of a related commercial AM station or other commercial stations;
(ii) the programs of the Australian Broadcasting Commission, the Special Broadcasting Service or public stations.
This provision will provide some degree of Tribunal oversight over the simulcastingof programs-that is, the simultaneous transmission in one area of the same radio program by two or more stations-or the networking of radio programs from other areas. Other provisions intended to preserve the principle of localism are those relating to:
(i) the minimum amount of locally produced or originated programs as provided for by licence conditions; and
(ii) the encouragement of local advertising.

Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2999

The proposed amendments will provide a legal basis for the introduction of supplementary licences for radio. However, it needs to be noted that substantial lead. times are involved both for

(c) encourage the provision of Australian produced programs and the use of Australian creative resources;
(ii) whether a person or company is fit and proper to hold an interest in a licence;

the industry and for my Department. This in- (iii) the financial, technical and management capacity to

volves giving reasonable notice to those who will

undertake the operations of a licence;

be required to vacate the 88-108MHz band, and the determination of station service areas. Substantial costs may also be involved. The decisions

(iv) in non-metropolitan areas (Le. outside the six State capitals) the degree of concentration of influence of radio or television stations; and
(v) the commercial viability of stations in the area.

required can be made, and the costs minimised, only if all concerned in the process of clearing the
band are given adequate notice of the Government's intention. There is already a considerable backlog of applications to be considered relating to the existing range of broadcasting and television services. Planning for supplementary licences will proceed in parallel with the clearing of this backlog and the introduction of nonmetropolitan commercial FM services. Accordingly, at a later date, I intend to make a major statement regarding planning guidelines for this stage of development of commercial FM services. For these reasons, the Bill includes a transitional provision that no applications for supplementary licences may be made before a date to be fixed by
proclamation.

The undertaking concerning the provision of an adequate and comprehensive service in pursuance of the licence provides a focus for public input at licensing inquiries. It is also intended to generate greater awareness in the public and the industry of the need to provide programming which not only complies with general standards, but also takes account of the particular characteristics of the audience served. With regard to the concentration of influence on radio and television in regional areas, honourable members should be aware that the principal Act already applies much stricter limits on ownership in metropolitan areas than in regional areas. It is not possible for any in. dividual to hold prescribed interests in more than one television station and one radio station in any one State capital city within the overall limit of

Public Interest Criteria

two television or eight radio stations. On the other

Clauses 13, 16, 18, 19,28 and 38 of the Bill provide for legislative guidelines for the public interest component of the major discretionary powers of the Tribunal in relation to licence grant, renewal, suspension, revocation or transfer and in relation to the approval of share, or deben-

hand it would not be illegal for one person to control up to two television stations and four radio stations in a regional city such as Newcastle. In this latter case, it is clearly desirable that the Tribunal should be able to limit undesirable concentration.

ture, transactions. Although the words 'public interest' do not currently appear in the Act in respect of licence grants and transfers, the High Court of Australia has confirmed in the 2HD case

Ownership or Control Provisions PROCEDURES FOR THE EXAMINATION
OF SHARE TRANSACTIONS

that the concept of public interest is a relevant The current ownership or control provisions of

factor in the exercise of the Tribunal's discretionthe Act provide that it is an offence to hold

ary powers even where it is not explicitly stated. prescribed interests in more than two commercial

The Bill provides a consistent codification of pubtelevision licences or more than eight commercial

lic interest for all the major discretionary powers. radio licences. The acquisition of a prescribed

Dependent on the type of application, the public interest or an increase in a prescribed interest, as

interest criteria will be established according to defined in the Act, is currently subject to prior ap-

the following guidelines:

proval by the Tribunal. The provisions restrict the

(i) whether the applicant will meet or has met an underopportunities to purchase shares or debentures in

taking to:

a company if they would confer on the purchaser

a prescribed interest in a licence. It is proposed

(a) compJywith the conditions ora licence;

that the requirement for prior approval of such

(b) provide an adequate and comprehensive service in pursuance of the licence, having regard
to: the nature of the community served or to

transactions be relaxed whilst preserving the principle that changes in the ownership or control of licences be subject to effective public scrutiny.

be served;

Most importantly, the Tribunal is being given

the diversity of the interests of that community;and
the nature of other radio/television services which may be received in the same area;

effective powers to collect information on proposed transactions and to give directions to avoid irreversible adverse effects on the licensee prior to approval being given.

3000 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill

Sections 90J and 92F of the principal Actclauses 27 and 37 of the Bill-are being amended to provide for the notification to the Tribunal of any intended transaction and the lodgment of an application for approval of either an intended transaction, or a completed transaction. Failure to lodge a notice or application prior to a transaction will be an offence on each day until a notice or application is lodged. However, such an offence will not preclude ultimate approval by the Tribunal of a transaction provided an application is lodged within 28 days. These amendments will allow the Tribunal to receive applications for approval of share transactions after, as well as before, transactions have taken place.
New sections 90JA and 92FAA-clauses 28 and 38 of the Bill-make provision for the approval of share and debenture transactions. In summary, these sections provide:
(i) for the Tribunal to approve an application in respect of share transactions after, as well as before, a transaction has taken place;
(ii) that the Tribunal may disapprove an application made before or after a transaction provided that it first holds an inquiry into the intended transaction; that inquiry may at the Tribunal's discretion be:
(a) a separate inquiry into the transaction; or
(b) an inquiry into both the transaction and the renewal of the licence;
(iii) that any inquiry may be required by the purchaser, in his application, to commence within three months after the application and if the inquiry does not commence within three months, the transaction is deemed to have been approved; and
(iv) that the Tribunal shall take all reasonable steps to complete an inquiry within three months of commencing the inquiry.
Where a transaction has taken place without prior approval the Tribunal may give directions to prevent any action it considers will have an adverse effect on the ability of a company holding the licence to comply with the conditions of the licence or on the operations, management or the selection or provision of programs by the licensee company. These powers are conferred by clause 40 in new section 92M. Clauses 28 and 38 of the Bill also provide the criteria which must be taken into account by the Tribunal in considering whether to approve a transaction. In particular, the clauses provide the grounds on which the Tribunal may

refuse an application for the approval of a transaction, in whole or in part where an application is lodged in accordance with section 90J or 92F.
These are: (i) in the case of a purchaser acquiring or increasing a major interest in the licence, the Tribunal would be empowered to refuse consent to the transfer of that licence to the applicant; This provision recognises that a major share transaction affecting a licensee and a transfer of the licence are, in practical terms, similar and the Tribunal would consider the same public interest criteria and other criteria as are provided for in clause 19, that is, section 89A dealing with transfers;
(ii) in the case of a purchaser acquiring any interest in the licence, where the licence has been granted within the previous two years, this provision is intended to preserve the integrity of the licence grant process, by preventing an unsuccessful applicant for a licence from taking over the company of the successful applicant.
(iii) in the case of a purchaser acquiring a minor interest, or any other applicant acquiring an indirect interest through the purchaser, where the applicant does not comply with public interest criteria, this provision applies the criteria in a more appropriate way to minor and indirect interests than if these were considered under point (i) above and take into account:
(a) the effect the transaction will have on the capacity of the holder of the licence to comply with the conditions of the licence and the written undertakings given to the Tribunal in relation to program services;
(b) whether the applicant is a fit and proper person to hold a licence and, as far as is relevant, has the necessary financial, technical and management capacities to carry out the requirements of a licence; and
(c) the degree of concentration of influence either directly or indirectly, on commercial radio and television stations, in a nonmetropolitan area.
These streamlined procedures and guidelines will provide adequate controls on the ownership of radio and television. The Tribunal's approval will be necessary for the acquisition or increase of a

Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3001

prescribed interest, and the Tribunal will retain a discretion to consider an acquisition in the context of a public inquiry. At the same time the share market will be freed from unnecessary restrictions, but adequate checks will remain to discourage trading in licences per se. I should like to make one further point. The Government has decided that the new provisions relating to approval of share transactions will apply only to transactions taking place after commencement of this legislation. Clause 50 gives effect to this decision.
LOAN INTEREST AND REGISTERED LENDERS
Under the existing Act, loan interests in a television station may result in a lender acquiring a prescribed interest in a licence. In some cases this will restrict opportunities to obtain tinance, except by bank overdraft, to which exemption already applies, when in practice the investor might only be able to influence a licence where a licensee defaults on a loan. New section 91 cclause 31 of the Bill-empowers the Tribunal to register approved lenders and so exclude them from the prescribed interest provisions of the Act provided the Tribunal is satisfied that a person will not be in a position to exercise, directly or indirectly, a significant influence on any company holding a licence. In circumstances where a registered lender used a loan interest to exercise undue control over a licensee the Tribunal could deregister the lender. The lender would then be subject to the prescribed interest provisions applying to loan interests.
VARIAnON OF LIMITS ON PERMISSIBLE HOLDINGS
New section 91D-c1ause 31 or the Bill-addresses the problem of breaches of section 92 of the Act by third parties acquiring excess prescribed interests as a result of share transactions by other persons. Experience has shown that an investor can be put in breach of the Act through the purchase of shares by another party in which the investor is a shareholder, because of the tracing provisions of the Act. Problems of third party breaches of the Act have arisen particularly with institutional investors because of their large and diversified portfolio shareholdings.
New section 91D provides that any person holding an interest of from 5 per cent up to 10 per cent-on any test-in a television licence without its being considered as a prescribed interest, may apply to the Tribunal for a certificate permitting him to hold that interest. However, the benefits of the section will be extended only to persons acquiring an interest in a television licence operating

in an area where there is at least one other commercial television station-that is, the five mainland State capitals-and then only if those persons can satisfy the Tribunal that the interest in question will not give rise to a person exercising, either directly or indirectly, a significant influence on the licensee company. Clause 31 of the Billincorporating both section 91 and section 91D--will commence on a date to be proclaimed. Some preliminary work by the Tribunal is necessary to enable introduction of these provisions. However, the Government will be looking to proclaim this provision as soon as practicable.
FOREIGN SHAREHOLDINGS
The existing sections 90G and 92D of the Act restrict ownership of shares, but not voting rights, in licensee companies by any individual nonresident to 15 per cent, and by the aggregate of non-resident shareholders to 20 per cent, of issued share capital. The interpretation of the provision has presented difficulties because of the lack of definition of 'resident' and the meaning of 'control'-that is, whether it is commercial control, up to 50 per cent of votes, or control as defined in the Act; that is, 15 per cent of votes and shares. These sections have been redrafted to provide a redefinition of restrictions on foreign shareholdings to provide that only Australian citizens and companies in which Australian citizens hold more than 50 per cent of the votes and/or shares, may be 'in a position to control' a licensee company. Clause 53 is a transitional provision for non-resident shareholdings, enabling residents who are not Australian citizens to retain any interests they hold at commencement which comply with the existing provisions of the Act.
PROVISIONS RELATING TO ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
PROVISIONS
The changes proposed by the Bill to the ownership or control provisions will produce a system which gives considerably more flexibility to licensees and persons acquiring interests in licences. The Government expects strict compliance with the new provisions. To this end existing sanctions and penalties have been strengthened substantially. Clause 40 provides for the Tribunal to give directions for the purpose of securing disposal of excess interests if it is satisfied that a person has breached the provisions of Division 2 or 3 of Part IV of the Act by the acquisition of shares, debenture or loan interests. Directions given under clause 40 will be enforceable in the Federal Court of Australia. Additionally, the Bill provides in clauses 40 and 46 that non-compliance

3002 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill

with directions will attract substantially higher penalti~ than those presently in force.
AUSTRALIAN BROADCASTING COMMISSION MECHANDISING AND
CONTRACTUAL ACTIVITIES Clauses 7 and 8 of the Bill amend merchandising and contractual provisions relating to the operations of the Australian Broadcasting Commission. These provisions will enable the ABC to make, promote, circulate or sell non-literary matter associated with its programs. Clause 8 allows the ABC to enter into contracts for the sale of its programs without ministerial approval. This delegation is essential for the quick negotiation of contracts.
OTHER MINOR AMENDMENTS The Bill contains a number of other provisions which are either consequential to the changes outlined or are minor changes which update and standardise provisions to accord with current legislative practice. In 1965 when the ownership provisions were last amended special provision was made for persons holding interests in excess of the new limitations, such that these interests could be retained as long as they were not increased or restructured. The effect of this 'freezing' provision or the 'grandfather' clause as it was known, which today applies only to a few companies, has been to inhibit their ability to adjust their corporate structure to the present commercial environment. These companies will require time to restructure their interests. I take this opportunity to foreshadow a Government amendment which I will be proposing to move during the Committee stage of the debate on the Bill which will make appropriate transitional arrangements for these companies in relation to the new share transaction procedures. The proposed changes I have outlined to the ownership or control provisions will be the first major alterations for 16 years, yet there have been significant developments in the industry over that time. These changes, together with the introduction of supplementary licences for radio stations, will provide a sound basis for the continued development of broadcasting in the coming decade without undue constraint on commercial activity. I commend the Bill to the House. Debate (on motion by Mr Dawkins) adjourned.
BROADCASTING STATIONS LICENCE FEES AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Sinclair, and read a first time.

Second Reading Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications) (4.35)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill makes consequential amendments to the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend that Act to supplementary licences for radio stations. References in the Act to commercial broadcasting stations, licences and licensees are applied to supplementary broadcasting stations, licences and licensees. Provisions have also been inserted to deal with licence fees payable by a consortium of commercial broadcasting licensees holding a supplementary licence. The Bill provides that the supplementary broadcasting station will be regarded as a separate operation for the purposes of licence fees assessments. The effect of these amendments is to place supplementary licensees on the same basis as commerciallicensees in respect of the imposition and calculation of licence fees. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Dawkins) adjourned.
OVERSEAS TELECOMMUNICATIONS AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Sinclair, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications) (4.36)-lmove:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The principal purpose of this Bill is to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act 1946 to allow the Overseas Telecommunications Commission (Australia) to form or participate in the formation of a company that may be established to own and manage the national communications satellite system. On 18 September 1980, the then Minister for Post and Telecommunications informed the House that tenders were to be called for the supply of a communications satellite'system, and that the Government was considering the possibility of establishing a company to own and manage that $ystem, the public sector to hold 51 per cent of the share capital in such a company and the private sector to hold 49 per cent of the shares. A committee of officials was requested to report on the interest of the private sector in participating in such a company in which OTC would have a major interest on behalf of the Government, the company to operate' as a commercial tax-paying ertterprise. As an interim measure, OTC had been designated as the authority to own

Overseas Telecommunications Amendment Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3003

and manage the communications satellite system. For this purpose, licences under the Wireless Telegraphy Act 1905 had been issued to OTC to provide telecommunications services by way of a satellite system.
The request for tenders for the satellite communications system was issued in October last year. The request for tenders is a comprehensive set of documents inviting tenders for the supply of the space segment of the satellite system, the major city earth stations and minor earth stations to access the satellite, and earth stations required by Telecom Australia for telephony services as well as to receive only earth stations for regional and remote area national broadcasting services. Also included in the request for tender was the supply of earth terminals for the Department of Transport's air safety and navigational services. Twenty tenders were received for the space and earth segments of the satellite communications system and evaluation of tenders is now taking place.
In introducing this Bill I make it clear that the Government has not taken decisions on what the final ownership arrangements will be. The report of officials on their discussions with the private sector on participating in a company to own and manage the satellite communications system is now being considered by the Government and I hope to be able to announce the outcome of these considerations in the neal' future. Honourable members will appreciate that if the Government decides to proceed with the concept of establishing a company with public and private sector involvement, there will be a need for further discussion and negotiation on the detailed arrangements which might apply before the company, as a legal entity, is established. The provisions of the Bill in this regard should therefore be seen as a contingency measure only. Whether there will be a need for recourse to the provisions of the Bill will depend on Government decisions regarding the organisation or authority which will be the ultimate owner of the satellite communications system and the timing for implementing those decisions. For this reason the Bill provides that action by OTe to form or participate in such a company requires the approval of the Minister.
Other objectives of the Bill are to enable OTe to provide technical services, on a commercial basis, to such a company, and to enable OTC to provide consultative services to the governments

of neighbouring countries on the use of the satellite system for their own purposes. Again the Minister's approval is required before OTe can take action along those lines. The provision for OTC to provide consultative services of this nature to neighbouring countries reflects the Government's policy of assisting less developed nations in the region to develop their own telecommunications services. Provision has been made in the design of the system for the satellite to provide telecommunications services for the Government of Papua New Guinea. This is an optional feature in the system design, and the Papua New Guinea Government has yet to make decisions regarding its use of the Australian satellite system for its own needs.
For technical reasons, it has not been possible to provide in the first generation satellite system for services to be available to other countries in the South West Pacific region. The Government has offered, however, to participate in a study of the telecommunications needs of those countries, and a formal invitation has now been received for Australia to take part in such a study. The results of that study will be taken into account when planning later generations of communications satellites.
The Overseas Telecommunications Commission has had considerable experience in the provision of telecommunications services by satellites. It now provides tracking, telemetry, command and monitoring facilities for the Intelsat satellites in orbital locations over the Pacific and Indian Oceans. It will provide similar services for satellites to be launched by the European Space Agency. The OTe also provides the major facilities at Moree, Ceduna and Carnarvon for receiving and transmitting by satellite of international communications. Since the taking of the decision to invest OTC with the interim responsibility for developing the satellite communications system, that authority has built up its technical resources on satellite communications. The skills and experiences of OTC officers in satellite communications systems will be of major benefit in pursuing the Government'8 policy of extending modern telecommunications services to all people in Australia.
In seeking the support of honourable members to this Bill 1 would emphasise that the development of the nationaI communications satellite system is a major project. The evaluation of tenders will be one of the most critical aspects. It has to be undertaken within a time frame which would allow contracts for the supply of the system to be entered into in early 1982, so that the space and

3004 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Bill

earth segments of the system are available to coincide with reservations which have been made with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, or NASA, and the European Space Agency to place the satellites in their Ofbital positions. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by MI' Scholes) adjourned.
BOUNTY (PRINTED FABRICS) BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.43)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to give effect to the Government's decision to pay a bounty on the printing in Australia of certain lightweight woven fabrics weighing less than 120 grams per square metre. The decision to adopt this form of assistance follows the Government's consideration of the recommendation by the Industries Assistance Commission contained in its report No. 240 of 30 April 1980 entitled 'Textiles, Clothing and Footwear'. This bounty proposal is part of the Government's broader program for the textiles, clothing and footwear industries, intended to encourage the development of a more efficient industry structure. It is expected also to provide substantial benefits to user industries such as clothing manufacturers. To this end, the proposal is in agreement with the broad objectives of the Industries Assistance Commission's recommendation.
The Bill provides for the bounty to be payable at the rate of 70 per cent of the additional value added to the fabric by the printer. The value added will be based on the factory cost of tl>e bountiable printed fabric less the costs of materials used in the printing process. The scheme is to operate for a period of seven years from I January 1982 and bounty payments for the tlrst full year are estimated to be $2.5rn.
The bounty assistance is designed to offset the effect on printers of another Government decision to grant import entry of certain fabrics at mini.. mum rates of duty and free of quota that is, those printed fabrics weighing less than 120 grams per square metre, and destined for garment use. Bounty is payable on fabric printed at registered premises during the bounty period, if the fabric is used or is sold for use in making up into garments in a registered clothing factory. Clothing factories will be treated as being registered for the purposes of the bounty scheme if registered under a State

law or, in the case of internal Territories which do not have laws suitable for these purposes, such places used for the production of garments and approved by the Comptroller-General of Customs.
This approach is consistent with exclusions from the proposed tariff concessions of certain lightweight woven fabrics which I mentioned earlier. The exclusions will protect the interests of manufacturers of other lightweight cloth, such as pocketings, linings and curtains. At the same time, the Bill makes provision for an extension by regulation of the uses to which bountiable fabric may be put, if the Government decides that such an extension is desirable. The Government expects that the assistance proposed by this Bill will enable the local industry to compete adequately against printed fabrics of a similar nature which will be able to be imported at minimum rates of duty and free of quota after 1 January 1982. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Scholes) adjourned.
BOUNTY (TEXTILE YARNS) BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.48)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to give effect to the Government's decision to provide bounty assistance to the production in Australia of certain yarns. The decision to adopt this form of assistance follows the Government's consideration of the recommendations by the Industries Assistance Commission contained in its report No. 240 of 30 April 1980 entitled 'Textiles, Clothing and Footwear'.
This bounty proposal is part of the Government's broader program designed to encourage the development of a more efficient industry structure for the textiles, clothing and footwear industries. It will also provide substantial benefits for industries using bountiable yarns in manufacturing textiles or textile products. User industries will benefit from reduced costs of material inputs and greater flexibility of sourcing. To this end the proposal is in agreement with the broad objectives of the Industries Assistance Commission's recommendation. The Bill provides for the bounty to be payable to producers of most yarns at rates calculated as specified percentages of the value added to the yarns, on a factory cost basis, in their production. The yarns eligible for the bounty are

Airlines Agreement Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3005

specified in clause 2 of the Bill and the rates of

AIRLINES AGREEMENT BILL 1981

bounty proposed for each type of yarn are specified in clause 6 of the Bill.

Second Reading Debate resumed from 28 May, on motion by

The Government in August last year established the bounty rate for several yarn types, including yarns, spun on the cotton system, at 33 per cent. Following extensive discussions with industry sectors, and based on an assessment of up to date information, it has become apparent that assistance for cotton system spun yarns at this level would be likely to result in a degree of dis-

MrHunt:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr MOORE (Ryan--Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill, the Independent Air Fares Committee Bill and the Airlines Equipment Amendment Bill as they are

ruption that could not have been foreseen at the associated measures. Separate questions will, of time the Government took its original decision, course, be put on each of the Bills at the conparticularly in some regional locations. For this clusion of the debate.

reason the Government has decided to set the Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)-Is it

bounty rate for these products at 43 per cent.

the wish of the House to have a general debate

covering these three measures? There being no

From 1 January 1982 imported yarns similar to objection, I will allow that course to be followed.

the bountiable yarns will be quota free and subject only to minimum rates of duty. Wool carpet yarns and yarns for handcrafting and sewing thread will not be eligible for the bounty. Sewing threads and hand craft yarns are to be assisted by import duties from 1 January 1982. The processes and expenditures eligible for bounty are specified in clauses 2 and 3 of the Bill. In general, the 'additional value' provision excludes materials such as fibres and polymers, dyes, yam additives, and some packaging materials. It also excludes other costs such as general administration, selling and distribution.

Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (4.54)-The three Bills in this legislative package contain some advances on existing arrangements for the provision of airline services. I will, at appropriate stages in the debate, move amendments designed to shorten the life of the two-airline agreement that is proposed, to provide greater participation by the public and consumer interests in air fare fixing procedures and for oversighting of the profits of the two parties to the agreement, Ansett Airlines of Australia and Trans-Australia Airlines. The major purpose of the package of Bills is to ensure the profitability of Ansett Airlines for at least the

next eight years. Some provisions of the legislation

The bounty scheme is to operate for a period of have been included to appease dissidents in

seven years from 1 January 1982, and it is government ranks concerning what they rightly

estimated that bounty payments during that saw as undesirable aspects of the preference and

period will be $47m for 1981-82 and $71m per protection afforded to Ansett Airlines under the

annum thereafter. Bounty eligibility will be reterms of the now discarded 1980 airline agree-

stricted to yarns produced in premises registered ment. The position, therefore, is that any benefits

under this Act and used in registered textile facto the public that have arisen from this legislation

tories. Textile factories will be treated as regisare incidental to those two main purposes.

tered for the purposes of the bounty scheme if used for the commercial manufacture of textile products and if registered as a factory under a State or internal Territory law. In the case of internal Territories which do not have laws suitable for these purposes, buildings used for the commercial manufacture of textile products and approved by the Comptroller-General of Customs will be recognised as registered factories. The Government expects that the assistance proposed by this Bill will encourage further improvements in the efficiency of this industry, reductions in cost, and responsiveness to changing consumer needs. I commend the Bill to the House.

Airline services are one of the few profitable areas of our public transport system. The objective of the Australian Labor Party Opposition is to ensure that the people of Australia have maximum access to safe, convenient airline services at a minimum cost to the users. There can be no justification, in the provision of airline services under the airline agreement, for the operators of those services, Ansett Airlines and Trans-Australia Airlines, to earn profits commensurate with trading operations in the general commercial environment. That was a point made very strongly by the recent Holcroft Committee of Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares in its recent report. The fact is that

the public transport system of which the airline

Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned. service is a major part is there to provide a service

3006 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Airlines Agreement Bill

to the community. It is not there to earn rewards for risk-takers. In fact, under the provisions of the airline agreement there is little risk involved because the system is a cost-plus system. Only the profits have not been spelled out in specific terms.
.Before discussing provisions of the Airlines Agreement Bill let me quickly recall the origins of the two-airline policy. Honourable members will remember that it was introduced in the early 1950s to prop up the failing private enterprise operator, Australian National Airways. It was amended subsequently in 1957 to meet the desires of its successor, Ansett Airlines. The policy has entrenched a rigid regulatory control of domestic airline services and has been supported by successive conservative governments. The great contradiction in the behaviour of honourable members sitting opposite is that despite their constant claims as to the efficiency and efficacy of free enterprise and how it can be done better by the private sector, the two-airline policy, by its very nature, is the antithesis of free enterprise. It provides to two private multi-millionaire operators guaranteed protected access to half the capacity of major airline services in this country. On the basis on which they are protected from any competition, there can be no danger of a competitor pushing them out from their share of the traffic or of endangering their commercial position. As I mentioned, they are protected by a cost-plus pricing system.
The present proprietors of Ansett Airlines seized control of Ansett Transport Industries Ltd in a gigantic stock exchange coup in late 1979. They paid heavily inflated prices for AT!. The new proprietors then had to set about finding ways of increasing the financial yield for Ansett Airlines. They did not have great difficulty because they had a compliant government. They had a captive government then and they have a captive government now. It stands ready to do their bidding. Today we saw the introduction of the Murdoch amendments in respect of the Broadcasting and Television Act. The two-airline agreement was to be re-negotiated and changed to assist further the multi-millionaire proprietors of Ansett Airlines.
The new agreement makes no reference to a limitation on profits despite the exclusive right of the parties to provide major domestic airline services. It is designed to help achieve that higher financial yield now required by Ansett Transport Industries to fund the inflated prices and to help pay for the tax free profit that Mr Robert Holmes a' Court gained from the sale of his shares to the

present proprietors. As I have pointed out, because the fare structure is based on a cost-plus system and the agreement requires the operation of only two operators over the entire trunk route network, Ansett cannot fail. There is no risk or danger from competitive forces over the entire trunk route network. Again, that is a point which was made by Mr Holcroft. In effect, the two airline policy is a licence to print money. That is the point that has been made by editorial writers around this country on a number of occasions. The editorial writer of the Australian Financial Review of7 December 1979, at the time when the coup was in progress, was correct when he wrote:
The major asset of ATI is the entrenched rights and privileges it possesses under the two-airline policy.
Television licences are public property which may not be freely bought and sold. So is the position of ATI within the two-airline policy.
Government policy does not have to remain unchanged on either.
It certainly has not. The present multi-millionaire proprietors of ATI bought into that company and organised that stock exchange coup on their own initiative. Let their risks be on their own heads, but let not their risks be an imposition upon the air travellers of this country under the masquerade that they are providing a public transport service, a better service and that they would not have entered into contracts to purchase new aircraft if they did not have knowledge of the new agreement which was negotiated and which was not made available to this Parliament. The travelling public has no obligation to ensure an inflated rate of return on the investment the proprietors of Ansett have made in their airline.
The incredible subservience of this government to the Ansett proprietors is shown by the surrender of its sovereign power to determine aviation policy. It is an incredible performance. I could not find anything in parliamentary history which showed a sovereign government handing over its power finally to determine policy in the appropriate area to a private organisation which, in this case, is two multi-millionaires. The granting in clause 2 of the agreement of a 90-day power of veto to Ansett and TAA is without precedent in parliamentary history, but it also indicates the level of distrust. This is very important because this legislation has come before the Parliament after several months of dissention, disarray, backroom brawling and attempts to overthrow the leadership within Government. Out of all that disarray has come this second version of a two-airline agreement within 12 months. The distrust that is indicated in clause 2 of the new agreement goes to

Airlines Agreement Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3007

the distrust between the Australian National Airper cent of the proposed trunk route combi-

lines Commission, Ansett Airlines and this nations are not practicable or commercially feas-

Government. In effect, Ansett has said to the ible to the airlines. However, they are effectively

Government: 'We do not trust you to legislate in closed to any other air passenger operator unless

the manner you have indicated in the agreement. such operator develops specialised sched.uled

We do not trust you to legislate along the lines you passenger air services over such routes for which

have indicated in respect of the Independent Air the Commission and the company are not provid-

Fares Committee. We do not believe you can trust ing an adequate service to the satisfaction of the

your own back benchers'. That is the climate in Minister or unless either of the two major oper-

which this legislation has been brought before the ators should withdraw from the service.

Parliament.

Clause 7 deals with consultations mainly be-

Mr Hyde-We are getting on very well.

tween the Commission and the company. Clause 7 (2) (a) relates to the efficient and. economic op-

Mr MORRIS-I have noticed, but they are mopping up the blood outside at the moment. The removal of freight from the agreement is supported by the Opposition. The introduction of wide-bodied aircraft and specialised cargo aircraft should result in a higher level of efficiency in the industry together with improved services to air freight users. Accordingly, we do not oppose the Airlines Equipment Amendment Bill. However, the continued restrictive definition of trunk routes

eration of passenger air services. It does not set out objectives or standards by which one may analyse the efficient or economic operation of the airlines. One cannot but form an opinion other than that the Government is totally incapable of evaluating an efficient or economic air service. The report of the Holcroft inquiry supports this contention and sets out various formats by which these objectives and/or standards may be judged.
Clause 12 deals with the replacement of rural

will continue to give Ansett and TAA exclusive services. The Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt)

right to those routes, thus severely limiting opportunities for the development of regional operators such as East-West Airlines Ltd and any other future developments as population patterns and market patterns change. East-West has rightly expressed its concern at the dangers it sees arising from the limitations being placed on operators in

has now publicly acknowledged that TAA and Ansett will have the right to opt out of rural airline services under the provisions of the new agreement given that, after a specific procedure, they can prove that total costs exceed total revenue. The Minister and his National Country Party colleagues representing country electorates

the new agreement.

have again thrown their constituents to the wolves. The Fraser Government has given to its

Clause 6 of the new agreement in the Schedule friends the profitable air routes, and the marginal

attacht'd to the Bill spells out in clear terms the and loss routes will be reduced to a lesser standard

unfettered right of Ansett and TAA to be 'the of service. There is a need for the operator opting only two operators which provide scheduled domout of a rural service to make arrangements--

estic passenger air services over trunk routes within Australia'. Clause 6 (1) (e) nominates 18 trunk route centres in which an air link between any two of such nominated centres comes into the category of trunk route. There are in excess of 150 such combinations, of which 20 per cent are intrastate centres requiring a State government licence. The questions that must be asked are: How many of these trunk route centres are commercially viable now or in the foreseeable future? Why were they included in the agreement? Which

Mr Hyde-Are you calling for crosssubsidisation?
Mr MORRIS-No. I will go on to explain. There is a need for the operator opting out of a rural service to make arrangements with other interested operators to provide an adequate air service. Ansett and TAA should, under the provisions of this agreement, be compelled to operate rural services until continuity of such services is guaranteed.

party instigated their inclusion? Once a centre has Clause 13 of the agreement requires provision

been nominated as a trunk route centre now, or in of financial information generally in compliance

the future, there is no machinery whereby the airwith the Victorian Companies Act. I ask honour-

lines can drop the status back to that of a able members on the other side of the House who

prescribed route.

have corporate experience to enlighten the Minis-

ter on what the provisions of the Victorian

This agreement effectively closes up all route Companies Act can provide in an analysis of

centres in Australia where there is even the remofinancial matters relating to the airlines. Ansett

test possibility of an economic air service. Over 50 has for some time complied in its annual' report

3008 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Airlines Agreement Bill

with the provisions of the Victorian Companies Act. Under the agreement the Minister is to be presented with accounting information specifically, with airline operations in total, not specific, terms. Why could the Schedule not provide for accounting information from Ansett and TAA set out in a standardised format so that a meaningful analysis and comparison between the two operators could be made? There is a great need for financial information on each individual aviation section of Ansett. The Airline Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act requires this information to be furnished each year by Ansett. All the Minister has to do is extend this information to be available to be tabled in Parliament. If TAA has to furnish similar financial information in a standardised format then members of this Parliament and members of the public will be aware of what is going on in this highly protected industry.
In the 24 years since the 1957 airline agreement Ansett has not had to produce a detailed set of accounts for examination by anybody. The Department of Transport may have had access to those accounts. I do not believe that in recent years the Department has exercised its prerogative to require that information. If it did the information was not provided to the Parliament. In the recent Holcroft committee inquiry the proprietors of Ansett were not only able to dictate to the inquiry how it should conduct its affairs but also were able to elude providing necessary detailed financial information on the airline's activities. That information is absolutely necessary. If other operators in the industry are required to produce information so should Ansett. But it is necessary so that the parliament and the people can assess the efficiency and the financial results of the airlines on a comparative basis as part of the offset for the heavy level of protection that is provided to Ansett and TAA.
Clause 15 of the agreement deals with the role of Qantas Airways Ltd, TAA and Ansett. In the 1980 agreement this clause, despite recent Press coverage, still retains for Ansett a power of veto over direct Qantas participation in the provision of domestic air services. I have noted in recent weeks stories which gave the impression that the clause had been modified. It has been modified to require the Government to consult with the board of Qantas. But the modification has not altered the fact that Ansett, as one of the parties to the agreement, has a power of veto over whether Qantas should directly participate in the provision of domestic air services across Australia. Again the consumer is discriminated against for the benefit of domestic operators.

The contrast to be made is that recently, when there was a strike within the domestic aviation industry and the Government wanted to do something about it, it was quickly able to overcome the facilitation problems the Minister for Transport is so fond of quoting as the reason the capacity of Qantas across Australia cannot be used. In that strike situation, where it suited the Government's own political purposes, it moved in quickly to utilise Qantas capacity.
Clause 15 (2) sets out that any change in Government policy in the future in the respective roles of TAA, Ansett and Qantas will need only the approval of the parties to the agreement. That confirms what I have just mentioned in respect of Ansett having the final veto. The consultation process for Qantas is a little bit of window dressing.
Another undesirable feature of the agreement is its term of five years, plus three years notice of termination, which is in effect an eight-year minimum period. Its result will be to deny to Australians the benefits of new generation aircraft, adjustments that may be required flowing from changing market patterns, population shifts and tourist development. I will deal with these aspects in more detail in the Committee stage of the Bill.
Because of time limitations I turn briefly now to the Independent Air Fares Committee Bill. This legislation is a partial acceptance of the Australian Labor Party's policy canvassed at the last two elections for the establishment of an independent air fare tribunal, to which I referred on those occasions as the Prices Justification Tribunal or a similar body. Such a tribunal would be given the power to assess and determine air fares. Despite the deficiencies of this Bill, it is a step in the right direction. Those deficiencies can be remedied in the Committee stage with the support of some honourable members opposite. One major deficiency in this Bill and the Airlines Agreement Bill is the absence of a finite and precise financial objective for the airlines which would be available for consideration by the Independent Air Fares Committee. The Preamble to the agreement to which I referred earlier refers, in association with paragraph (a), to the need to ensure 'the efficient and economic operation of air passenger services within Australia'. As I said earlier, they are vague words, public service jargon, with the meaning being in the mind of the utterer. Clause 11 of the Independent Air Fares Committee Bill lists the items to which the Committee shall have regard in conducting major air fare reviews. Clause 15 (11) (d) contains almost the same words as clause A of the preamble to which I have referred; the same vagueness and the same generality.

Airlines Agreement Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3009

However, clause 15 (11) (g), which relates to operating on a competitive basis, is almost in conflict with clause 15 (11) (d) because the two objects cannot be compatible. On the one hand, the legislation involves operating on a competitive basis and, on the other, it involves ensuring economic and efficient operation. Clause 15 (11) (d) of the legislation would be improved if the financial objectives were specific. From my assessment and interpretation clauses 3 and 5 of the air fares committee legislation create serious problems for East-West Airlines Ltd, the major regional operator, in that that company's fare over a trunk route sector must be treated by the Committee as a discount fare. The fact that its fares will be treated in that manner imposes upon the company an obligation to supply information to which it would not have access, and an obligation to make forecasts or produce evidence that certain events may not happen. Again, that is information to which the company would not have access and which it would not be able to provide. We will examine that matter in more detail when we come to the Committee stage of the Bill.
Whilst the legislation picks up a number of the Holcroft committee's recommendations, it is regrettable that it has not adopted those in respect of profit limitation, full public disclosure and, very importantly, reconciliation of airline accounts with the overall activities of the organistions concerned. Some Government members like to criticise the non-airline activities of Trans-Australia Airlines from time to time without following the argument right through or without providing full information. After all, they are members of the Government and it is their responsibility to ensure that full information is provided. It is not the responsibility of the public; they are the Government. In the case of Ansett Transport Industries Ltd, I have often had the complaint from surface transport operators that there are ways and means that can be followed by Ansett Airlines of Australia and ATI in the preparation of accounts, in inter-company transfers and inter-company baJances in the establishment or conduct of operations, airline and non-airline, which conceal the true movements of funds between those companies and which place the airline company always in the position in which, when it is purchasing new aircraft, it needs the benefit of Government guarantees to obtain loans abroad. Mr Holcroft, a major figure in the private sector of the transport industry; Professor Hogan, an economist; and Dr Bell, who is an economist in the investment field, were skilled and able to assess and determine the importance of proper reconciliation. Unfortunately, a provision to deal

with such a practice is not contained in the Bill. Similarly, the Bill does not provide for public dissemination of comparative information on the efficiency of the financial and technical results of both airlines.
I am restricting my time because of a request from the other side. I have outlined the Opposition's general approach to the three Bills before the House. In view of those time restrictions I will reserve my further remarks for the Committee stage of the Bills.
Mr SHACK (Tangney) (5.14)-The three Bills the House is debating cognately this afternoon-the Airlines Agreement Bill, the Independent Air Fares Committee Bill and the Airlines Equipment Amendment Bill-together with the Australian National Airlines Repeal Bill which will be debated in this chamber later today, are the result of over two years of extensive consideration of domestic aviation policy by the Government, by private members of parliament, by the airlines themselves and, importantly, also by the pUblic. Some of the decisions that have been announced by the Government to date, and to which I will refer shortly, ensure that this consideration will be an ongoing process; a process to evaluate the appropriateness of the two-airline policy, which is to be perpetuated by the Airlines Agreement Bill, and perhaps to examine some other options such as a greater or lesser degree of deregulation in the future. As the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) mentioned, there is a limitation of time for this debate. I know that several of my colleagues would like to speak in the Committee stage. I propose to keep my most detailed comments for that time.
I now want to speak broadly, but briefly, on what I think has been achieved over the last couple of years. Over the last two to two and a half years consideration can be perceived as beginning with the Domestic Air Transport Policy Review Committee Report, which came out in 1978. That was an important report because it came out in June 1978, when the Airlines Agreement Act of 1973 terminated. After December 1977 the opportunity existed to provide for termination of previous airlines agreements with five years notice. I believe it was an important report. It came to numerous conclusions designed to improve the regulatory environment. It was on the basis of this report that the Government proceeded to negotiate with the airlines to come up with the airlines agreement which was signed towards the latter part of last year. That agreement was designed to incorporate the improvements and changes that were recommended in the report.

3010 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Airlines Agreement Bill

Although it was a valuable report, it had two The Minister announced in that statement that

weaknesses. Firstly, it proceeded from the basis of the Government would be enlisting independent

the maintenance of the two-airline policy. The assistance to help in that work. As I understand it,

two-airline policy was not brought into question. a tender has been let to some accountants. I would

Secondly-I do not think this is unfair criticismbe grateful for the Minister's explanation, in his

the review was conducted largely by the Departresponses during debate on these Bills, of how that

ment of Transport. I think it can be shown from further work is going. I hope that that cost allo~

the report that the interests of the regulated and cation procedure can be concluded so that when

the regulators became enmeshed. It was not an we next face a new fare rise, and if that new fare

independent study in that sense. Because of that rise comes before the Independent Air Fares

there grew in the community, and certainly inside Committee is in place, it will be based on the

the Parliament, a level of disquiet which recogHolcroft formula.

nised that this was a valuable opportunity to reassess domestic aviation and to reassess our needs for the future. It was felt that perhaps the reassessment in this report was not as full as needed. Wisely, the Government recognised that disquiet and moved to set up the Holcroft Independent Public Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares.

I mention the Independent Air Fares Committee because it is the second major initiative of the Government in response to the Holcroft report. There is an intention to establish the Committee, which will be given the sole responsibility of periodically reviewing the cost allocation methodology. It will be independent and separate

I want to place on public record my opinion as from the Department of Transport, and it will to the valuable contribution to the study and have the further responsibility of adjudicating on

understanding of domestic aviation made by the future fare rises, be they minor or major. An imHolcroft report. I want to pay tribute to Warwick portant point I make about the Committee at this

Holcroft, Harold Bell and Warren Hogan for the stage is that its personnel will be important, absol-

work they did in the course of the committee's inutely crucial. They must be men who can be seen vestigations. The focus of the committee was on and shown in the public arena as possessing the fares but, without repeating old arguments that I absolutely highest integrity because in a regulated

have voiced in this place, the terms of reference of environment they will have the sole responsibility the committee gave it wider scope. The comon behalf of the public of adjudicating on what

mittee was able to bring into focus and into questhe fares should be and of explaining to the public

tion the two-airline policy itself. The Government why they have arrived at such findings. I hope to

has had the Holcroft report since the early part of make an input to the Government as to who

this year and now we have this legislative package should be on that Committee. I merely stress that reflecting some of the findings in that report. As I the Committee's personnel will be absolutely vital

stated at the outset of my remarks, I would like to catalogue what I believe has been achieved. I refer firstly to fares. It will be remembered that the Holcroft committee, among other things, identified gross cross-subsidisation between routes,

to its success in the public eye. The second most important thing about the
Committee is that its findings will be public. Not only will it announce a fare rise but it will also

deficiencies of the present air fare setting formula publicise its reasons for that determination. This and procedure and, in the committee's opinion, a initiative is an attempt by the Government to pick

lack of desirable accountability which is necessary up that element of accountability that the

in the regulated environment due to the absence Holcroft committee identified to be lacking in the

of the disciplines of market forces.

regulated environment, and I think that is

The Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt), in his 1 April statement to the Parliament, gave an initial response to the Holcroft report. One of the most important elements of that response was that the Government accepted the need for a national cost-based formula with the elimination of cross-

especially important. I have my own personal view that if that is done, and done properly, more and more Australians will come to appreciate the ludicrous nature of a regulated air fare setting environment. However, for the moment, and for the purposes of this debate, that is by the by.

subsidisation as far as is practicable. To date we The third major initiative of the Government is

have seen a first step readjustment of the fare relaits decision on Trans-Australia Airlines. I do not

tivities between the long haul and short haul want to run the risk of referring to a debate that

routes in an effort to eliminate cross-subsidisation. will take place in this chamber later today. I

The Government rightly recognised that Holcroft simply say that the 1 April statement by the Min-

did not go far enough in terms of his figure work ister contained an in-principle announcement of

and that more cost allocation work was required. the establishment of TAA as a public company, to

Airlines Agreement Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3011

free it from the same sorts of bureaucratic controls that Qantas has complained about. It is an initiative that has been welcomed by TAA. It will make TAA more competitive, and I believe the regulated environment will be all the better for that decision. I am mindful of the Government's own interdepartmental committee study into the future of TAA. The report of that committee, which was given to the Government on 14 March
1980, stated:

have open minds on the question of future aviation policy for this country, 1 can see no reason why it cannot bring down progressive reports. The Government will have before it the benefits of that inquiry within five years. For the first time since the two-airline policy was brought into play, we will be in a position to consider where we should be going-not from the basis of maintaining the status quo but by comparing the status quo with perhaps some other options.

However, the committee concluded it was not possible to make Trans-Australia Airlines fully commercial while the Government was a majority shareholder.
What we are doing now, in my view, is taking the first most important step. We have to take the next most important step before we arrive at a final decision as to the future of TAA, that is, to investigate the structure of TAA. To look at TANs superannuation liabilities and other liabilities, its asset value and so forth. We can then arrive at an answer to the question which at present we cannot answer, that is: What is TAA worth? We have heard a lot of hysteria from the Australian Labor Party on this matter, which is central to its socialist ideology. I believe that if the Australian Labor Party shook off its blinkers and looked at the matter it also would come to the conclusion 1 presently hold that a more competitive TAA will be achieved if there is direct public shareholding. 1 believe that the regulated environment would be all the better for that.
The fourth initiative that has been announced by the Government is the intention to establish a deregulation inquiry, and again I refer to what Holcroft said. In simple terms, he said: '1 determine faults in the regulated environment and I list by way of recommendations ways in which I think you can improve it. But even if you do everything I say you should do to improve the regulated environment, you will end up only with second best.' In my view, the Holcroft committee's most important conclusion was that we should be proceeding down the road towards progressive deregulation. The Minister in his 2 April statement to this Parliament, when dealing with the Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantees) Bill, announced the intention to set up the inquiry. Again I say that the two most important aspects yet to be determined are the terms of reference for that inquiry and the personnel who will conduct it. I can see no reason why those matters should not be decided later this year when Parliament returns for the Budget session. As the Minister announced, the inquiry will be asked to report within five years. If the inquiry is set up properly, with dinkum terms of reference and with people who

Fifthly, ] come to the proposed two-airline agreement itself. The agreement takes into account the Government's decisions on the independent air fares committee and on TAA. Before dealing with that in a little greater detail, I would like to summarise the stage we have reached. In my mind, there has been definite progress. There have been air fare reductions on long haul routes and we have seen a foreshadowing of further changes in the relativities between fares for long and short routes. It is intended to establish an independent committee separate from the Department of Transport to determine future fares, to monitor the cost methodology, and to provide that public accountability that is so necessary in a regulated environment. A new two airline agreement has been negotiated to take into account the decisions of the committee and the decisions on TAA. It is intended to establish an inquiry to investigate whether deregulation is a viable objective for our future domestic aviation needs.
These are all significant undertakings and statements of intent which, in my view, mark important and welcome shifts in Government policy. Honourable members will recall that only a little while ago that policy did not really accept that the fare relativities between long and short haul routes were inequitable or unjust. Only a little while ago that policy was firmly committeed to the reins of regulatory control being held exclusively by the Department of Transport, which was committed to the continuance of TAA as a statutory corporation. It was based on a seemingly unshakable commitment to the long term maintenance of the two-airline system. [ believe that we have progressed, that we are taking steps in the right direction, and that further progress can be expected as we move down the path that has now been chosen.
In my last five minutes I want to turn to the two-airline agreement. I oppose the two-airline policy. I have opposed it in the Parliament for as long as I have been here, and my opposition is well known outside the Parliament. I accept that the proposed agreement contains improvements over

3012 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Airlines Agreement Bill

previous agreements-improvements with respect to freight, the air fares committee, and public accountability. But for every improvement we can find complaints and criticisms, such as the legitimate concerns of East-West Airlines Ltd, the concern that Qantas Airways Ltd will not be able to play its proper role, and so on. I remain opposed to the two-airline policy as such because I believe it denies entrepreneurs freedom to enter the market, it denies the Australian travelling public significant carri~r choice, and it offers the public little realistic price value choice in terms of fares. I accept that the policy does have some benefits, such as flight frequency and a very high standard of in-flight service, but I do not think that they outweigh the disadvantages, and they are certainly benefits that are provided at an inflated cost.
In the past I have called the two-airline agreement a piece of economic madness which is costing Australia dearly. I believe the present system is based on an inflated cost due to operational inefficiency. It is my view that a deregulated system would open up the system to competitive market forces and would see all features-price, frequency and service-based on and responsive to consumer demand. I have to accept the possibility that I may be completely wrong. My prejudice against the two-airline policy and in favour of progressive deregulation may be completely wrong. In that light, I congratulate the Government for opting for the only responsible course available to it, that is, to investigate the situation. The deregulation inquiry is a first-class initiative. I welcome it with all the support I can muster. For the first time in 20-odd years we will look at other possibilities and make a decision as to whether they can be applied to Australia. We will look at the American experience, not only from the perspective of the airlines but also from the perspective of those people we too readily forget-the passengers. The deregulation inquiry will report within five years.
Given that fact, what bothers me most about this legislative package is the life of the new agreement. I believe we should put ourselves in a position whereby we will make a decision on the deregulation inquiry at the end of five years. The airlines agreement as it is presently drafted and the Bill which gives effect to that agreement places no requirement on anybody to do anything after five years. We cannot do anything before five years, but after five years we do not have to do anything either. If honourable members doubt that I ask them to look closely at the terms of clause 22(4) of the agreement. Over the last few days we have heard a lot about whether five plus

three makes eight, whether three from eight equals five and so forth. I want to try to reduce the whole issue to this fundamental point. As clause 22(4) is presently drafted, it provides for a five year minimum plus an indefinite period during which we mayor may not give notice of something. It then has a three-year period of termination. Effectively we have a minimum of eight years but a maximum that is indeterminate. I have advocated strongly in the past that we should have a five-year maxamum. I will save my comments on that matter for the Committee debate because I am running out of time. I foreshadow that I will argue that we should opt for a five plus three situation but that we should make the minimum of eight years as provided for in the agreement a maximum of eight years. Amendments to be moved in my name have been circulated. I will leave my further remarks for the Committee stage of the Bill.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (5.33)-1 will support in the Committee stage the Opposition's amendments. I will now range over the Airlines Agreement Bill, the Independent Air Fares Committee Bill and the Airlines Equipment Amendment Bill, though not as broadly as the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack) ranged in the course of his remarks. He was extremely provocative, introducing at this stage of the debate the question of the future of Trans-Australia Airlines. That matter is not before us at the moment. He protrayed a picture of sweetness and light in the progress to the point at which we are now, which I do not think the history of this issue justifies. This debate today concludes a sorry tale, not only for the Government, although mainly for it, but also for the Government's revolting back bench. The Government's performance for over a year now has been one of vacillation and deceit-a misleading not only of the Parliament but also of the Australian people in a general election. These points were made quite clearly during the various debates on this matter to this point. Most particularly misled have been the citizens of Western Australia. They have also been ill-used by a selection of Liberal back backbenchers from that State. The honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde), the honourable member for Canning (Mr Bungey), the honourable member for Tangney, the honourable member for Curtin (Mr Rocher) and the honourable member for Perth (Mr McLean) have never been able to work out whether their main task has been to lower air fares for Western Australians or to conduct an ideological tribal dance on the question of the abolition of the Government's airline, of interest only to the wretched coterie of neanderthals in

Airlines Agreement Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3013

the local Liberal Party organisation. They will be made fundamental to the process. The Holcroft

put to the test on these Bills. Several honourable inquiry concluded with four recommendations on

members opposite are on record as supporting a profit levels. One of them was quite clear on

five-year maximum period on a non-negotiable amounts. It stated:

basis for the operation of this legislation. We shall be moving an amendment in the Committee stage that will give them the opportunity to display exactly how far they will go and how nonnegotiable that position has been.

Profit before interest and tax, excluding extraordinary items, should as a proportion of revenue not exceed 6 per cent, given a continuation of present levels of interest rates and income taxation in Australia.

The Labor Party's amendments are designed to resurrect something for the Australian and Western Australian people from this morass. To do this we must resist the Government's attempts to make the two-airline agreement election proof and the operations of the Independent Air Fares Committee public proof. This Government does not trust people because, left to themselves, the people do not trust it. Therefore, a popular view, in the view of this Government, must be resisted at all costs. Despite the fact that there are some improvements as the Opposition shadow spokesman said, referring to the Air Fares Committee, I suggest that these are way short of the requirements of the Holcroft inquiry into domestic air fares. They are short at least of what some honourable members opposite have said on the public record to this point. It will be extremely interesting to see how they come across on the amendments we will be moving. Our intentions through the amendments we will move will be two-fold. The first will be to stop the victimisation of the Australian travelling public by preventing their having to carry the burdens of excess and uncontrolled profits. Secondly, our amendments will render the airlines' economies publicly accountable.
The Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) wrapped himself, as far as he possibly could, in the Holcroft inquiry flag in his second reading speech on this Bill. However, throughout that

We can interpret many things in the Holcroft inquiry in many ways, but one thing we cannot do is interpret that recommendation out of existence. It is quite clear. It is also quite clear from the Minister's second reading speech and many of the contributions from honourable members opposite so far that this limitation simply will not be imposed. It should be imposed. We have every right to expect that it should have appeared in the Minister's statement and in the legislation. An indication of that was given by the Minister when he spoke on this matter on 1 April. He said:
In addition, the report's recommendations advocating the adoption of a profit target must be more fully examined.
More fully examined by whom, if it is not to be directly more fully examined by the air fares inquiry to this point? Not only is there no limit on profits but also there is no requirement to make public airline accounts so that people may judge the extent to which they are being justly or unjustly treated. This is evident from clause 13 of the Schedule to the Airlines Agreement Bill which has already been mentioned by the Opposition spokesman on this matter. I think it is worthwhile to refresh our memories. The Bill is before honourable members so I will not read the clause to them. They should contrast the clause with what the Holcroft inquiry recommended. Recommendation (1) in the section on profit stated:
There should be public disclosure of balance sheets and profit and loss accounts for those activities subject to special

speech and throughout the negotiation of this agreement he frustrated at every point the purpose of that inquiry and the recommendations it made. Fundamental to the inquiry and ignored by this agreement and the Independent Air Fares Committee Bill was a limitation on excess profit.

regulation and these accounts should be shown separately from those for the company as a whole. There should be reconciliation statements for such accounts stating the results for regulated activity together with the overall accounts. This should be supported by sufficient information to show the methods used for allocating relevant items between the two sets of accounts.

In chapter 16 of the Holcroft report the question How far short of that very desirable objective

of profit was assessed at great length. Many condoes clause 13 of the Schedule fall? It falls a very

structive suggestions were put forward. The long way short indeed. It is no particular credit to

Holcroft inquiry stated:

the Government that it has chosen not to adopt

The attention given to profitability in relation to the setting of air fares requires a careful appraisal of the ways in which an equitable return in a regulated activity should be assessed.
This is all the more important when so little attention has been given in Australia to what this means in practice.

that recommendation of the Holcroft inquiry. There is a half-baked comm~tment right down the line to the Holcroft propositions. This is a110ther element of that half-baked commitment. The House is not only misled by ministerial prot-

Neither in the agreement nor in the terms of estations on the level of government compliance

reference for the Air Fares Committee' is this with Holcroft recommendations but also misled

3014 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Airlines Agreement Bill

on the undertaking by the Minister to permit the use of Qantas Airways Ltd seats on domestic flights between east and west. I will quote in full an answer to a question asked of the Minister by the honourable member for Tangney on 29 April 1981. The Minister said:
I think the events of the last few days have indicated that the proposition--
That concerned the suggestion on the permanent use of Qantas on east-west fiights-
put forward by the honourable member is certainly a feasible one in terms of administration. In the longer term, however, I understand that there would have to be additional facilities for Customs, quarantine et cetera, in order to cope with the mix of passengers on such aircraft. I have initiated discussions between the airlines to ensure that there is a way through the problem that has been concerning the Western Australian people for some considerable time. Where we can use excess capacity on international services from Perth to the eastern States, we should endeavour to do so, so long as we do not disrupt the regular scheduled services that the Western Australians have come to expect. That is the only concern I have in trying to achieve that objective which has been sought by a number of people from Western Australia.
The Minister may defend himself, if he wishes to, by pointing out that there are enough caveats and loopholes for him to whip a horse and cart through. There is no loophole in that statement to suggest that he may permit Ansett Airlines of Australia to determine the point at which the Government's conclusions on that investigation have been reached in a satisfactory way. There is no suggestion in the statement made by the Minister on the question of the use of Qantas seats that Ansett Airlines will be given a veto. There is no suggestion of that whatsoever. Effectively, that section of the agreement relating to the use of Qantas provides Ansett with a veto. Therefore, Western Australians cannot, I believe, look forward with the degree of confidence they ought to a rapid gaining of access to Qantas flights on the east-west trip.
I remind honourable members that various estimates made of the value to the Western Australian travelling public of the use of Qantas seats have put the reduction of fares as high as 50 per cent. Further, in terms of reference, functions and public accountability of the Independent Air Fares Committee that from a parochial point of view the main possibilities for air fare justice have been thwarted. That is a parochial Western Australian point of view but also one which I think could be adopted by any honourable member from any area of Australia. The Holcroftinquiry demonstrated the extent of the cross-subsidisation of the eastern network by passengers travelling on the east-west routes. Whilst the honourable member for Tangney does not wish us to look at those matters historically and says that bygones

ought to be bygones I do not think that we who represent Western Australia ought ever to tire of reminding honourable members that the estimates of subsidies were over $20m per annum. That is a shameful figure. It is a figure that has not in any way been alleviated, at least to any substantial degree, by air fare reductions that have occurred so far. We cannot guarantee in any aspect of this legislation that the situation will be alleviated in the future.
The Governments adjustments to air fares were a joke. But they were accepted by gullible members opposite from Western Australia as the forerunner of more cuts. All the groundwork was laid for a rapid reallocation of costs by the Holcroft committee. A considerable amount of work was done by committee members on that matter. As I said, the groundwork was laid for a rapid decision. But under the Bill there is no obligation on the committee to report in under three years. I will refer to the Minister's speech on 1 April and his comments on whether there would be further air fare reductions. To a very considerable extent these can only be based on a proper appreciation of the need to reallocate costs. The Minister stated:
However, the inquiry recognised a considerable amount of detailed work would still be necessary to derive and verify the most appropriate fair setting formula based on current costs.
He went on:
The Government will arrange immediately further substantial discussions with the airlines so this task can be completed by July 1981.
The honourable member for Tangney expressed hope that when the next air fare rise came about such adjustments would be made. The simple fact of the matter is there is now established a body given responsibility for reallocating costs. That will provide a perfect excuse for this Government-and it has not very often needed perfect excuses in the past to do what it wants-to evade having to do that cost reallocation so that we in Western Australia can expect, three years from now perhaps-no doubt promises will be made before the next election by the Liberal Party advertisers doing a soft shoe shuffle-the fare reductions that we might get in the west. Of course, that may well come to naught after the next election. That question has been made 'public proof' with the terms of the Committee's reference. As I would suggest, in the end nothing will come of it. Therefore we still have the situation where the air fares to Canberra from Sydney is $112, from Melbourne $145, from Adelaide $232, from Brisbane $214 but from Perth $504.

Airlines Agreement Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3015

Over the years quite effective pressure groups have been established in Western Australia to demand air fare justice. Nothing in the Bill gives such groups automatic access to the committee they have striven so hard to create. At cost allocation reviews such groups will appear at the Committee's pleasure. If the groups are not made parties to the agreement they, like the rest of the public, have no automatic right of appearance; nor do they have the right to know what transpires at Committee hearings. Part of the hearings-a part vital to a Committee decisionmay be held in private. On top of that, interest groups have no right of access to major and minor air fare reviews.
As the honourable member for Tangney pointed out the Committee must be trustworthy. The Holcroft inquiry pointed to the dangers of regulators identifying with the interests of the regulated and not the interests of the public, on whose behalf they should be acting. This applies to the Government in the case of the Holcroft inquiry. It will apply to the Committee in the case of its composition. We have not been given any guarantees in the Minister's second reading speech that the Government will appoint to this Committee the type of person who will not purely be a lackey of the Independent Air Fares Committee interests. The importance of doing so I think was well outlined on page 238 of volume 1 of the Holcroft committee report. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard that page of recommendations in order to be able to conclude my remarks and to give other honourable members time to speak.
Leave granted.
The document read as jollows-
15.9 The problems of accountability in an industry or activity that is treated for regulatory purposes as in some sense part of the public sector are especially testing. The concept of accountability is bound to embrace the activities of the regulatory agency as well as the performance of the regulated participants. For example, accountability requirements imposed upon the regulated industry may reveal shortcomings which also reflect upon the workings of the regulatory agency. In such circumstance the regulatory agency may develop as much of an interest as the regulated participants in limiting the information available on past and present performance.
15.10 A positive concern with accountability must involve the dissemination of information on the workings of the regulated industry and the regulatory agency in such a manner as to allow third parties, especially the users of services of the regulated industry, to make judgments about the efficiency and effectiveness of the regulatory agency as well as of the regulated industry.
15.11 It may be objected that the regulated industry, while having to meet the requirements of the regulatory agency, also has to meet other obligations in the marketplace with all the reporting requirements that are laid down for private sector firms. However, this objection is misplaced if the provisions for an industry specially regulated by the mechanisms of the

public sector also involve withdrawing some of the normal checks applied to market performance. 15.12 Air passenger transport activity bears witness to the complexity of arrangements associated with regulation. For example, the two major participants, TAA and Ansett, are not engaged solely in this activity so there is no clear basis to?
Mr BEAZLEY-I thank the House. Neither the membership nor the public accountability of this Committee conforms to the standards that the Holcroft committee laid down. The failure to conform to the standards that the Holcroft committee laid down, I believe, means that in the future there will be considerable difficulties in ensuring that the travelling public is treated justly by the two-airline agreement. There is to be no consumer representative on the Independent Air Fares Committee. Public access and public accountability are highly restricted. The Opposition will move amendments that will provide honourable members opposite with a chance again to assert their principles on both those accounts. I believe that the Opposition's amendments when they are moved must be supported. The honourable member for Tangney talked of the progress of sweetness and light on this matter, but it appears that quite bloody and bruising battles have taken place opposite. Honourable members have gone on record via leaks and direct public statements. Their statements are all on record; they all match amendments that the Opposition is moving. We look forward with very great confidence to a few thumping victories this evening.
Mr CHARLES JONES (Newcastle) (5.53)-The Bills before the House in this cognate debate are the Airlines Agreement Bill, the Independent Air Fares Committee Bill and the Airlines Equipment Amendment Bill. The introduction of these pieces of legislation into the Parliament has certainly brought about considerable conflict within the ranks of the Government members who have all been pushing their own lobby's point of view. The result is that the Cabinet and the Government have been in one hell of a mess ever since the airlines agreement was first brought to negotiation. In a country the size of Australia, with a population as large as it is, with a limited number of air travellers, there are some advantages in having a genuine two-airline agreement and an arrangement which would put the airline system into a truly competitive position and which at the same time would give the people of this country a first-class airline system at fair and reasonable prices.
Ever since the original airline agreement was first negotiated and brought into legislation by the Menzies Government in 1952 the result has been one thing only. On that occasion the legislation was designed to protect Ansett Airlines of

3016 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Airlines Agreement Bill

Australia from Trans-Australia Airlines or any other competitor which might move into the field. I draw the attention of the House to the case only a few years ago when IPEC endeavoured to get into the airline business, into the lurk, into the monopoly operation; in order to get a licence to print money. That is what the airline agreement has developed into-a licence for the private operators to print money. In such a situation there is a need for a renegotiation of the airline agreement.
A limitation of five years notice of termination under the old agreement has been mentioned. The position under the old agreement was that it was almost impossible to terminate the agreement. The present agreement has five years to run. With three years notice of termination the position could well be that at the end of this Parliament in 1983 we could have an Australian Labor Party government. In 1985 the five years would have run its course. The Labor Party could give notice of termination of the agreement at that point. When the three years notice expires there could be a change of government. So, we then have a change of policy.
This airlines agreement should be a sunset agreement. If we have a five-year agreement then at the end of five years that agreement should terminate. There should not be any notice of termination of the agreement. When the agreement is approaching the end of its five-year term it is up to the government of the day and the parties to the agreement to sit down to talk about it, to negotiate a new agreement that would then become operative, if it is agreed to by the Parliament. This should be the practice instead of this humbug, this means whereby Ansett can get out of having the agreement renegotiated. The Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) in his speech drew attention to the fact that in 1974 I, as Minister for Transport, wanted to give the people of Western Australia another service. Thereby TAA would have been in competition with MacRobertson Miller Airline Services which, after all, is only another name for Ansett Transport Industries Ltd. The Labor Government was going to fit TAA with DC9s. It was going to give the people the option of two fares-the first class fare and the economy class fare. At that time all the people using the MacRobertson Miller airline had to pay the first class fare. There was no economy fare. Our proposal involved a 25 per cent reduction in fares for the people. How long did it take to get that decision that was taken by the Labor Government put into effect? It was some three and a half years. By the use of the terms of the agreement and the High Court of Australia and

all the rest of it the people were prevented from getting this opportunity to have lower fares. The Minister in his second reading speech said:
In its submission to the public hearings of the Holcraft Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares in Port Hedland. TAA claimed that between November 1977, when the DC9 services commenced. and August 1980, 41,168 passengers had used the DC9 services. These passengers had paid some $1.5m less for their travel than if they had usedF28 services. a saving of over $25 for each passenger.
That is what the first two-airline agreement meant to the people of Western Australia. The members of the Liberal Party in Western Australia and the members of the Liberal and Country parties in this Government were instrumental in forcing the people of Western Australia to pay the extra charges on the airlines operations in Western Australia. The proposal could have resulted in cheaper fares for those people. What happened occurred just because the Government wanted to pay for services rendered to it by Ansett. Ansett has been protected for years by the Liberal and Country Party governments of this country. Now we have the set-up with Murdoch and Sir Peter Abeles in Ansett Transport Indus" tries Ltd. Here once again is the pay-off. Just as with the pay-off earlier today with-the amendments of the Broadcasting and Television Act, this pay-off is for services rendered to the Government by Ansett and by Murdoch in the 1975, 1977 and 1980 elections.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Mr CHARLES JONES-The Airlines Agreement Bill and the two associated Bills are very important pieces of legislation. One of the most unfortunate aspects of this debate is the limited time the Parliament will give to considering these major Bills. Without repeating what I said prior to the suspension of the sitting, I wish to refer to a couple of matters. The first relates to the set-up of Ansett Transport Industries Ltd. a company that covers a multitude of undertakings. No real consideration has been given to the composition of this company, as to whether it is a transport company or a media company, or whether it will be involved in television operations as a result of the legislation introduced earlier today. That legislation is part of a pay-off to Murdoch for services rendered to this Government in the three elections held in 1975, 1977 and 1980. Honourable members know that what I am saying is true.
I draw the attention of honourable members to the fact that Ansett Transport Industries operates in the airline business not only as Ansett Airlines of Australia but also as Ansett Airlines of New Souih Wales and MacRobertson Miller. One can go through the various States and see the names

Airlines Agreement Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3017

under which Ansett Transport Industries operates. The company also owns a number of tourist resorts and touring buses throughout Australia. The Wellington Hotel, which is just down the road from Parliament House, is owned by Ansett Transport Industries. The company deals in interstate bus and freight operations, and it also operates as a furniture removalist. This is all part and parcel of its operation. When Sir Reginal Ansett was Chairman he took the company into television. As a result, we now have a situation where this agreement will have a major effect on all the undertakings in which Ansett Transport Industries is involved.
I remind honourable members that Ansett had a very substantial shareholding in Associated Securities Ltd. Ansett employees were encouraged to take out debentures and secured and unsecured notes. Finally ASL folded up after Ansett Transport Industries had been given a guarantee by this Parliament for the borrowing of money from the Exim Bank of the United States of America, thus enabling the company to borrow money at much lower rates of interest than would normally apply and to use the cash flow that the airline industry provides for a company to try to keep ASL alive. Unfortunately, these matters have not been taken into consideration by this Parliament. I believe it is wrong to rush this legislation through the Parliament. Consideration should be given to referring the legislation to a parliamentary select committee or to one of the Parliament's legislation committees, rather than pushing it through as we are doing at present.
One of the clauses in the Airlines Agreement Bill places us in an intolerable situation. The clause seeks to allow one of the private operators to decide whether Qantas Airways Ltd will be permitted to operate on domestic routes. One of the two operators, Ansett or TAA, can veto Qantas's operations. Do we intend to reverse the position and allow Qantas to veto the operation of Ansett and TAA on the international routes? These matters have not been explained in detail. I am concerned about the Press reports and statements we have received from East-West Airlines. I have great regard and respect for that airline because I think it has done an excellent job. The former Chairman, Don Shand, was a great man in aviation, and I am certain that the Minister for Transport, who is seated at the table, would not dispute that point of view, having lived fairly close to him. I had great respect for Don Shand and the airline he operated, and I have the same respect for the present General Manager, Mr Riley. These people are all concerned about what is happening.

Budget Rent-a-Car Systems Pty Ltd, which admittedly is not owned by Bob Ansett but by the Bank of New South Wales, is putting forward the point of view that the agreement should not be passed by the Parliament at this stage without its being given further serious consideration. It is for these reasons that I say there is a need for this legislation to be considered by a select committee or by one of the Parliament's legislation committees. I am surprised at the hide of the signatories to the agreement, but I think I can guess where it came from. It came from Ansett. The name of Sir Reginald Ansett has been maligned, but unfortunately the airline carries his name. He is not the guilty man; the guilty men are Sir Peter Abeles and Murdoch, but the fact is that we still have to refer to the airline as Ansett. I now turn to clause 10 (3) of the Schedule to the Airlines Agreement Bill, which states:
The Commonwealth agrees that it will not increase the amount of tax (including customs and excise duties) payable in respect of each litre of aviation fuel in any period of twelve months by a greater amount or rate than the corresponding amount or rate of any increases in tax in that period imposed on motor spirit.
It is like the hide of them to require the Australian Parliament to give them that assurance, that is, that the Commonwealth Government will not increase aviation fuel taxation or excise. Does the electorate have any assurance from the Government that it will not increase fuel tax? Does it have any assurance that the Government will not increase income tax? The Government gave the assurance to Ansett. It has tied it to some other remotely related form of taxation in a tax for roads. I will never forget what Harold Holt said back in about 1962 when he was the Treasurer. I asked him a question about fuel tax and he said that petrol was only another commodity that the Parliament reserved the right to tax and that the Parliament should not assent to agreements such as the one to which I have referred namely, the agreement contained in clause 10 (3). That clause should be deleted from the agreement, and I am disappointed to find that the Minister is prepared to agree to such a clause being included in the agreement. I believe that parallel scheduling by the two airlines, Ansett and TAA, is a waste of capacity. Day after day two aeroplanes fly simultaneously between major centres, in many cases with only half the capacity of the aeroplane occupied, where one aeroplane could do the whole job. Unfortunately, this situation applies under the agreement as far as parallel scheduling is concerned. The airlines stick rigidly to the principle. Neither will give an inch.
In the limited time available to me I wish to make reference to the Independent Air Fares

3018 REPRESENTATIVES ,3 June 1981

Airlines Agreement Bill

Committee which it is proposed to set up. The Committee is to 'comprise a part time chairman and tWo part time members. I would like some indiCation from the Minister, if he should reply to the debate, as to whom he is considering for those positions. What sort of people is he looking at? Without mentioning names, of course, the appointment of a judge has been mentioned. If he was a full time judge, he would not receive any special allowance as the Chairman of the Independent Air Fares Committee. I am more interested in establishing who the three people will be. What will be their connection with the aviation industry?
I draw the attention of honourable members to the constitutional powers of this Parliament to set up an interstate commission. Legislation to establish such a commission went through the Parliament in October 1975. That legislation has never been proclaimed by this Government. Admittedly, avia~ion was excluded from the amendments which we were forced to accept. Of course, that was all done at that time. Let us be clear and frank about that. It was done because of the pressure that Ansett Transport Industries was able to wield on the Liberal-National Country Party Opposition. At that time the Australian Labor Party, unfortunately, did not have the numbers in the Senate as was later proven on 11 November 1975. We could not get the legislation for the establishment of the interstate commission through in the form we wanted it through. I had to accept the amendments in this House rather than let the amendments be introduced in the other place. The Liberal-National Country Party Opposition at that time, under pressure from Ansett, was successful in forcing us to accept the deletion of any reference to aviation.
It would be quite easy for this Government to bring that commission back into being. I believe it would be of great value as far as transport is concerned. Nobody really knows the cost of carrying a tonne of freight, whether it be by road transport or by rail transport. We do have some idea of the cost of a tonne of freight carried by ships because shipping gets very little subsidisation compared with the other two modes of transport. So the Government should be looking at this aspect rather than setting up a separate identity to deal with just one facet of transport, namely, the fares to be charged on the main trunk route operations. I ask the Minister to give some serious consideration to this matter. Once again I think this matter should be referred to a select committee. It is one thing that that committee could have a very good look at. It could also look at providing the means for correctly assessing the rates that will be

charged by the airlines. While people are only appointed to part time positions their connections are questionable. Pressures can be applied to them in relation to the fares to be charged. I am not satisfied with the means whereby these people will be appointed. I think it is a matter that should be considered in much greater depth than we have considered it at this time. Having in mind the desires of the House to go into Committee I conclude my remarks.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
In Committee
The BilL Mr SHACK (Tangney) (8.13)-Mr Deputy Chairman, I seek your indulgence. The Committee is determined to consider the Bill as a whole. I have an amendment to clause 2 which has been circulated in my name. It is the first clause that can be amended unless we change the name of the Bill. I have also circulated an amendment to insert a new clause. I submit that my two amendments are consequential upon one another. They do not make sense unless they are put together. They are two sides of the one coin. I seek leave of the Committee to move those two amendments together forthwith.
Mr Morris-Leave is not granted. I was on my feet to move the amendments circulated in my name.
Leave not granted.
Mr SHACK-I seek your guidance, Mr Deputy Chairman. I have circulated an amendment relating to clause 2. As I have said, that is the first clause that can be amended. I move:
Clause 2, page 1, line 8, omit sub-clause (2), substitute the following sub-clause:
'(2) Section 3 shall come into operation at the expiration of the period of 90 days referred to in sub-clause 2 (3) of the agreement referred to in section 5'.
The whole thrust of my contribution to this debate is that the Parliament should provide for an end point to the new airlines agreement. Equally, I believe, it should provide for a definite end point for the existing legislation. As the Bill is drafted at the moment, clause 2 (2) states:
Section j shall come into operation on a day to be fixed by Proclamation.
Proclamation is an uncertain time. I see it as the role of this Parliament to place a definite end point on when section 3 shall come into operation. Section 3 is, of course, the repeal section of all those Acts which currently give rise to the civil aviation agreements and the airline agreements that bring us to this point. I repeat that clause

Airlines Agreement Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3019

2 (2), as presently drafted, states that section 3 shall come into operation on a day to be fixed by proclamation. My amendment, if passed, would mean that the repeal clause would come into effect at the expiration of the period of 90 days which is provided for in the agreement. Subclauses 1 (3) (a), (b) and (c) of the Schedule which is, in fact, the agreement, state that the remainder of the agreement shall come into operation on the day of occurrence of the last of the following events: The first event is an Act of the Parliament providing for the establishment of the Independent Air Fares Committee; the second event is the amendments to clause 8 related to the Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations and the Airlines Equipment Act; and the third event is the 90-day period which, in everyday speech, is the opt-out clause which is provided for in clause 2 (3) of the Schedule. The new agreement will come into existence after the expiration of 90 days. 1 believe that is also the time when all existing agreements should be repealed. That is my purpose in moving the amendment.
Mr HYDE (Moore) (8.18)-1 think this is an appropriate time for me to make one point. The honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack) has described the purpose of the amendment. I cannot add to that. This amendment and the one that will be shortly moved by the honourable member for Tangney come at the end of a period of long negotiation, at the end of which substantial agreement has been reached with the Government. During that time those honourable members from this side of the chamber who have sought to achieve a more free enterprise domestic aviation system have had many difficult discussions with the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) and with the Government. For the record, in spite of odd disagreements, it ought to be said that the Minister has, at all stages, been courteous, co-operative and frank with us. Had that not been the case, we would not have got through to tonight where there is only one area of disagreement at the end of a long stage of quite difficult negotiations. I, and I think those who have argued with me, appreciate the Minister's co-operation.
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport)-I would like to thank the honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde) for his generosity. Unfortunately, the Government cannot support this amendment and the one that will be moved later as they are contingent upon each other. I would like to reserve my remarks until we deal with the next amendment. I just foreshadow that the Government cannot accept either amendment.
Question put:

That the amendment (Mf Shack's) be agreed to.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Mr G. O'R. Giles)

Ayes

54

Noes

55

Majority

AYES
Annitage, 1. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowenl Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Bungey, M. H. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,I. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.l. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry.K. L. Hawke, R.I. L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B.L.
Humphreys, B. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Hyde,J. M. Innes, U. E. Jacobi, R.

lenkins, H. A. lohnson,Les (Teller)
lones, Barry Jones, Charles lull,D.F. Kelly,R.l. Klugman, R. E. McLean, R. M. McLeay,Leo
McMahon. Les Mildr.n, I. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. rvlorrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Rocher, A. C. Scholes,G.G.D. Scott, J. L.
Shack,P. D. Tambling, G. E. I. Theophanous, A. C. Tuckey, C. W. Uren, T. Wallis,L.G. West,S.J. WiIIis,R. Young, M.J.

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, I. D. Baume,M,E, Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton,1. J. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. D. Dean,A.G. Dobie, 1. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D.
Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. (Teller)
Good luck, B.l. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harri., G. McD. Hicks,N.l.

NOES

Hodges, J. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt. R. J. D. Jarman, A. \V. Katter, R. C.
Lloyd. B.
Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M.l. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McVeigh,D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar,P.C. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Robinson, Ian Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E.
Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. MoC. Spender, I. M. Street, A. A. Thomson, D, S. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

PAIRS
Campbell,G. Keating, P.l. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C.
In division-

Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William Killen,D.l. Nixon,P-I-

3020 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Airlines Agreement Bill

Mr Scholes-Mr Deputy Chairman, I take a point of order. The right to tell in a division belongs with the official Opposition; yet the honourable members for Tangney and Moore, both Government members, have been appointed as tellers from the side on which the Opposition is voting. The honourable member for Tangney is also the mover of the amendment.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN-In view of the practical difficulty that the honourable member for Tangney is the mover of the amendment and in view of the concern that has been expressed by the Opposition, I now appoint the honourable members for Hughes and Griffith tellers for the ayes.
Question so resolved in the negative.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (8.32)-1 move the following amendment standing in my name:
Page 3, after clause 8, add the following new clause: Cessation of operation of Act '9. (l) This Act, unless sooner repealed, shall cease to be in force at the expiration of 5 years after the date of commencement of this Act. (2) For the purposes of section 8 of the Acts Interpretation Act 190I, when this Act ceases to be in force by virtue of sub-section (1), it shall thereupon be deemed to have been repealed by an Act other than this Act.'
The purpose of the amendment is to limit the life of the agreement to five years, which is the minimum life under the existing agreement. In the view of the Opposition, the Government has no mandate to extend the life of the agreement, whether by one year to six, three years to eight or five years to ten. It has been revealed in recent times that a secret deal was concluded between the proprietor of Ansett Airlines of Australia, Sir Peter Abeles, and the Government to double the life of the agreement to lO years. That deal was made prior to 17 March last year, the date on which Ansett, with a great deal of fanfare at a national Press conference, announced its decision to purchase its new Boeing fleet. The doubling of the agreement to 10 years was carefully concealed from the Parliament and from the public by the Government, by the Ansett firm and by Sir Peter Abeles, despite the expensive fanfare associated with the announcement of the purchase of the new Boeing fleet. I refer specifically to the speech of the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) made in this House on the last night of the last Parliament. On page 2, he stated:
We have now reached a stage where discussions on principles with the airlines have been finalised and drafting of the new agreement is nearly completed.
That was the evening of 18 September last year. Some 16 hours later it was announced that the Minister, Ansett Airlines and the Australian

National Airlines Commission had sign.ed a new agreement. But it was carefully concealed that the new agreement provided for a doubling of its life to 10 years. I quote also from the Minister's Press release of 19 September last year recording that event. Paragraph 3, in reference to the new two airlines agreement, states:
The terms of the new agreement are along the lines of the principles outlined in the second reading speech of the Australian National Airlines Act introduced into the House of Representatives on 18 September 1980.
The Minister was careful to make no reference in his speech or in that Press statement to the doubling of the life of the agreement or to the veto power being provided to Ansett to prevent the use of Qantas Airways Ltd capacity in the provision of direct domestic services across Australia. There was a conspiracy of silence to delude this Parliament and to delude the Australian electorate because the Government was then going out on an election campaign. Not one word was uttered, except for a report that appeared in the Australian Financial Review of 22 September. That report referred to a 10-year agreement. It is reported that the Minister refused to confirm the accuracy or otherwise of that lO-year agreement. So he knew there were questions raised about it but he refused to confirm it. He denied that information to Parliament, as did the airline itself. Sir Peter Abeles, his colleagues and this Government have engaged in a conspiracy of silence to deny essential information to the Parliament and to the public. What of the term of 10 years? I quote from no lesser personage than the Secretary to the Department of Transport, the Minister's own top adviser. A few weeks after this deal was done, on 15 April 1980 in an address to the Committee for the Economic Development of Australia, that gentleman said:
In listening to me, you might bear in mind that in a fast changing world a span of 10 years is a long period over which to make predictions.
In other words, he was saying it was difficult in planning the transport scene and in developing transport policy to make any kind of firm predictions on that time scale. A five-year period, as proposed in the amendment the Opposition has put to the chamber, would enable reviews of the agreement to be carried out in, say, the third year or the fourth year. It would enable the effectiveness of the new arrangements to be assessed and an assessment of market changes to be made. It would enable Parliament and the government of the day to appraise the features of the new generation short haul aircraft. It would enable the Government and the Department of Transport to evaluate changes in the tourist industry, including changes in demand. It would enable government

Airlines Agreement Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3021

to determine any desirable changes to the agreeMr Good luck-Come on, cut out your remarks

ment, with public interest being the first considerabout honesty.

ation. The appropriateness of any further extension of the agreement beyond that date or amendment to the agreement could be made in light of experience and in light of all that information. But the Minister has chosen by his actions, and the airline has chosen by its actions,

Mr MORRIS-What does the pipsqueak opposite want? He will be following the leader for the rest of his life. I know how he will be voting. The little man should not worry.
Mr Good luck-I'm taller than you.

to deny to the electorate and the people of Mr MORRIS-We will see about that. In this

Australia, in a general election campaign, the proposal, Sir Peter Abeles and the Government

knowledge that a secret deal had been done to reengaged in that conspiracy to pre-empt the de-

strict the provision of air services in this country cisions of this Parliament and to conceal from the

for a period of 10 years, to the disbenefit of the public what they were about.

Australian people.

If this amendment is carried, and we invite sup-

Why was the matter kept secret? It was kept secret because the Fair Internal Air Fares Organisation in Western Australia had proposed to mount a candidate at the Senate election in late 1980. This deal was done in March 1980. I do not know which Government back benchers knew about it. I understand some Government back benchers from Western Australia knew about it but they did not have the courage to tell their constituents, nor did they have the courage to tell the Parliament or the people of what had been consummated between Ansett Airlines and this Government. The principals of the Fair Internal Air Fares campaign disclosed subsequently that they learned of the new term of the agreement some three days prior to the election and they knew that a number of Western Australian back benchers also knew about it. But the campaign committee thought that at that time, so close to the election, there was little point in revealing the information to the public. So we have the reasons for the conspiracy of silence and the participants in it. This legislation has now been brought in. What does Sir Peter Abeles say? On 27 May, having engaged in an exercise to conceal critical information from this Parliament and from the electorate, he then had the temerity to make a statement to the Australian Financial Review. On 27 May its report stated:

port from the men of integrity on that side of the chamber, the men who put public interest first, it is the Opposition's intention there will be a review in year three and year four of the five-year term in which we would carry out the kind of analyses and assessments that I have indicated. Recognising that immediate changes cannot be made to existing arrangements because of their complexity, then those changes could be discussed and debated and means established to determine how new equipment could be brought in, how air fare structures could be changed if necessary, and how greater flexibility and better service could be provided to the Australian people. I commend the amendment to the men of integrity opposite who put public interest first.
Mr SHACK (Tangney) (8.41)-1 appreciate being called a man of integrity by the spokesman for the Opposition, the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris). As a man of integrity, I see it as my responsibility to come into this chamber and vote for things which I believe, if passed, would make good law. It is no secret that outside the chamber there has been long, consistently hard negotiation in arriving at the Government's position on this legislation. Equally, it is no secret that I have argued that the agreement should have a limited life of five years. The process of negotiation in our great party is simply one of give and take. As that negotiation concluded, I

Sir Peter Abeles said he viewed the five year idea very dimly opted for a maximum of eight years, and I will be

and that Ansett would not have committed itself to its big removing my amendment at the conclusion of the

equipment program if it had known it was not to have a 10 year term.

consideration of the Opposition's amendment.

I have opted for my amendment rather than the

The Ansett company knew; it had done a deal Opposition's amendment for one reason. Even if

with the Minister and with the Prime Minister the Opposition's amendment were passed it

(Mr Malcolm Fraser). Sir Peter Abeles, in an would not be good law. What we are considering

attempt to pre-empt this Parliament, in an at the moment is an enabling Bill to give effect to

attempt to block the honest men and the men of an agreement between three parties, namely, the

integrity on the other side who know that this proCommonwealth and the two airlines. There is a

posal is not right for the Australian people and weight of legal opinion which concludes that the

that it is an attempt to bludgeon them, then had Parliament is in the position of simply adopting or

the temerity to claim--

rejecting that agreement. We are not in a position,

3022 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Airlines Agreement Bill

however much we may like to be, to amend that contract between the three parties. Clause 22(4) provides for a minimum agreement of eight years. To move for the agreement to have a maximum life of five years flies directly in the face of the agreement. We may not like the agreement, but we are stuck with the legal position. I am interested in seeing that Parliament passes good law. A five year maximum term is not good law. It flies directly in the face of the signed contract between the three parties. There is legal doubt as to whether the amendment, if passed, would be legal. There is legal doubt as to whether the amendment, if passed, would have any effect on the actual agreement. If the Parliament is to move in the direction in which I have argued it should move, that is, that we provide an end point for this agreement and not allow an infinite run, we should provide an end point which is consistent with the agreement and which has the possibility of being passed not only in this chamber but also in another place.
My relationship with the Government on this matter over the last couple of years has simply been to try to improve the situation, to try to achieve something that is achieveable, and to try to achieve something that is constructive, and not be negative and obstructive. I intend to vote against the Opposition's amendment.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (8.45)-The comments of the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack) sought to give the impression that the legal advice he has in respect of the amendment I have moved is the correct advice. The fact is that the Schedule and the Bill have been very cleverly drafted, and the Minister acknowledges that.
Mr Hunt-No, I did not.
Mr MORRIS-I thought that the Minister did. The expert legal advice given to me is that the form of the amendment I have moved, given the contents of the Bill and the manner in which the agreement has been drafted and contained in the Schedule, would be effective if carried. It is no good the honourable member trying to hide behind the prop that his advice or the advice to his colleagues is that our amendment would not be good law. The simple fact is that the Government was extremely clever in the manner in which it drafted the legislation. Clause 22 (1) of the agreement provides that the agreement shall continue in force unless and until determined in accordance with its provisions. The Standing Orders prevent the moving of an amendment to a Schedule contained in a Bill. If we consider those facts we recognise something of the cleverness of the Government.

As I mentioned earlier, from the beginning this has been a very clever and secret deal. Firstly, the public was denied knowledge of what was happening. The deal had been done. Secondly, the Bill was drafted in such a way as to be amendment-proof. Irrespective of what the honourable member for Tangney has just said, I repeat that the legal advice I have taken from experts similar in standing to those who advised the honourable member, is that the amendment in the form we have proposed would be good law and would be effective in terms of the Standing Orders and in terms of the laws of this nation.
In conclusion, the five-year period we are pro-. posing is the minimum currency of the existing agreement. Nobody on the Government side, nobody in the airline industry-not even Sir Peter or Mr Murdoch-has said that the five-year notice in the existing agreement is not sufficient time. Not one word has been uttered. There has been general acceptance of that time. All we are asking of honourable members opposite-those men of integrity and those who put public interest first-is that they confirm the policy they have been pursuing for the past five years under existing legislation. If they want to see the Australian tourist industry develop, if they want to see Australians get a better deal in airline services, if they want to see cheaper fares and greater public accountability, and the right of the government of the day to control airline policy, they will support the amendment I have moved.
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (8.48)-1 oppose the Opposition's amendment. I think the point that is being overlooked in this argument is that the airlines already have an agreement which entitles them to five years' notice to pass both Houses of Parliament.
Mr Hunt-And a much more restrictive agreement.
Mr TUCKEY-Of course. That is a fact that I am quite able to put to the House. I am on my feet to point out that the agreement the airlines currently enjoy is much more beneficial to them, and in fact includes such things as freight arrangements in respect of Tasmania and so on. If they were to have a term of five years to nothing, they would naturally accept the present agreement. If we pass a five-year term, it comes down to a situation of the airlines obviously saying: 'Thanks for nothing; we will take a five years' notice, if you can get it through both Houses of Parliament. If you cannot get it through both Houses of Parliament we are very grateful because we will continue as we are today.' As the Minister for

Airlines Agreement Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3023

Transport (Mr Hunt) mentioned, that is a far It is regrettable that the Minister for Transport

more attractive situation to them.

(Mr Hunt) did not make his announcement to

establish an inquiry into whether deregulation of

We have to accept the practicalities of this situthe airline industry was a desirable long term

ation. We can argue the law until three o'clock in objective four or five years ago. If he had done so

the morning. The fact is that the airlines will not by now we could be debating the results of that in-

take a five-year term and the new agreement. quiry. Of course, that is too much to expect of a

They do not have to. They have an agreement and government that insists on moving in such a short-

they will obviously take five years under the old sighted way. My colleague the honourable

agreement. I certainly would if I were in their member for Shortland (Mr Morris) has stated

shoes.

publicly that the Opposition would support the

establishment of such an inquiry if it were to be

Another thing should be put to rest at this stage public; if it were to receive the full support and

of the game. I think honourable members on this access to the resources of the Department of

side of the House know that there has been talk Transport; if its task were to be completed within

about all sorts of funny business and deals. That is a reasonable period, preferably a year; and if the

not the case. There is no doubt whatsoever that inquiry were given the power to require the air-

the airlines were entitled to an understanding that lines to present all relevant information. Instead,

things were to continue as they had for the preuntil tonight the announcement of this inquiry is

vious 20 years. Statements made by this Governall that the Government's airline rebels have to

ment before the election clearly indicated that show for all their public utterances. The eyes of

that was the case. That it was not the opinion of the Australian public will tonight be on those

some of us in this place has now been made quite back benchers who have moved a certain extent

clear. Let us get things straight. We are not talking and shown their concern. I hope that they will

about that; we just think that we would like to put move even further to limit the life of the agree-

the Government in a better position by making ment to five years.

this agreement finite. Anybody who believes that he can talk the airlines into dropping the situation they have today for a new agreement of five years' notice would not have had much experience in business.

The Opposition has already expressed grave concern over the main points contained in the agreement. The first is that the new agreement will give Ansett and Trans-Australia Airlines the right to control routes which they do not at

Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (8.50)-1 am amazed by the differentiation made by Government members as to what this chamber can and cannot do. When, with five minutes' notice, this Parliament wishes to grant substantiation to a loan to enable Ansett Airlines of Australia to buy Boeings we have all the power in the world, but on something as sensible as restricting the time limitation for an agreement such as this for the benefit of the

present even operate, such as between Sydney and Hobart. It seems that this and other provisions of the agreement are designed to deal with EastWest Airlines Ltd. Secondly, the agreement allows TAA the right to withdraw from routes where it is at present sustaining heavy losses. Of course, this is of intense interest to Queenslanders, particularly those in the more remote corners of that state.

Australian people it appears that we are entirely The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)-I

powerless. This agreement as it stands has set the am sorry to butt in on the honourable member,

course of this nation's domestic aviation policy for but I am having precisely the same trouble as I

the next five to eight years. We are locked in. The had last night. The clause is a limited one. This is

next Parliament, the subsequent Parliament and not a general second reading debate. If I let the

probably even the Parliament after that will be honourable member continue in this line I will

unable to debate this legislative foundation for the have to open up the debate for others, which I am

country's domestic aviation policy. Unless the not prepared to do. 1 ask the honourable member

Opposition's amendment is carried, this will be to confine her remarks to the amendment under

the last opportunity for another eight years to deconsideration.

liberate on the agreement. The Government has introduced this historic legislation and is rushing it through both houses in the shortest time possible. After months of prevarication it is ramming the agreement down our throats without countenanc-

Mrs DARLING-It is rather awkward to debate even a narrow clause without bringing in some relevant information. I believe the information I am giving is relevant.

ing the most mild and modest protestations even Mr Ian RobinsonYou could be wrong,

from its own side of the chamber.

couldn't you?

3024 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Airlines Agreement Bill

Mrs DARLING-I could be wrong. I hope anyone would admit that he or she could be wrong. The Holcroft report established that TAA was losing about $l1m a year on Fokker Friendship services. The possibility of withdrawing from these services and the unprofitable air corridors, along with the decision to sell TAA and thereby elevate the profit motive as TAA's primary, if not sole, priority, will surely mean the end of these services. We must move to limit the time before such a move takes place. TAA's submission to the Holcroft inquiry stated:
A reasonable profit is only a minor component of the price of air travel. This is not a cavalier approach to the responsibilities of running a national public airline. Quite the reverse . . . The airline must maintain its productive capacity in real terms and provide for necessary expansion demanded by growth in the community's needs for air transport services.
This is a true reflection of the responsibilities of a nl;ltional publicly owned transport company. Ansett, on the other hand, made it clear that it exists to make money and run at a profit.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member will resume her seat.
Mr TAMBLING (Northern Territory) (8.55)-1 am not impressed by the comments of the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris). In fact, I am rather fearful that he is playing at being the devil's advocate on this issue. The honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack) has already said that the intent of the amendment of the honourable member for Shortland is very destructive and probably legally questionable with regard to the specific relationship between the agreement itself and this enabling legislation. My only hangup with the legislation relates to the timing clause, but I cannot support the amendment which has been moved by the honourable member for Shortland. The development of this legislation embraces very significant changes and advances in airline policy. There are total links both with the Independent Air Fares Committee and with the proposed deregulation inquiry. It is important to stress that the deregulation inquiry is to report within five years. That period of five years has an integral link with the proposed term of the agreement. The shortest term under which the agreement contemplates notice being given is eight years, that is, the initial five years and the three years of giving notice. That can be done and can be adequate.
I also believe the honourable member for Shortland is inconsistent with his own Party's policies and platforms on this issue. I refer to the

decisions made and the platform that was developed by the Australian Labor Party at its Adelaide conference. They indicate that the honourable member is not being genuine. On transport the ALP said:
Transport systems and services should not be solely determined by market forces but should be designed to maximise social benefit to the community.
Mr Beazley-Mr Deputy Chairman, I take a point of order. If the honourable member for Lilley was ruled out of order on the propositions she was putting forward, surely the honourable member for the Northern Territory is out of order on the grounds of his arguments at this stage. He is not addressing himself to the question before the Committee which relates to the five-year expiration date of the agreement. He is talking generally about the Labor Party's transport policy.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. The honourable member's point is sustained, but it was only in the last few sentences that the honouraBle member got away from the point.
Mr TAMBLING-The sensitivity of Opposition members is obvious when one refers to their own paper work. I will refrain from quoting from the document on the Opposition's economic policy. The honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley), in his own comments in the second reading debate, was also, 1 am sure, playing political football with his own State. He was merely trying to take the mickey out of the Western Australian members on this side of the chamber who have worked in conjunction with the Minister for Transport (Mf Hunt) to develop a strong and positive policy.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. The honourable member will not refer to a second reading debate that has taken place today.
Mr HYDE (Moore) (8.58)-1 also will not be supporting this amendment. T will in due course be supporting the amendment foreshadowed by the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack). My reason is that I was advised some days ago that what we sought to achieve in a five-year sunset provision, which I agree would be desirable, was not achievable in law. It was my judgment that it was not achievable in Parliament. 1 agreed at that stage-I hoped at the time that 1 could do so-to reach an accommodation with the Government to settle for eight years. I will abide by that agreement.
Mr CHARLES JONES (Newcastle) (8.59)- We are debating a clause dealing with the endorsement of the agreement, the signatures to which are R. J. Hunt, Law-Smith, Fitzgerald,

Airlines Agreement Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3025

Abeles and Simpson. I hope honourable members will pardon the deletion of the initials.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. The honourable member is debating an amendment.
Mr CHARLES JONES-We are debating an amendment. Thank you, Mr Deputy Chairman, for your assistance. Whilst we are dealing with an amendment to insert a new clause 9 in the Bill, in actual fact we are talking about clause 22 (1), (2), (3) and (4) of the Schedule to the Bill, that is the agreement. The question is whether we can legally overrule that agreement. I see the Minister's signature on the agreement as speaking on behalf of the Parliament. To this date, to the best of my knowledge, the Parliament has not authorised the Minister to sign the agreement. The agreement is not law. Those words are not worth the piece of paper they are written on until such time as this Parliament passes the Bill. That is when the agreement will come into being. If those honourable members who voted against the second reading reconsider their position I am confident they will see as preferable a five-year agreement and the negotiation of a new agreement in the run-up period to the end of the five years. I suggest that those honourable members may give the matter some second thought and carry the amendment moved by the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris). That will give us a terminating agreement.
Believe you me, there is no way that honourable members could ever convince me that Ansett Transport Industries Ltd will not accept such an agreement. I notice that Sir Peter Abeles spoke up and said: 'There is no way we will accept any amendment of this agreement'. Good God, I have seen enough of Sir Peter Abeles's industrial agreements to know the trade unions twist him around their little fingers. He does not give a damn what the unions get so long as he can get a buck and so long as he can up the price of everything that he is selling in the form of freight. Sir Peter Abeles is a great old bluffer. He has bluffed this Parliament out of a five-year sunset agreement. If Government members have the intestinal fortitude to give it a go we in the Opposition will give it a go too and make it a five-year terminating agreement. It is ridiculous that the present two-airline agreement has a five-year period and then five years notice of termination. AlII can say is that in another two years and one month the five years notice of termination will be included.
This Government should have the intestinal fortitude to do what a Labor Government would do and terminate the agreement, forcing the parties to come to the negotiating table to work out

some sort of agreement acceptable to them and to the Parliament. The agreement is not worth anything unless the Parliament passes this Bill. Therefore, I say to those honourable members who I know are in favour of the five-year agreement to give it a go and let us see where we get to. That is the situation. I ask honourable members to give it serious consideration.

Mr McLEAN (Perth) (9.3)-Mr Deputy Chairman-

Motion (by Mr Hodges) agreed to:

That the question be now put.

Question put:

That the new clause proposed to be added (Mr Morris's amendment) be added.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Mr G. O'H. Giles)

Ayes Noes

. 46 64

Majority

18

AYES
Armitage, I. L. Beazley, K. C.
Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Bungey, M. H.
Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, I. S. Duffy, M. J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C.
Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Innes, D.E.
Jacobi.R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, I.es (Teller)
Jones, Barry
Jones, Charles Kelly,R.I,
Klugman. R. E. McLeay,Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C.
Uren, T. Wallis,L.G. West,S.l.
Willis.R. Young,M.J.

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E.
Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M.
Braithwaite, R. A.
Brown,N.A.
Burr,M.A.
Cadman,A.G.
Cameron, Donald
Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P.
Coleman, W. P.
Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, I. D. M. Edwards, H. R.

NOES

Hunt,R.J.D. Hyde,J.M. Jarman,A. W. Jull,D.F.
Katter,R.C. Lloyd.B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip
MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. Mclean, R. M. McVeigh,D. T.
Macphee, r. M.
Millar,P.C.
Moore.J. C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Porter, J. R.
Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M.

3026 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Airlines Agreement Bill

NOES
Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W.

Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street,A.A. Tambling, G. E. 1. Tbomson, D. S.
Tuckey, C. W. White,P.N.D. Wilson, I. B. C.

PAIRS

Campbell,G. Keating, P. 1. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Cohen,B.

Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William
Killen,D.l. Nixon, P,l. Viner, R, I.

Question so resolved in the negative.

MrSHACK (Tangney) (9.10)-I move:

(2) Page 3, after clause 8 add the following new clause: Cessation of operation of Act '9. (1) This Act, unless sooner repealed, shall cease to be ill force at the expiration of 8 years after the day on which the agreement referred to in section 5 comes into force and effect. (2) For the purposes of section 8 of the Acts Interpretation Act 1901, when this Act ceases to be in force by virtue of sub-section (1), it shall thereupon be deemed to have been repealed by an Act other than this Act.'.

In the second reading debate I spoke about the amendment to some extent. Suffice is to say that if the amendment were agreed to it would see the insertion of a new clause 9. I believe this to be a legally responsible amendment. It complements the agreement in that the minimum eight years as provided for in the agreement would, under this amendment, become a maximum of eight years. It coincides with the timing of the deregulation inquiry in that the Government has announced that the inquiry will report within five years. The Government of the day will then be in a position to give notice after five years and consideration of the findings of the deregulation inquiry. If the Government chose to go down the deregulatory path there would be a three-year transitionary period, after which time the agreement in to to would expire at the end of eight years.

Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (9.12)-The amendment moved by the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack) is in the view of the Opposition a second best proposition. It suffers from the same doubts, on legal advice, as did the amendment that 1 moved on behalf of the Opposition. It is not correct to say that this amendment would be effective and that the other one would not have been. As I said, we regard it as second best. The Opposition will be supporting the amendment.

Mr HYDE (Moore) (9.13)-1 wish to make only one point; namely, that 1 do not believe the

amendment suffers from the same legal doubts. The eight years were guaranteed to the companies under the agreement that they had signed. There is opportunity for the government of the day to fill that agreement to the letter with the acceptance of this amendment moved by the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack). This would not have been possible with the amendment moved by the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris),
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) (9.14)-The Government rejects the amendment. The Government has resolved to establish an independent inquiry into the advisability or otherwise of deregulation. This committee of inquiry is to report within five years. If the committee should report in favour of deregulation and the government of the day resolves to adopt those recommendations the government would have the opportunity of serving notice, at the end of five years of operation of the agreement, to terminate that agreement three years later. This would enable an orderly transition from a regulated two airlines arrangement to a deregulated environment.
There is no doubt that at least three years would be required to enable the Government and the airlines to make the necessary infrastructure arrangements at airports and elsewhere to implement a deregulated system. It would enable airlines and other interested groups to gear themselves up to take advantage of a deregulated system. On the other hand, the sunset clause in the agreement would terminate the agreement at eight years regardless of the report of the inquiry. It could well result in the government of the day, say a Labor government, not exercising its right to give notice to terminate the agreement, thus leaving the airline industry in considerable uncertainty until the airline agreement concludes at the end of eight years. Such an agreement would result in aviation policy being dropped into a vacuum at the end of eight years. Such a policy would lead to a chaotic situation and could well result in the ultimate nationalisation of the airlines system which is clearly the objective of the Opposition.
I believe the difference between the Government's approach and the approach involved in the amendment is the difference between order and chaos. This amendment would not be in the best interests of the travelling public. In view of the decisions taken by the Government, and leaving aside the Airlines Agreement Bill before the chamber but including the decisions relating to Trans-Australia Airlines and the decisions to

Airlines Agreement Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3027

establish an inquiry into deregulation, it is undoubtedly a logical and rational approach to support a five-year agreement with a provision for three years notice to terminate the agreement following any decision that a future government might take resulting from the deregulation inquiry.
Moreover, the legal advice I have obtained from the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) is that if the amendment were accepted by the Government, or, carried by the Parliament, both the Airlines Agreements Act and the agreement itself would be thrown into doubt and confusion. It would, therefore, be ridiculous for the Parliament to accept those circumstances. I am advised that the amendment would also have the effect of repealing the Customs prohibited import regulations thus destroying the basis of the twoairlines policy. The Government, therefore, cannot accept such a proposition or the amendment.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (9.17)-1 support the amendment that was moved by the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack). In doing so I make a couple of points about it. The Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) has waxed moral on the issue of the chaos that the airlines would be thrown into if this amendment were passed. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), however, made quite clear over the weekend what the intentions of the Government were with the Schedule and the way in which the Government devised the Schedule, with particular relation to this eight-year clause. He pointed out that the purpose of the legislation, and particularly this clause, was to make it Labor election proof. In other words, the purpose of the Government was not orderly airline policy. The purpose of the Government was, by whatever means possible, to frustrate the Australian Labor Party eight years in advance. I think that is a disgraceful position to be presenting to the Australian public, even if it was disclosed at a closed session of the Liberal Party and was subsequently leaked. If that is the Government's motive it deserves all that it gets on this item.
I do not believe that the advice of the Attorney General (Senator Durack) is any more valid than the advice that has been given by the various legal sources of both the honourable member for Tangney and the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris). If the advice of the Attorney General turns out to be correct, it will be correct because of the way in which the Government has gone about negotiating the agreement. Its intentions are to frustrate the capacity of the Parliament to operate in a normal way when dealing with an agreement such as this. But it will not happen because the legal advice that we have

received, which is the same legal advice that the honourable member for Tangney has received, is good and therefore, the amendment should pass.

Mr CADMAN (Mitchell) (9.19)-1 will be brief. There are many great advantages in what is being proposed by the Government. Whilst J understand the attractions of the proposition put by the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack) I am afraid that 1 disagree with the thrust of what he is doing in light of the pressure of time and the circumstances. There has been much gained. He admitted this in his speech at the second reading stage. The proposal that there be a five-year period plus a three-year notice period, as the honourable member has moved, would tend to deny the opportunity for open discussion concerning the setting of air fares. It would also tend to prejudice the deregulation inquiry. The full evaluation of the report of the Holcroft Independent Public Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares, I believe, would also be put in jeopardy if this amendment were to be carried.

I say to my colleagues who tend to support this amendment that, as Shane Paltridge did, we have broken new ground in the airline system in Australia today. I think that we have put in place a proposition that will allow all people, whether they live in the east or the west of this country, to look forward to opportunities they have not had previously. If those opportunities were denied to them, as indeed the Opposition would deny them, it would be a great shame. I indicate in passing that the Opposition completely opposed the idea of differential equipment and the opportunity of breaking up the tight and tied system. The Opposition has spoken against it and has opposed that proposition. We on this side of the chamber have moved forward to advantage the people of Australia. J think that from this point we can see advance, and there will be opportunities for further advance. It would be a great shame if those opportunities were lost.

Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (9.21)-Mr Deputy Chairman-

Motion (byMrHodges) put:

That the question be now put.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Mr G. O'H. Giles)

Ayes

65

Noes . .

44

Majority

21

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D.

AYES

Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J.M.

3028 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Airlines Agreement Bill

AYES
Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A.
Brown,N.A. Bungey,M.H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P.
Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M.
Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Good luck, B. J. Groom,R,J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C, (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W.

Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F.
Katter, R. C. Lloyd,B.
Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh,D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar,P.C. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. PorterI J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J.
Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B.C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cross,M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E, E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K,L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U.E.

Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A.
Johnson, Lea (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J. Klugman, R. E. McLeay,Leo
McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L.
Theophanous, A. C.
Uron, T. Wallis,L.G. West,S.J. WiIlis,R. Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William Killen,D.J. Nixon,P.J.
Viner,R.I.

Campbell,G.
Keating, P. J. Kent,L.
Kerin,J.C. Cohen, B.

Question SO resolved in the affirmative.

Question put:

That the new clause proposed to be added (Mr Shack's amendment) be added.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman-Mr G. O'H. Giles)

Ayes

53

Noes

56

Majority

3

AYES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen) Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Bungey, M. H. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. EVeringham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding,A.C, Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Hyde,J.M. Innes, U.E. Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A.

Johnson, Les (Teller)
Jones, Barry Jones, Charles
Jull,D.F. Kelly,R.J. Klugman, R. E. McLean, R. M. McLeay,Leo McMahon, Lea Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Rocher, A. C. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Shack,P. D. Tambling, G. E. J. Theophanous, A. C. Tuckey, C. W.
Uren, T. Wallis, L. G. West,S.J. WiI\is,R.
Young,M.J.

NOES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baumc,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Burr,M.A. Cadman,A.G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Tell.r) Good luck, B. S. Groom, R. J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J,

Hodges,l. C. (Teller)
Hodgman, W. M.
Howard,J. W.
Hunt,R.J.D.
Jarman,A. W.
Katter,R.C.
Lloyd,B.
Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKcnzic~ A. J. McVcigh, D. T. Macphee, J. M. Millar,P.C.
Moorc,J.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L.
Porter, J. R.
Robinson) Ian
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E.
Shipton, R. F.
Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Thomson, D. S. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

PAIRS

Campbell, G. Keating, P. J.
Kent, L. Kerin,J.C. Cohen, B.

Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William Killen, D. J. Nixon,P.J. Viner, R. I.

Question so resolved in the negative.

Mr IAN CAMERON (Maranoa) (9.35)-1 want to speak against clause 12 of the Schedule to the Bill. As we understand the two-airline agreement, it is finished. Trans-Australia Airlines no longer acts as a service airline. We object to clause 12 very violently because we believe the
Government--

Airlines Agreement Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3029

Mrs Kelly-Who is 'we'?

Mr IAN CAMERON-Mr Deputy Chairman,

Mr IAN CAMERON-Mr Katter and I. That is enough. How many do you want? Bob Katter, the honourable member for Kennedy, and I object to clause 12. Two is enough. The basic reason fIJr our objection is that the Government has set out to do away with services to western Queensland and the rest of rural Australia. It is important for members of this chamber to remember this. The Holcroft report recommended that a fares tribunal be established to finance

I am sure you would have some idea of the distances involved and the fact that aeroplanes are absolutely essential in this part of the world. I point out to honourable members that it is 1,600 kilometres from Kikoy to Birdsville. The distance to Tasmania-I do not particularly want to fiy there-is approximately the same. That is what honourable members must understand. Air services are absolutely essential in this part of the world.

Ansett Airlines of Australia's continuing profits. Mr Leo McLeay-When are you going to build

It also recommended that the Government look an airport at Quilpie?

at assisting some of the inland air routes of Australia. Nothing in clause 12 guarantees this will happen. Clause 12(2) states:

Mr IAN CAMERON-I am working on that. Do not worry about that. Enough people go to the races at Birdsville to put in a jet strip. The with-

That in the event that the total direct and indirect costs of operating a rural airline service during a continuous period of net less than 6 months commencing after the date of commencement of this clause exceed the total revenue from that service in respect of that period, the Commission or the Company, as the case may be, which operates the service (in this clause called "the operator") may give to the Commonwealth notice that it will cease to operate the service upon the expiration of 3 months after the giving of the notice.

drawal of mail services is also envisaged in this package. 1 think that is terrible. That service will be given to private contractors. That means that those people in that part of the world will get no services at all. There will be no plane services and no mail services. If it is enough for--
Mr Charles Jones-Mr Deputy Chairman, I

I ask the Government: What happens if another operator does not want to take that air service on?

take a point of order. Could you tell me what clause the honourable gentleman is debating?

We object to that clause. No longer do we in our The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN (Mr Giles)- part of Australia have an essential service. Qantas The honourable gentleman explained that to me.

Airways Ltd was established in my electorate and I could, if pressed, give you the clause.

the electorate of the honourable member for Kennedy. No longer does Qantas fly in that part of the world. TAA has supplied some sort of service until now. We expect the Government to allow this to continue. The air service in this part of the world is an essential service. How can Canberra get $lOm to keep its buses running and Brisbane get $20m to keep its buses running? Railways in Queensland run at a $100m loss. Yet, we are being

Mr Charles Jones-Mr Deputy Chairman, I ask you to do so.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN-That really is not the question before the Chair. The question before the Chair is that the Bill be agreed to.
Mr IAN CAMERON-I am debating clause 12. If I am given a bit of time. I will wind up my remarks very quickly.

denied a service in Western Queensland.

Mr Charles Jones-Mr Deputy Chairman, I

Mr Leo McLeay-Well, come over on this took a point of order. What clause of the Bill is the

side.

honourable member debating?

Mr IAN CAMERON-I might. This is the point I am trying to get across.
Mr Leo McLeay-We might not have you.
Mr IAN CAMERON-Shut up and listen.
Mr Leo McLeay-You're just not a good enough socialist.

The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN-It is not for the Chair to give that information to the honourable member.
Mr Charles Jones-I noticed earlier-The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. The question before the Committee is that the Bill be

Mr IAN CAMERON-Honourable members opposite would not know how far it is from one end of the electorate of Maranoa to the other.
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN. The honourable member for Maranoa will address his remarks to the Chair and not to the rest of the

agreed to. As I understand the situation, therefore, the honourable member is perfectly entitled to speak if he has described to the chamber already the clause that he is debating.
Mr Charles Jones-Are you sure you are not debating clause 12 of the Schedule to the Bill?

chamber. This might discourage honourable Mr IAN CAMERON-I am debating clause 12

members from interjecting, which is disorderly.

and a few other clauses. It is enough that TAA

3030 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Airlines Agreement Bill

will be granted a $500m backing by the Federal Government. I believe that that subsidy alone is sufficient for the two airlines to operate in this country. I believe the agreement should be 10 years, being tied to the term of the loan. I cannot understand either side of the chamber wanting to give the agreement a term different from the terms of the loan. The 90-day clauses are a disgrace to anyone's way of thinking. I put it to the Committee that we are here to govern, not Ansett. It is a great weakness of our political system that unfortunately the party system rules here tonight. I have said enough on this matter and now give way to my friend, the honourable member for Kennedy (Mr Katter).
The DEPUTY CHAIRMAN--I am sorry to spoil the unholy alliance but I call the honourable member for Lilley.
Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (9.43)-Briefly, I would like to support what the honourable member for Maranoa (Mr Ian Cameron) has just said. I share his concern regarding clause 12. In Queensland it could force Bush Pilots Airways out of business. The Airlines Equipment Amendment Bill gives the Minister sole power to determine the number of future aircraft and flights to be operated by every airline. This number having been arbitrarily decided, the airline is not permitted to operate additional flights if passenger demand suddenly increases. This clause relates to airlines being forced out of a service. If larger airlines decide to opt out of servicing country routes-as the agreement allows them to do if they find them unprofitable-it is reasonable to assume that passenger demand for an airline such as Bush Pilots Airways will increase. Under this agreement Bush Pilots Airways will be locked in. It would be compelled to refuse the business under threat of heavy penalties, if Ansett Airlines of Australia or Trans-Australia Airlines should withdraw and Bush Pilots Airways have to meet that demand.
Mr Bradfield-That is not right.
Mrs DARLING-That is right. Under the agreement, Bush Pilots Airways will be locked in.
n will be compelled to refuse business under
threat of heavy penalties, according to this agreement, once a certain number of flights is agreed upon. I do not know whether the honourable member realises this. The same ludicrous situation will occur if demand drops. It may be required by this legislation to operate, as near as is practicable, a set number of approved flights despite the drop in demand. It could even be obliged to run empty flights to satisfy the needs of the agreement. This situation could definitely crop up in Queensland if

clause 12 is agreed to. The larger airlines, if they find it unprofitable, coud drop those routes. They would not be serviced. Bush Pilots Airways will have to pick up those routes and start servicing them and then it will be locked in by this agreement. It is a ludicrous situation which will be very bad for Queensland.
I recommend to honourable members that they consider the points which have been put forward. This clause should be dropped from the agreement to the benefit not only of Queensland but also of other areas. If honourable 'members opposite are really concerned about free enterprise they will move in this area and stop the squashing of free enterprise. At present they are only boosting big monopolies, be they private or public enterprise, to the detriment of small airlines. It is up to honourable members opposite to show where they stand and support their colleagues and my neighbours from Queensland.
Mr KATTER (Kennedy) (9.45)-1 am particularly concerned with clause 12. The honourable member for Maranoa (Mf Ian Call1eron) and I are concerned about those people who sustain industries that bring many billions of dollars into this country. Particularly vital to them is just how often an aircraft flies into their remote areas, the sort of aircraft that flies in and what they will be charged for those services. The difficulty with clause 12 is that if an airline is not showing a profit over a period of six months it can withdraw from the service after a further period of three months. We just did not sit back and accept this. There has been a series of long discussions-- .
Mr Hunt-We have had meetings. Mr KATTER-We have had meetings. On Monday the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) convened a meeting which was attended by Frank Ball, the Australian General Manager of Trans-Australia Airlines, Frank Pascoe, one of the senior officials of Ansett Airlines of Australia, the honourable member for Maranoa, my~elf, and a few others. The crux of that discussion was our understanding that Ansett and TAA have a unique privilege. They have the sole rights to run on the major routes in Australia. I well remember it being said some time ago by the then Minister for Civil Aviation that if those airlines were to continue to have that protection and that sort of privilege they were expected to serve the rural air routes. The Holcroft report has been adopted and we have to try to make the best of it. As a result of very lengthy discussions on Monday the General Manager of TAA issued the following statement which I very much want to go in the record:

Airlines Agreement Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3031

1. TAA will honour its undertaking with the Queensland Government to maintain F27s now operating until April 1982 or in accordance with the provisions of the new two-airline agreement, whichever is the later.
The second point he made was in the following terms:
Before that time TAA will: (a) Negotiate with Bush Pilots and other operators to conduct commuter operations over routes which TAA can no longer economically operate in accordance with IAFC guidelines; (b) Assess the viability of the establishment-
This is a very important point which came as a result of some pretty hot argument on Monday afternoon-
of regional centres serviced by commuters radiating from those regional centres with F27 services operated by TAA.
Finally, he stated:
The Government will continue to assist in negotiations between TAA and other operators, including Bush Pilots and East-West, to ensure that air services in western Queensland are maintained at a satisfactory level.
The point J want to make is one on which we will have to stand firm. I do not know what muscle we will have when it comes to a final showdown. In my part of Queensland we are sustaining three industries that bring billions of dollars into this country. We did not tell God to put all the minerals 400, 500 or 600 miles away from the coast. We did not tell God to give sheep foot rot. I notice that a lot of honourable members opposite do not believe in God. They should make their own arrangements and deal with their bloke, but I will deal with my fellow. We did not ask that sheep along the coast get foot-rot. We did not ask that lousy pastures be put along the coastal areas and for us to have the great trace metal areas out in the back blocks. This is no joke, although it might be a joke to honourable members opposite. These great industries are many hundreds of miles from the coast. If we do not have damned airline services, what do we have? Whitlam came along and dragged away every subsidy we had. He kicked us in the guts and brought us to our knees out there. That is the sort of thing we had to take. He did not give a damn about anyone out there.
Dr Theophanous-Mr Chairman, I wish to raise a point of order. We are discussing the Airlines Agreement Bill, not the protection or otherwise given by a previous government to the honourable member's area.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! There is no point of order. I understand that the honourable member for Kennedy is addressing clause 12.
Mr KATTER-So, the rot set in. We saw the gulf services go and we saw the channel services go. Then came a challenge. We were told our F27 aircraft would be taken away and that Metroliner

aircraft would be put on. With the permission of the Deputy Whip, the honourable member for Petrie (Mr Hodges), I would like to put his description of that aircraft before the chamber. Perhaps I had better not. It is a splendid aircraft for short runs, perhaps up to an hour or an hour and a half. But to fly for four and a half hours in a rigid seat with no hostess, with no facilities whatsoever--
Honourable members inte1jectingMr KATTER-I apologise for the connotation. We have achieved something because we have had these discussions and we have the undertaking from the manager of TAA. But, over and above that, we have established a monitoring committee, consisting of those who are present plus the Australian general manager of TAA plus one of the senior executives of Ansett Airlines, Frank Pascoe. The object of the establishment of that committee was to monitor what would happen to those airlines over the next five, six or 12 months. I can assure the chamber-1 will be in constant touch with the Minister on this matterthat we will not stand idly by and see the frequency or the standard of our aircraft services reduced. That is why we are concerned about clause 12. Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (9.53)-One can only admire the spirited and uncharacteristic display of independence on the part of the National Country Party. It is regrettable that it all comes too late and there is nothing anyone can do about the situation. If members of the National Country Party are really concerned about the airlines agreement which tonight is being ratified by this Parliament, they should have, at the very minimum, voted for the last amendment proposed. They have voted for an agreement which can go on for ever and ever. If they were concerned about any aspect of the clauses in the Schedule they would have-had they known what they were doing, presumably they would have-voted to give a limited life to this agreement. They would have voted to provide for the circumstances in which the Parliament would have had to enter into deliberately and ratify another agreement at the expiry of this current agreement in eight years time. The votes of the honourable member for Kennedy (Mr Katter) and the honourable member for Maranoa (Mr Ian Cameron) would have been enough to turn this question around, to rewrite aviation history in this country not only for people in the metropolitan areas but also for people who those honourable members purport to represent. They are nothing but phoneys or dopes

3032 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Airlines Agreement Bill

because the whole point is that in advance of eight years time they and the rest of us would have had the opportunity to rewrite the agreement. But they have given this Government, or any government, and more particularly the airlines, an agreement with an infinite life. Unless a parliament or government at some later time takes the initiative to rewrite this agreement it will go on forever and the aspects of clause 12 with which the honourable members disagree can go on not only for their lifetime but for their children's lifetime and their children's children's lifetime. The problem with them is that they do not even understand what they are doing. The honourable member for Maranoa said he would call for a division. What on earth will he call for a division on?
Mr Ian Cameron-Mr Chairman, I have not mentioned a division.
Mr DAWKINS-The honourable member has just denied it, but earlier he said he would call for a division. There is nothing to call for a division on. We have just discussed the eight clauses of the Airlines Agreement Bill. It might be of enlighten~ ment to the honourable member for Maranoa to know that he is not free to meddle with the clauses of the Schedule; he either had to take the opportunity offered to him a moment ago to vote for giving this agreement a definite life, or do nothing. It is a great shame that his spirited display of independence was not a little more in evidence just a few moments ago. I repeat that he and the honourable member for Kennedy had the opportunity to rewrite aviation history in this country but they displayed their arrant gutlessness in not defying their Government and taking that course of action.
We are used to slick justifications from the National Country Party. A moment ago the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt), in his explanation of the reasons we could not have an eight-year term, said we have a committee that needs five years to report. I remind people of the situation a few months ago when we had another inquiry, the Holcroft Independent Public Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares, which was supposed to have a year to report and yet all of a sudden the urgency of the matter, the requirement to prevent chaos in the airline industry, required that that inquiry should report within five months; should terminate its inquiry in order for the Government to carry out certain undertakings that it gave before the election to its powerful friends in the airline industry. We are used to these slick justifications. No more than five months was necessary before the election; now we need five years for an inquiry into whether there should be deregulation.

I wish to tell members of the National Country Party another thing. Tonight they have crunched headlong into the movement in the Liberal Party which supports small government and deregulation. They have just woken up for the first time that there are some dangers and problems involved in deregulation. If we go flying straight into deregulation some people are bound to miss out. I just ask you--
Mr Katter-Mr Chairman, I raise a point of order. The honourable member for Fremantle is directing his remarks at me. I find them completely insulting. I would not vote with him if I were dying in the middle of the Nullarbor Plain.
The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member for Kennedy will resume his seat. I remind the honourable member for Fremantle to address his remarks through the Chair.
Mr DAWKINS-The honourable member is prepared to do anything for his constituents except vote in their interests. He would not move away from the Government benches for anything in the world. His constituents have to realise, once and for all, that he will not take any action which advances their interests if it means deserting the Government which he has supported in such a cherished fashion for so long. There are some problems in deregulation. I ask honourable members to contemplate this: If the National Country Party is up in arms about the horrors, the portents, of deregulation, what are the chances of this inquiry likely to be?
Motion (by Mr Hodges) agreed to:
That the question be now put.
Bill agreed to. Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.
Third Reading Bill (on motion by Mr Hunt)-by leave-read a third time.
NEW BUSINESS AFTER 11 P.M.: ADJOURNMENT OF THE HOUSE Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) (lO.2)-Mr Speaker, I ask leave of the House to move:
That Standing Order 48A, adjournment of the House, and Standing Order 103, II o'clock rule, be suspended for this period ofsittings.
Mr SPEAKER-Is leave granted?
Mr Donald Cameron-With reservations. What time are we getting up?
Mr SPEAKER-I will put that again. Is leave granted?

New Business after 11 p.m.:Adjournment

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3033

Opposition members-No. Mr SPEAKER-Leave is not granted.
Mr HUNT-I move:
That Standing Order 48A, adjournment of the House, and Standing Order 103, 11 o'clock rule. be suspended for this period of sittings.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (10.3)-The Opposition opposes the motion. The present dilemma that faces the Government is a result of its own disarray, its own inability to get its act together, and its own inability to prepare legislation. As we approach the final days of the autumn session even its own members are rebelling against an extension of sitting hours. Yesterday's proceedings concluded at 2.20 this morning. Today some most important and critical legislation before the Parliament has been jammed through the House, and other important legislation is to follow. This is not the way to run a country, it is not the way to run a parliament, and it is certainly not the way to manage the affairs of this nation.
Mr Sainsbury-Don't be so self-righteous. Mr MORRIS-Is the honourable member happy about the way things are going?
Mr SPEAKER-Order!
Mr MORRIS-Let the honourable member speak for himself.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Shortland will address his remarks to the Chair. The honourable member for Eden Monaro will remain silent.
Mr MORRIS-Mr Speaker, far be it from me not to want to address my remarks to you. I was making the point that this is the Government's problem. It is a matter of rearranging the ordinary sitting times of the Parliament and, if necessary, sitting further into this month. There is no need for Government members to gallivant off across the world acting as postmen. They should stay here and properly, competently and effectively do the job they were sent here to do. We oppose the motion.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (10.5)-1 just want clarification, through a Government spokesman, of how late is late. Last night the House adjourned at 2.28 a.m. I have vivid recollections of the first six years I was in this Parliament from 1966 when the House sat until 2 a.m., 3 a.m., 4 a.m., 5 a.m., 6 a.m., and even 6.45 one morning. The only good thing to come out of the Labor Administration and the Whitlam years was the 11 o'clock rule. Whilst I am prepared to go along with an extended sitting perhaps until midnight to clear up Government business so that we can rise, Jam not prepared--

Mr Charles Jones-J rise to order. The honourable member for Fadden is speaking in a most derogatory manner about you as the leader of the House.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member will resume his seat. There is no point of order.

Mr DONALD CAMERON-You know full well, Mr Speaker, that 1 would not speak about you in that way. I suggest that the honourable member for Newcastle have his ears and his brains blown out at the same time. If the Government is prepared to state to the House that at midnight it will pull up the stumps, J will happily go along with it. 1 will not sit here and indicate a preparedness to sit here like a puppet on a string until all hours of the morning, and line up again at 9 o'clock like a member of a classroom and say:
'Yes, sir, no sir'. J think a fair thing is a fair thing.
Australia has suffered enough as a result of the three years of Labor Government. Let us not lose the only gain we had from the Labor Government, the 11 o'clock rule.

Question put.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes Noes

66 . 45

Majority

. 21

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, I. D. Baume,M.E. Birney,R.J. Boufchier,J. W. Bradfield, 1. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A.
Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. I. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, I. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W. C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck. B. I. Groom, R.I.
Hall, Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.I. Hodges, 1. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M.

Howard, J. W. Hunt. R. J. D. Hyde. I. M. Jarman, A. \Y. Jull,D.F.
Katter, R. C. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A.
Lynch, Sir Phillip
MacKeUar,M.l.R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Macphee. I. M. Millar,P.C. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe. F. L. Porter. J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher. A. C. Ruddock, P. M.
Sainsbury. M. E. Shack,P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, 1. McC. Spender, I. M. Street, A. A.
Tambling, O. E. I. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W.
Whit.,P.N.D. Wilson, I. B. C.

3034 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Independent Air Fares Committee Bill

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U.E.

Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.I. Klugman,R. E. McLeay,Leo
McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. Wallis, L. G. West, S. J. Willis,R.
Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H.
McMahon, Sir William Killen,D.J. Nixon,P.J. Viner,R.I.

Campbell,G. Keating. P. I. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Cohen,B.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

PROPOSED SITTING HOURS Mr SPEAKER-I wish to indicate to honourable members that ballot papers have been circulated which ask a question about sitting hours. The closing time for the ballot I had announced to be 10 p.m., but it seems that there have been events in the chamber this evening that have diverted the attention of a number of members. I therefore propose to extend the closing time of the ballot until noon tomorrow.

INDEPENDENT AIR FARES COMMITTEE BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 28 May, on motion by MrHunt:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (1O.14)-The remarks I made earlier in the second reading debate on the Airlines Agreement Bill were pertinent to this Bill. I simply move:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'the House is of the opinion that the Bill is deficient in that it does not provide for-
(1) cost allocation reviews on a sufficiently comprehensive and frequent basis;
(2) the involvement of the public, including consumers' representatives, in the review process, and
(3) recognition of the profitability of the major airlines in the conduct of reviews by the Committee'.
Mr SPEAKER-Is the amendment seconded?

Mr Charles Jones-I second the amendment and reserve my right to speak at a later stage.
Amendment negatived. Original question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
In Committee Clauses 1 and 2-by leave-taken together, and agreed to. Clause 3 (Interpretation). Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (10.17)-1 wish to speak in opposition to clause 3 sub-clauses (5) and (6) on behalf of the Opposition. These subclauses illustrate that this whole package of legislation is framed on the basis of backing up and supporting Ansett Airlines of Australia. In faCt, one could be forgiven for thinking Ansett's own legal people had drafted this legislation. That is so clearly illustrated in these two special sub-clauses. I will go into them in some detail. They highlight the totally hypocritical approach of this Government. On the one hand the Government parties say that they are the parties of free enterprise and that they like market forces to operate. Yet when it comes to airline policy the situation is totally different. These sub-clauses act as a deterrent to East-West Airlines Ltd, in particular, and any third airline operating fairly in the market place. I will highlight that claim in my discussion on these two sub-clauses. First of all, I think the existing fare structure operating in Australia is to the detriment of consumers in Australia, that is, the users of air services in Australia. They have not been taken into consideration at all in the drafting of this legislation. The situation for my constituents in Canberra is one example. Recently we had an increase of 37 per cent in the fare for the leg between Canberra and Sydney. That is absolutely appalling when one considers that we have a degree of isolation in Canberra. Government members interjectingMrs KELLY-How do you get here if you do not come in on aeroplanes? I do not see you driving, walking or hitchhiking. This rapid increase in air fares-37 per cent for my constituentsin Canberra-has had a very detrimental effect on the tourist industry. It will continue to do so. The Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) nods his head. What is he prepared to do? Will he vote with me on this matter? This legislation should give a third airline the opportunity of providing for my constituents in the Australian Capital Territory a cheaper air fare. That is why I am opposing these twosub-c1auses today.

Independent Air Fares Committee Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3035

Twill illustrate a point to honourable members. When the air fare increase was announced a further airline put a submission to the Department of Transport outlining a proposition to provide an air fare cheaper by $10 each way than the existing Ansett and Trans-Australia Airlines fare. That was the proposal. The operators claim they can do that with the F27 and a one class service. The legislation before us today will work to inhibit their doing that and providing this fairer system for my constituents in the Australian Capital Territory and others like them throughout
Australia.
I want to confine my comments specifically to sub-clauses (5) and (6) of clause 3. The effect of clause 3 (5) is that any air fare proposed by an operator other than Trans-Australia Airlines and Ansett Airlines of Australia for a trunk route shall not be an economy fare or first class fare for the purpose of the Bill. The consequence is that no operator other than TAA or Ansett has a right to have its trunk route fares reviewed under clause 15, the major air fare review clause, or clause 16, the minor air fare review clause. Such operators can have their trunk route fares reviewed only if the Committee of its own motion decides to conduct a review under clause 15 (2). The opportunity for a minor air fare review is removed. This follows from the definition in clause 3 (5) of economy fare and the fact that clause 15 and clause 16 refer only to economy fares. Under clause 3 (6) any trunk route fare of an operator other than TAA or Ansett which is not the same as the TAA or Ansett fare is treated as a discount fare. The consequence is that unless the other operator charges the same fares as TAA or Ansett approved fares the operator then must satisfy the Committee. Such an operator has to prove, firstly, that the proposed fare is likely to increase the operator's profitability; secondly, that the proposed fare is unlikely to result in the economy fares of any operator over trunk routes being increased; and thirdly, that the conditions are reasonable and not discriminatory between persons who comply with the conditions in clause 17 (4).
Although on the face of it these criteria may seem reasonable, legal advice which I have had, and which I know has been available to other of the minor operators in Australia, is to the effect that it would be unreasonably difficult for an operator to satisfy the Committee on the first two requirements. The requirements of clause 17 (4) are unduly onerous in their application to discount fares. They are even more unreasonable and unnecessary for regional airline trunk route fares. All trunk route fares should be assessed on the same basis as TAA and Ansett fares under clause

15 (ll) and clause 16 (8). These clauses provide TAA and Ansett with more than adequate protection.

This Bill can be amended easily by the deletion of clause 3 (5) and clause 3 (6). I wish that more National Country Party members were in the chamber to hear this because they are the people who should be voting with the Opposition on this amendment. This amendment will have the effect
that the trunk route fares of regional operators such as East-West Airlines and Bush Pilot Airways are considered on a proper basis. All that the Opposition is asking for is that such operators get a fair go. If this Government really believes in supporting private enterprise and free market forces it should give those operators a chance.

Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (10.24)-Mr Chairman, it is the intent of the Opposition to oppose the inclusion of sub-clauses (5) and (6) of clause
3. I have just been discussing the matter with the Clerk and it appears that because of the haste with which we are considering these amendments
and because of the pressure since last evening we have not prepared written notice of that intention. Could notice be prepared to enabk that process to be followed?

The CHAIRMAN. If the honourable member so wishes he can move to omit sub-clauses (5) and (6) from clause 3.

Mr MORRIS-I move:

Clause 3, page 4, omit sub-clauses (5) and (6).

Question put:

That the amendment (Mr Morris's) be agreed to.

The Committee divided.

(The Chairman-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes Noes

. 45 65

Majority

. 20

Armitage. 1. L. I!eazley. K. C. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H.
Charles, D. E.
Child,J. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E.
Dawkins, J. S.
Duffy,M.J.
Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L.

AYES

Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A.
Johnson, Les (Teller)
Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly. R. 1. Klugman. R. E.
McLeay.Leo McMahon. Les Mildren. 1. B.
Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, 1. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott,J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. Wallis,L.G. West,S.J.

3036 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Independent Air Fares Committee Bill

AYES
Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Jnnes, U.E.

Willis,R. Young.M.l

NOES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A.
Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H.
Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman.H.G.P. Coleman, W.P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.D. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W. C. Fi,her, P. S. (Tener) Giles. G. O'H. Good)uck, B. J.
Groom,R.J. Hall,Sleele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, 1. C. (TeUer) Hodgman. W. M.

Howard. 1. W.
Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J.M.
Jarman,A. W. Jull,D.F. Kauer, R. C.
Lloyd.B. Lusber, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. 1. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh,D. T. Macphee, 1. M. Moore.J.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L.
Porter. 1. R. Robinson, Can Rocber, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F.
Sinclair,1. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A.
Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W.
White,P.N.D. Wilson,1. B. C.

PAIRS

Campbell,G. Keating, P. J.
Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Cohen,B.

Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William
Killen,D.J. Nixon,P.J.
Viner,R.I.

Question so resolved in the negative.

Clause agreed to.

Clause 4 (Constitution of Committee).

Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (10.32)-Clause 4 prescribes the constitution of the Independent Air Fares Committee. It is to be made up of three members. Amendment No.1 standing in my name reads:

Clause 4, page 5, after sub-clause (2) insert the following sub-clause:
'(2A) At least one member shall be a person who is a member or officer of a body having functions in relation to consumer protection. '

The purpose of the amendment is to ensure that there is direct consumer representation upon the Committee so that there is a direct link from some 11 million persons who use domestic passenger air services each year to the deliberations of the Committee and there is a channel and means by which the problems experienced by members of the public in the utilisation of air services and the views as to the adequacy or appropriateness of the types of fares offered to the community can be processed

through to the Committee. At the same time, having direct consumer representation on the Committee would ensure that there is a link both ways-between the Committee's activities and the public and then between the public in its expression of views and the Committee. Not wishing to delay the chamber at this stage, for those reasons I move:
Clause 4, page 5, after sub-clause (2) insert the following sub-clause:
'(2A) At least one member shall be a person who is a member or officer of a body having functions in relation to consumer protection.'
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) (10.33)-The Government notes the view of the Opposition in regard to this matter. The Government intends to leave the clause in its present form. I assure the chamber that we will obtain the best people possible whatever the qualification. There is not the slightest doubt that the quality of the people who are chosen for this task is very important to the functions of the Independent Air Fares Committee. The Committee has a very important task in ensuring that it sets the fares according to the guidelines that have been adopted which are consistent with the Holcroft Independent Public Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares recommendations of setting a nationally consistent cost related fare. Every effort will be made to ensure that we will obtain really top people who will take into account the consumer requirements.
Amendment negatived.
Clause agreed to.
Clauses 5 to 12-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clause 13 (Cost Allocation Reviews).
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (10.35)-by leave-I move amendments No. (2) and No. (3) together:
Clause 13, page 9, sub-paragraph (2) (a) (i), line 4, omit '3 years', substitute '6 months'.
Clause 13, page 9, sub-paragraph (2) (a) (ii), line 6, omit 'at least 2 years, and not more than 3 years,', substitute 'not more than 2 years'.
The purpose of the amendments is to ensure a cost allocation review of the two .major trunk operators at least within six months. If we examine the record of public analysis of the operations of the airlines since the commencement of the two airline policy we see there has been no public examination of any nature either of the costs and fare structure or of the cost allocation procedures in establishing fares other than the Holcroft Independent Public Inquiry into Domestic Airfares which was truncated by the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt), who is at the table. Given

Independent Air Fares Committee Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3037

the new arrangements under the Airlines Agreeto determine fares. We commend the Govern-

ment Act which has just passed through this ment for that. We would like to see it go further,

chamber tonight, and assuming that it passes as these amendments show. I cannot see any

through the other place, and given that both the reason, that will stand the test of responsible

major airlines have embarked upon major reexamination, why the Government cannot accept

equipment programs and that the aircraft that this amendment. It will give the Government a

each airline is purchasing are of different style good base from which to assess changes in the dis-

with different characteristics, different sizes, it is tribution of costs as between flag fall charges, on-

important that as soon as possible a cost alloground charges, overhead charges, and the dis-

cation review of both airlines be conducted.

tance component, the cost of keeping an aircraft

In the Holcroft inquiry I referred to, only Trans-Australia Airlines lodged a substantive submission. As Mr Holcroft said in his report, the bulk of that inquiry's recommendations was based upon the submission of TAA. The fact is that since 1957 some 24 years have elapsed, almost a quarter of a century, and the accounts, financial performance and efficiency of Ansett Airlines of Australia have not been analysed publicly in that time. Those on the other side might say that the Department of Transport has done that. The Holcroft committee showed that it has not done

in the air from the time it is airborne until it gets down. Let me refer to the importance of that matter. As 1 mentioned before, with the airlines going on to use different aircraft fleets-a Boeing fleet, an Airbus and DC9 fleet, with some Boeing 727s of Trans-Australia Airlines-that decision means a departure by the two major airlines from the past practice of utilising the sharing of spare parts stocks, maintenance equipment, flight simulators and so on. Let me quote again from the remarks of Mr Lyn McKenzie on 12 September last year. Referring to the new fleets, he said:

that. The committee showed that, in fact, the Department of Transport, the regulatory authority, had engaged in a rubber-stamping exercise over a number of years. The Department in the domestic aviation policy review, noted that it had been unable to determine the extent of non-airline activities by Ansett Airlines. It also noted that it had

The two different major aircraft types provide the consumer with a choice, but the consumer will have to pay for the privilege.
The choice of different aircraft is unfortunate from the national point of view.
It will prove costly because of the need for expensive duplication of spare parts, engine test cells, flight simulators, engine overhaul and in the provision of various facilities.

been unable to get adequate information. Again, the Holcroft inquiry came to that same conclusion about lack of information, that the Department had not carried out its task.

He went on to refer to the costs that will be incurred by passengers in being able to have the choice of flying in a Boeing aircraft, an Airbus, or whatever make of aircraft comes on the scene,

If we are to develop a system of airline services particularly in the next few years. It is important,

that has some relationship to an accurate with this Committee being established, that there

measurement of efficiency, to an objective of givbe a proper data base and a proper analysis of

ing a safe, convenient service at the cheapest existing cost allocations of the real costs involved

price, then we need to have the data that would be in flag fall and in the distance component, so that

thrown up by the cost allocation reviews. As the as aircraft changes come along there will be an ac-

notes to the Independent Air Fares Committee curate base from which to work.

Bill point out, the cost allocation review deals specifically with apportionment of airline operators' costs and how they should be attributed to the flag fall and the distance components of an air fare formula. It will also determine the first class fare differentials.

Finally, let me make the point that while both airlines are operating similar fleets over similar routes, with schedules having similar characteristics, irrespective of the comments we make from time to time about the lack of public analysis of accounts and the paucity of information on the

Under the provisions of the Bill such reviews operations of each airline, a rough kind of com-

are to be held concurrently for Ansett and TAA parison can be made. Both airlines have been

but the first cost allocation for both those airlines, doing roughly the same thing with the same kind

again under the provisions of the Bill, is to be conof aircraft fleets. With this change, that position

ducted within three years of the enactment of this will no longer pertain. Unless there is an accurate

Bill. That involves well over a quarter of a century base on which to compare future performance

before there is any public analysis. I cannot see with present aircraft fleets, again it will be a case

any substantial reason that could be advanced in of the Committee accepting the word of the air-

support of this situation by the Government. The line. I strongly urge the Minister and the Govern-

Government is picking up the Australian Labor ment to accept these amendments in the spirit in

Party's policy of establishing an independent body which they are moved, that is, that within six

3038 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Independent Air Fares Committee Bill

months of the enactment of this legislation there should be a cost allocation review of TAA and Ansett, and that future reviews be no further apart than two years, rather than the three years provided in the Bill. I commend the amendment to the Committee.
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) (1O.43)-The amendment is not necessary because the Government intends to request the Independent Air Fares Committee to conduct a cost allocation review within six months of its establishment.
Mr Morris-For the major airlines? For Ansett and TAA?
Mr HUNT-For both, to establish the faresetting formula. The Department of Transport is engaging consultants to evaluate the formula so far established by the Department following the Holcroft report. So at least some refinement will be made to the formula prior to any application that might be received from the major airlines after 30 June. However, I doubt very much whether the consultants and the Department will be able to undertake the thorough review that would be necessary to complete the work necessary to establish the base to which the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) has referred. The Holcroft report indicated that to do this task accurately would take a considerable period. It is not an easy task. Already there has been some disputation as to the 1evel of the flag fall that has been established. There are those who argue that the flag fall is already too high; there are those who argue that the flag fall is too low. Naturally it will be the task of the Committee, after a public inquiry, to conduct a cost allocation review in order to establish a formula from which future fare adjustment applications can be made. There is really no need for the amendment because obviously the Committee will have to establish a satisfactory base on which to do its future work.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (10.45)-1 do not wish to delay the Committee, but I ask the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) to clarify the comments he has just made. In his second reading speech and in the explanatory notes attached to the Bill, it is stated that a period of three years is provided within which to initiate a cost allocation review for Trans-Australia Airlines and Ansett Airlines of Australia. In respect of other passenger operators, the Minister made the point in his second reading speech that a cost allocation review would be initiated within six months. I want the Minister to be specific and clear, and to undertake that a cost allocation review of TAA and

Ansett will be initiated within six months of the enactment of the legislation.

Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) (l0.46)-Clause 13 (2) states:

The Minister shall request the Committee to conduct a cost allocation review-

(a) in relation to each trunk route operator(i) before the expiration of 3 years after the com-
mencement of this Act . . .

What I am saying is that it will take some time for the Committee to get its staff and to get itself esc tablished, but within six months of the establish-
ment of the Committee--

Mr Morris-That is a firm undertaking?

Mr HUNT-We would expect that Committee, and it will get a direction, to undertake
such a cost allocation review to establish a proper
base for future fare setting processes.

Mr Morris-That is a firm undertaking?

Mr HUNTI have said that.

Amendments negatived.

Clause agreed to.

Clause 14 agreed to.

Clause 15 (Major air fare reviews).

Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (10.47)-I move:

Clause 15, page 12, lines 42-46 and page 13, lines 1-6, omit sub-clause (6), substitute the followingsub-cJause:
'(6) Where(a) a passenger operator requests the Committee to
conduct a review in accordance with this section; or
(b) the Committee decides, in pursuance of sub-section (2), to conduct a review in accordance with this section in relation to a passenger operator,
the Chairman shall(c) give notice in writing to that passenger operator- (i) in a case to which paragraph (b) appJiesstating that the Committee intends to conduct the review; (ii) specifying the time and place at which the review is to be commenced; and

(iii) inviting that passenger operator to make

submissions in writing to the Committee in

relation to the matters to be considered by

the Committee during the review within such

time as is specified in the notice; and

(d) cause to be published in the Gazette a notice-

(i) stating that the Committee intends to con-

duct the review;

(ii) specifying the name or names of the passen-

ger operator or passenger operators in re-

lation to whom the review is to be conducted;

(iii) specifying the time and place at which the

review is to be commenced; and

.

(iv) inviting memhers of the public to make sub-

missiQns in writing to the Committee in re-

lation to the matters to be considered by the

Committee during the review within such

time as is specified in the notice.'.

For the information of honourable members, subsequent amendments Nos 7 to 13 relate to the

Independent Air Fares Committee Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3039

matter contained in the amendment I have just moved. The effect of the amendment is to ensure that major fare reviews be conducted by way of public hearing. Under the provisions of the Bill, cost allocation reviews will be conducted in public, with the Independent Air Fares Committee having a discretion to determine which part of the proceedings ought to be conducted in private and to determine which evidence should be released, with a disclaimer that evidence, or material may be submitted or submissions made that would breach trade secrets or be of a commercially confidential nature. That is a matter to be tested later in the operation of the Committee, and here in the Parliament, I hope.
The purpose of the amendment I have moved is to ensure that the major fare reviews be conducted publicly. One of the very contentious points of the whole two-airline policy was brought out very clearly by Holcroft in his report, and it is a point that I have made over and over to the Parliament in the last three or four years. Where we have a situation in which two major operators have exclusive access to the provision of a public transport service, and where they operate under legislative protection on a cost-plus basis that ensures they have to be profitable, and under legislation, as in the Schedule to the Airlines Agreement Bill, which prescribes that there be only two operators over the entire trunk route network, it is a nonsense to suggest that they suffer from a risk of disclosure of information. Let me record in Hansard an extract from page 175 of the Holcroft report. Paragraph 10.23 states:
The Inquiry has observed a number of features of the administration of air fare pricing which it believes should be altered as quickly as possible. By far the most important of these is the lack of public disclosure of financial and performance data by the airlines.
The matter of public disclosure is, in the Inquiry's view, of overriding importance in the regulation of air fare pricing. A moment's reflection will recognise the irrationality of creating a protected joint monopoly, with a cost plus pricing system, and then affording the members of that joint monopoly secrecy in relation to costing and pricing.

of such a stance, apparently without asserting its right to be properly informed as surrogate for the pUblic.

I could not put it in better words than it has been put in the Holcroft report. For this reason we believe it is the responsibility of the two airlines to provide information to the Committee in the conduct of major fare reviews, so that those two airlines give full public accountability to the public
and to the Parliament that gives them legislative protection in the conduct of air fares. For those reasons we believe the major fare reviews should be conducted in public. The effect of my amendment is to bring about that result. I commend the amendment.

MI' HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) (10.53)---The Government does not agree with this amendment. To have a public inquiry every time there was a major fare review would result in
extended inquiries. It is very necessary to have a public inquiry for the cost allocation review to set the formula. Once the formula has been set it is
necessary for the Committee then to adjust all future applications for fare increases according to that formula. Needless to say, there would be very lengthy delays in reponses to applications if there
were to be a public hearing every time there was an application for a fare increase. When one takes account of the scope of responsibility-it covers not only the trunk operators, but also the regional operators and the commuter operators-the Committee would hold, on average, one inquiry each working day. An enormous bureaucracy would be needed to handle such a work load. We do not believe it is necessary.

Question put:

That the amendment (Mr Morris's) be agreed to.

The Committee divided.

(The Chairman -Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

45

Noes

65

Majority

20

Paragraph 10.25 states:
The Inquiry points out when a company accepts a place in an industry into which competitors-
Such as East-West Airlines Ud-
are precluded by law from entry and in which prices are set by law so as to recover costs, including profit, and in which long term government policy prescribes that there shall remain only two firms, each capable of competing with the other, and by implication that they shall survive that competition, for each airline then to adopt the stance of being a firm in a highly competitive environment, jeopardised by the slightest disclosure, is plainly ridiculous. So too is the toleration that has been displayed over a long period by the regulatory authority-
In this case the Department of Transport-

Annitage,J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Browo,John
Brown, Robert
Cass,M.H. Charles. D. E. Child,l
Cross,M,D. Cunningham, D. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V.
Fry,K. L.

AYES

Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly, R. J. Klugman. R. E.
McLeay.Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, 1. G,
Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Thcophanous. A. C.

3040 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Independent Air Fares Committee Bill

AYES
Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B. L.
Humphreys, B. e. (Teller)
Hurford, C. J. Innes, U.E.

Urcn,T. Wallis,L.O. West,S.l. Willis,R.
Young,M.J.

NOES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D.
Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite. R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey,M.H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameront Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. l. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D.
Fife.W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Oiles, O. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M.

Howard, J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,I.M. Jannan, A. W. Jull,D.F.
Katter, R. C.
Lloyd,B.
Lusher,S.A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean,R. M. McVeigh, D. T.
Macphee, r. M. Moore, J. e.
Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L.
Porter, J. R,
Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C.
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack,P.D.
Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, O. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey,C. W. White, P. N. D.
Wilson, r. B. C.

PAIRS

Campbell,G. Keating, P. J.
Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Cohen,B.

Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William Killen,D.J. Nixon,P.J. Viner, R. I.

Question so resolved in the negative.

Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (11.0)-1 move:

(5) Clause 15, page 14, after paragraph (11) (a) insert the following paragraph:
'(aa) the need to ensure that the profit of Ansett and the Commission, before interest and tax, excluding extraordinary items, as a proportion of revenue does not exceed 6 per cent, given a continuation of the present levels of interest and income taxation in Australia;'.

Clause 15 deals with the conduct of a major airfare review. Sub-clause (11) deals with the matters to which that the Independent Air Fares Committee shall have regard in determining the amount of economy air fares. Paragraph (e) states:

the need to ensure that air services are provided over trunk routes by 2 economically viable passenger operators:

Whatever that means I do not know. The meaning is in the mind of the utterer. Paragraph (d) prescribes:

the need to ensure that air services are operated on an efficient and economic basis.
Paragraph (g) prescribes:
the need to ensure that air services that are provided over trunk routes are operated as far as possible on a competitive basis.
That paragraph makes a nonsense of the previous one to which I have referred. If the fares are to be the same, if the matters to be taken into consideration are the same, and if there is a vagueness about establishing that air services are to be operated on an efficient and economic basis, then the only real competition can be the colour of the curtains over the galley of the aircraft or the colour of the uniforms of the hostesses on board.
We are proposing that, in addition to those vague items, there be included a 'precise measurement of profit objective for the two airlines concerned. The amendment that 1 have proposed again is taken directly from the Holcroft committee report. I must point out that the members of that committee are men with a very wide experience in the commercial world, with a wide experience of the type of return that is available to the various industries within Australia, whether in investment, manufacturing or transport. Mr Holcroft is from the transport field, Dr Bell is from the investment field and Professor Hogan is an economist from Sydney University. I will not go into the report and the detail of the matters they considered, the kind of ratios they compared and the comparisons that they made of the different measures used to establish what is a satisfactory return up on funds employed upon capital or upon revenue, but those three gentlemen came to the conclusion that, in the light of all the evidence available, the most appropriate measure would be to write into future legislation a requirement relating to profit before interest and tax. Paragraph 16.82 sub-paragraph (3) of the Holcroft report states:
Profit before interest and tax, excluding extraordinary items, should as a proportion of revenue not exceed 6.0 per cent, given a continuation of present levels of interest rates and income taxation in Australia.
Sub-paragraph (4) states:
The rate of return and the rate of profit before interest and tax should be reviewed whenever there is a significant shift in the criteria by which they were previonsly established.
I will not take the time of the Committee going through the detail of the background to that recommendation. I have read the recommendation and I am satisfied that it is an appropriate recommendation. I leave it to honourable members to refer to the report.
Before 1sit down I wish to repeat the point that I have made before. When two operators are

Independent Air Fares Committee Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3041

given a protected and privileged position in the provision of a public transport service-a guaranteed profit through a cost plus system-in the public interest, that arrangement must carry with it a heavy responsibility for public accountability. Neither of the major operators is exposed to the degree of risk that exists in other commercial ventures in the economy. They are protected. There can be only two operators; there cannot be a third operator in the field. They are not entitled to the kind of return that could be justified in a venture or a commercial operation with a higher risk component. Airline services should be predicated upon the assessment that they are part of the public transport service. For those reasons the Opposition moves the amendment which I have outlined to the chamber. 1 commend that amendment to honourable members.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (11.7)-1 want to reinforce some of the remarks made by the Opposition spokesman for transport, the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) and point out that in fact the Holcroft committee considered the question of profit at very considerable length. In fact it saw it as fundamental to its whole examination of the air fare structure. The figure of 6 per cent was arrived at after extremely detailed consideration. A second feature upon which it is worth commenting and upon which the Opposition spokesman did not comment is that because of the experience of the Holcroft committee and the general tenor in which the negotiations for the two-airline agreement were conducted, it is possible that we will have some trouble ensuring full disclosure of the accounting procedures of the two airlines that will be party to this agreement. I refer not so much Trans-Australia Airlines, which was relatively blameless in its performance before the Holcroft committee, but to the other airline.
The point I wish to make about this 6 per cent profit margin is that as well as being appropriately calculated by persons capable of making such a calculation and as well as being right, given the regulated nature of the airlines and ensuring that there is no exploitation of the travelling public, it would also have the very distinct advantage of concentrating the minds of the accountants of the two airlines wonderfully and ensuring that the figures which they come up with are accurate and the sorts of figures that we could subject to some form of public scrutiny. Thus [ hope, we arrive at a situation in which the airline travelling public is not exploited to the extent to which it has been to this point.
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) (lLlO)-In brief, the Government does not accept this amendment. The airlines have made

an $800m investment in new generation widebodied aircraft, which will be of tremendous benefit to the travelling public generally. They are a more efficient and less noisy aircraft, and will help to stabilise the fares of passengers because of their efficiency, so long as we can maintain a sufficiently high utilisation level. Work done indicates that if the 6 per cent figure were established there is no way that either airline could operate at a profit. [n fact, they would operate at a loss. Of course, Holcroft made the point that the figure could be varied, so the question of the making of a profit will be a matter for the Independent Air Fares Committee to decide, having regard to its guidelines. The figure mentioned in the Holcroft report certainly was not one of the soundest aspects of that report.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (ILl 1)-In effect, the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) is saying that since the return to those airlinesparticularly to Ansett Airlines of Australia-as measured by the means described in the Holcroft report is around about the figure that is recommended, as I have indicated, as I interpret the Minister's remarks--
Mr Hunt-There was not a lot of work done on that figure.
Mr MORRIS-That may be right. I looked at the tables and the comparisons made. If what the Minister says is correct then there will have to be a substantial increase in air fares to achieve the kinds of return on revenue or profit expressed as a percentage of revenue before interest and tax as outlined in the amendment I have put to the chamber. If that is the case, there might very well be fleets of new aircraft but people will not be able to afford to travel on them.
Amendment negatived. Clause agreed to. Clause 16 (Minor air fares review). Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (11.12)-The amendment to clause 16 is identical to the amendment to clause 15 that I moved earlier. It has the effect of ensuring that the matter that I outlined in my previous address is taken into consideration in a minor fares review. The remarks I made in support of the previous amendment apply to this amendment, so 1will not delay the House. I move:
Clause 16, page 17, after paragraph (8) (a) insert the following paragraph:
'(aa) the need to ensure that the profit of Ansett and the Commission, before interest and tax, excluding extraordinary items, as a proportion of revenue does not exceed 6%, given a continuation of the present levels of interest and income taxation in Australia; '.
Amendment negatived.

3042 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Australian National Airlines Repeal Bill

Clause agreed to.
Remainder of Bill-by leave-taken as a whole, and agreed to.
Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.
Third Reading Bill (on motion by MI' Hunt}-by leave-read a third time.
AIRLINES EQUIPMENT AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading Consideration resumed from 28 May, on motion by Mr Hunt:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved ill the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Hunt) read a third time.
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL AIRLINES REPEAL BILL 1981
Second Reading Debate resumed from 28 May, on motion by MrHunt:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (11.17)-The Australian National Airlines Repeal Bill deals with the conversion of Trans-Australia Airlines from a statutory authority to a public company. Obviously it is the first step by the Fraser Government in the sale of all or part of the airline. When the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) stated as reported in the Melbourne Herald on 3 April, that shares would not be sold to Ansett Airlines of Australia, he clearly did not state to whom shares would be sold. If it was proposed that the shares were not to be sold then he would not have said they would not be sold to Ansett; he would have said they would not be sold to anybody. The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) agrees with the view of the Australian Labor Party and the majority of Australians that the sale of TAA would lead inevitably to the formation of a private monopoly in major domestic airline services, higher air fares for travellers and the abolition of country air services. We heard from two Queensland members of the National Country Party earlier this evening, the honourable member for Kennedy (Mf Katter) and the honourable member

for Maranoa (Mr Ian Cameron), of their concern about the possible abolition of country air services in your State, Mr Deputy Speaker.
Let us look at the history of Trans-Australia Airlines. It was established at a time when aviation was in its infancy. There was a very firm belief in this country, held by the then Leader of the Opposition, Mr Menzies, and also by the United Kingdom Government, that the provision of transport services should be carried out by a public utility. It was the decision of the government of the day in 1946 that the most effective way to provide a national system of safe, regular airline services was with one major airline. The total investment in that airline, Trans-Australia Airlines, was some $14.8m in 1946. Not one dollar has been put into that airline since. It has developed and grown upon the basis of the service provided, on the reserves it has developed and on the profits it has made. We know that the two-airline policy devised by the Menzies Government in 1952 was aimed at protecting Australian National Airways-later Ansett Airlines of Australiafrom the growth of TAA. In other words, it was devised to protect the private enterprise operator from the rigours of competition from another operator-as I said earlier, that is the very antithesis of what private and free enterprise is supposed to be all about.
Despite the handicaps and the obstacles of the two-airline policy and despite the impediments and obstructions placed in the way of Trans-Australia Airlines by successive conservative governments, Trans-Australia Airlines went on to become a leader in market innovation, to gain the support of the majority of air travellers and to hold that support year after year, establishing itself as a national symbol of endeavour, of spirit and of identity as a successful public enterprise, as a successful Australian enterprise and as a symbol of achievement by the Australian people. It has been supported by generations of Australians and generations of Australians have contributed to the development of that airline. Since 1946 the airline has carried some 71 million passengers, it has paid $35m in dividends to Consolidated Revenue, it has paid government charges and taxes of $423m and it has established a national route network of 63,583 unduplicated kilometres servicing some 53 towns and cities.
Let me put to rest the claim often made by opponents of TAA because they see the airline as a danger, that TAA does not pay the same taxes. Let me state, and the Minister will confirm this, I am sure, that TAA pays the same taxes and government charges as any public company. It is interesting to note the value put on TAA by those

Australian National Airlines Repeal Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3043

honourable members opposite who seek to snipe, able to say there was any competition with a one-

undermine and sabotage this valuable public airline policy. Two was the minimum number

asset. Senator Peter Rae said in 1979 that the they could have and still give Ansett the inside

value was some $30m; $55m said his friends from running. For that reason Australian National Air-

IPEC-the Employees Share Ownership Plan ways, as it was then known, was kept alive and not

people; Mr Murdoch was a little more realistic sold up in 1952.

and said about $15Om. It is probably worth in the vicinity of $170m. What is the Government's case for forming TAA into a public company? The clear purpose is that it wants to appease those members of the back bench who are disputing with the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and want to see successful public enterprises sold off to the public sector. By forming TAA into a company the task of proceeding to dispose of the airline is simplified.

As I stated earlier, the two-airline policy protects Ansett, and it is the real barrier to greater competition. Changing the form of ownership of TAA will do nothing to lessen air fares. All Australians now share in the ownership of TAA. Those who have passed on, those who have worked with airline services since 1945, those who have used the services, the taxpayers who have made contributions to the development of this country in those intervening years, those who

The interdepartmental committee report provided by the Minister shows that the prime demand of Ansett was that TAA should be sold to commercial interests. It is the view of numerous people of standing in this country that if TAA were sold-be it in two, three, four or five years' time; it does not matter-inevitably it would become part of a major private monopoly of domestic airline services. Mr Rupert Murdoch and Sir Peter Abeles made the demand that TAA should

presently use TAA-and that is the majority of air travellers-are all shareholders in TAA. Under the proposals of that segment oppositethe free enterprise fanatics-TAA is to be formed into a public company. We are asked: 'Would you not want to buy shares in TAA?' There is a very short response to that. As a taxpayer, I already have shares in TAA, and I am quite happy with that arrangement. To form TAA into a public corporation--

be sold during the negotiations for the new twoMr Ruddock-Tell us about the dividends you

airline agreement. The reason for that demand get.

was that TAA has always been a thorn in the side of Ansett. In the absence of proper monitoring of airline costs and performance, it has acted as a monitor of the airline industry. It has acted as a barrier to higher profits in the provision of what is essentially public transport.

Mr MORRIS-The dividends are in social benefit and service and in the knowledge that TAA acts as a monitor on the industry, provides service throughout Australia, and also provides, as two members of the National Country Party pointed out earlier, services to outback

The free enterprise fanatics in the Government ranks claim that the sale of TAA would mean greater competition and cheaper fares. They say that the public could buy shares in TAA. That is a quite spurious claim even if one assumes that greater competition would result in cheaper fares and the public could buy shares in TAA. The situation is not that TAA is a barrier to greater competition. The barrier to greater competition is the legislation that earlier this evening was enshrined for eight more years by those who sit opposite. That is the barrier to competition because this Government is committed to ensuring a higher level of return to the proprietors of Ansett in return for past services rendered in relation to

Queensland that otherwise would not be provided in the absence of TAA. That is part of the dividend I get, and I am quite happy to see those services provided to other Australians. It could be that such dividends do not suit the honourable member or that he is unhappy about such an arrangement. I am not here to deal with my pecuniary interests; that is more the concern and ambition in life of the honourable member. The fact is that the sale of TAA and its listing on the stock exchange will mean that 90 per cent of Australians who do not hold shares in public corporations, who do not buy and deal on the stock exchange, will lose their share of the ownership of TAA.

elections. So the barrier to competition is not The other point made by the proponents of the

TAA. It is quite spurious also to suggest that comdisposal of TAA is that TAA has some disabilities.

petition by itself or the presence of more than one I cannot make the point too strongly that in my

firm would create greater competition. If one view the people who make that kind of claim for-

looks at the history of the two-airline policy one feit their right as members of Parliament to speak

finds that the Menzies Government settled upon a on this area. They are members of the Govern-

two-airline policy because it would not have been ment. TAA is a creature of the Government.

3044 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Australian National Airlines Repeal Bill

TAA must operate in the commercial environment created for it by the Government. So whatever problems and financial disabilities TAA has, we must remember that honourable members opposite are the bosses. They must db something about it. They cannot have the luxury and the hypocrisy of opting out and saying: 'They have problems; they should provide more information; the superannuation scheme is wrong'. They have been sitting on the Government side of the House for five years. Those honourable members who sit opposite have had longer than five years to remedy those disabilities and they cannot enjoy the luxury of complaining about the conditions under which they require the airline to operate. But they are selective criticisms. They are only criticisms of the public enterprise operator.
Mr Hunt-We are trying to fix it up, Peter.
Mr MORRIS-That is more than some of the Minister's colleagues are trying to do. I think that even the honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde), who is sitting at the table beside the Minister, is trying to send it down. Again, this is chaos in Government. The Government is trying to get its act together. The financial disabilities suffered by TAA are the result of Government decisions, and the remedies lie with the government, whether it is in reporting, in entitlements to the scheme, or in funding of the scheme. The Government cannot have that luxury of then blaming the problems on the management of the airline and saying that the airline is not efficient. I would like to quote what the Minister for Transport said on 18 September 1980 when introducing the Australian National Airlines Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980. I described this Bill as an act of grovelling by the Government before the proprietors of Ansett. I want to refresh the memories of honourable members opposite about what the Minister said. He stated:
Paramount amongst these changes was the need to place TAA on a more commercial basis. Since the Government aims to create a more competitive environment for the two airlines, it is amending the ANA Act to ensure that TAA operates on a similar basis-
I underline those words-
to a privately owned airline. At the same time the Government is anxious to ensure that the ANA Commission as a statutory authority is not advantaged over its competitors. This approach is consistent with the Government's overall policy that publicly owned business undertakings should, as far as possible, be neither advantaged nor disadvantaged as compared with their competitors from the private sector.
Is the Minister to tell us this evening that that was a falsehood, that what he told us on 18 September last was not true, or substantially was not true? The challenge is there for the Minister. Let me compare those words of 18 September with the

Minister's words on 25 May. The Minister in his second reading speech on the Australian National Airlines Repeal Bill 1981 stated:
I now acknowledge the contribution of the Australian National Airlines Commission to the development of aviation since its establishment in 1946. TAA is an airline with a great reputation. This is due to its management and staff, the people who have made and are making it a great airline.
That is a pretty paltry kind of epitaph when the Government wants to send an airline down the drain. I thought that the airline would have deserved something better than four lines. The Minister went on to say:
-I firmly believe that by making it a public company and freeing it of many bureaucratic controls it will go from strength to strength.
Which version is correct? Is it the first speech or the second speech? I believe the first one is correct. I have looked at those amendments. The Minister was acting on the basis of fact. He had information and he spelt out in the Bill the proposed amendments, the purpose of the amendments and the reasons they were being made. The second is simply a propaganda document brought up to quieten those poor fellows from Western Australia who have been conned about the deregulation inquiry and who have now been further conned by the words 'We will make TAA into a public company. That should satisfy them. We will have a look at selling it'. The task that faces the Minister is to detail specifically the many bureaucratic controls that were not evident to him or his Department when the legislation of 1980 was submitted to the House.
The major issue at stake in this whole exercise and in the thinking of the free enterprise fanatics opposite is the profit stripping of profitable public enterprises. The Government is concerned about selling off only profitable public enterprises, not the loss incurring public enterprises that are regarded as necessary services, such as railways, schools and hospitals or any other handouts to give as tax deductions. It is concerned with selling only those services which Australians of several generations have established. This airline has been brought to a stage of development where it can be profitable. Now that the risks have been borne by past generations and taxpayers over the last 35 years, the Government says: 'Now it is profitable let us give it to our friends, the wealthy investors and stock exchange speculators'. The Government has no mandate for that action. Some Government members may feel that they would like to do that, but let me make it crystal clear to them that they have no mandate. They have a mandate to do the opposite. They said in the election campaign and have said over and over in the last few years that TAA was not for sale. This

Australian National Airlines Repeal Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3045

Minister for Transport, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the previous Minister for Transport are on the record as saying that TAA would not be sold.
The decision to convert TAA into a public company, as I mentioned earlier, is related to a further desire to sell off the company. The Prime Minister said on the record during the election campaign that TAA was not for sale and that it would not be sold. Yet on 3 April this year in a Press interview in the street outside Parliament House he was asked by Laurie Oakes about Trans-Australia Airlines.
Mr Hunt-What did Laurie ask him?
Mr MORRIS-I will read it for the Minister. It is nice. The Minister will enjoy it. Mr Oakes said:
It was my impression in the election campaign, Prime Minister, that you promised that TAA would not be sold. Well, was my understanding wrong?
Mr Fraser said:
That had been the policy of the Government, yes. We've reexamined that over recent times as a result of, Tthink, somewhat changed circumstances.
Mr Oakes said:
Do you think it's fair Prime Minister, to make a promise in an election campaign and then say five months later, well we've changed our mind?
Mr Fraser said:
Oh, I think if circumstance is different, Governments have to adjust to that. Yes I do.
There it is. I knew that the Minister, as a supporter of public ownership-l 00 per cent government ownership of Trans-Australia Airlineswould enjoy that. This interview reminded me of the words of the infamous Richard Nixon--'That promise is no longer operative'. In Australia we have our own Richard Nixon in politics, the Prime Minister, Mr Fraser. The simple fact is that this Prime Minister will do anything or say anything to get into office and to stay in office. He is the most disbelieved politician in Australia. He and his Government cannot be trusted. It is the policy of the Liberal Federal Council, arrived at in April last year, that TAA should be sold in five years. The Prime Minister and those opposite, when I raised this in debates all through last year, said that that was not the policy of the Government; it was the policy of the party. It is clear that a substantial number of those who sit opposite, who are concerned only with private gain, have adopted it as policy.
Another move by the Prime Minister in this issue has been to appease the selective free enterprise fanatics on the back bench whose support he needs to hold off the honourable member

for Kooyong (Mf Peacock). As I said, this Prime Minister is prepared to sell off one of oUi most successful public enterprises-a symbol of Australian enterprise and achievement-to try to save his political neck. I do not believe he can be saved. I believe he is a temporary Prime Minister. He is prepared to allow almost any dishonesty to try to justify his actions in his manic desire to get his own way. The Melbourne Sun of 1 June contains a report of his address to the Federal Liberal Council meeting of last weekend. The report states:
Selling TAA shares to the public would be regarded as a provocation by any future socialist government .
He said a socialist government-
I suppose he means a Labor government---
would seek to bankrupt both TAA and Ansett and thus have the option of nationalising them.
No one in my memory has made that statement, certainly not since I have been a member of this place. It is not the policy of the Labor Party. It does not appear in the policy of the Labor Party. There is no reference to it. It was another fabrication by the Prime Minister, Australia's Richard Nixon. The report continued:
Assuming TAA was sold, a socialist government would regard it as the greatest possible offence to its principles and would do what it could to re-nationalise TAA and take over the other airline as well.
That is another fabrication. It was not said or heard by anybody else. It was heard only by those people who heard it out of the mouth of this Prime Minister, Australia's Richard Nixon. It is not the policy of the Australian Labor Party to nationalise the airlines system. It is the policy of the Labor Party to ensure that TAA remains a 100 per cent government owned enterprise. It is the political reality that at the moment at least two major airlines operate in this country. I do not see any way that that number can be reduced unless the Government proceeds with the sale of TAA. That would produce a private monopoly in the provision of major air services.
It is important to note the sniping campaign conducted against TAA's financial account by Government members. They never criticise Ansett which produces meagre financial accounts on airline operations. They never criticise the superannuation scheme, the provisions or the lack of data in Ansett's accounts. As I mentioned earlier, the solution to whinges about TAA is in the hands of Government members. TAA is a creature of government. It operates in an environment that the Government creates for it.
The purpose of the Bill as set out in the second reading speech is to enable the conversion of TAA into a public company which is to be 100 per cent

3046 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Australian National Airlines Repeal Bill

owned by the Commonwealth and to repeal the I mentioned that a firm of private consultants

Australian National Airlines Act 1945. It prowas to be commissioned -to advise the Govern-

vides for all assets, liabilities and arrangements of ment on the practicality of selling all or part of the

the Commission to be transferred to the public shares in TAA. I ask: What firm of public consult-

company. It provides transitional arrangements ants is to be engaged? Is it to be McKinsey and

for conversion of the Commission to a company in Co., the bosom pal of the beseiged and discredited

respect of liabilities and other arrangements, Prime Minister and the former employer of the

areas, employees rights and service, superannuhonourable member for Mackellar (Mr Carlton),

ation, et cetera. The formation of TAA into a who is not here at the moment. The honourable

public company, as I mentioned earlier, is only member for Mackellar, who is one of the arch

marginally different from the proposal contained proponents of the sale of TAA, the former bag-

in the Australian National Airlines Commission man of the New South Wales branch of the Lib-

Amendment Bill (No.2) of 1980. It is important eral Party-as he is generally reputed in this place

to note that in this Bill or the Minister's second to beand a man well known to Sir Peter Abeles

reading speech no details are provided of the of Ansett Airlines. If TAA is to be examined, then

memorandum and articles of association of the as it belongs to all Australians and to all members

proposed public company. The memorandum, as of this Parliament, let the examination be carried

some of us will recognise is the document that out by an all party parliamentary committee, as

describes the objectives and purposes of the was the case with other statutory corporations

company.

such as the Australian Industry Development

This Bill is a blank cheque, a blanket approval for the conversion of TAA into a public company with an undefined memorandum and articles of association and in the absence of a financial directive from the Government to indicate what its

Corporation and as is the case at the moment in respect of the Australian National Railways Commission. The airline belongs to all Australians and should be looked at on a non-partisan basis along with Ansett Airlines.

purpose will be. The Minister has said that a firm The ultimate sole objective of this legislation is

of private consultants is to be appointed to advise to free up TAA to provide better service to the

the Government on the practicality of selling public. Therefore, it can be understood that it

some or all of the shares in TAA, including how would be irresponsible of this Parliament to en-

this might be done in the light of the Governdorse conversion of the airline into a public

ment's aviation policies. If anybody can undercompany in the absence of a detailed memor-

stand the Government's aviation policies he has a andum of articles of association, especially when

big task in front of him in carrying out the work the policy of the major coalition partner is for the

that will be given to him by the Minister. Why a sale of the airline within four years and given the

firm of private consultants? Who will the firm of total lack of trust in what this Government and

private consultants be? As I said, the legislation Prime Minister say and do. The formation of

gives a blank cheque to the Government to conTAA into a public company is an ill-conceived,

vert TAA into a public company. We have no deexpensive and unnecessary gimmick. The legis-

tails of what is proposed.

lation constitutes a squandering of public re-

Let me make the point that changing the Commission's status will not mean that it will be more efficient or have greater freedom. Qantas

sources by the Prime Minister in his latest manoeuvre to head oft' yet another rebellion by Government back benchers.

Airways Ltd is a public company. Its major probThe Australian National Airlines Commission

lem has been petty interference by this GovernAmendment Bill (No.2) of 18 September last

ment's bureaucracy. The Chairman, Mr Jim year, with the exclusion of the profit objective

Leslie, is on record on numerous occasions testifyclause, clause 17, would be supported by the Op-

ing to the problems of the airline caused by position. This would achieve all the important

government bureaucracy and government interobjectives that the Minister claims this Bill will

ference. I challenge the Minister to detail achieve. The Government has a mandate to

specifically and precisely the improvements in the ensure that TAA is not sold, which is the opposite

day to day management of TAA which he would of the real purpose of this legislation. Changing

expect from forming it into a public company. His the form of ownership will not reduce air fares by

theory has not worked for Qantas because the one cent for one traveller. Converting TAA into a

Department of Finance, the Department of the public company will simplify its sale and it meets

Treasury and the Department of Transport can the prime demands of this Government's backers,

still, and do, interfere in the operations of the the multi-millionaire proprietors of Ansett. As I

company.

have said, the sale of TAA will result in a private

Australian National Airlines Repeal Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3047

monopoly and a withdrawal of country air serbeen very wise indeed to be quite open-minded

vices. This legislation was born in infamy. It should be rejected outright by this Parliament. It will be opposed at every opportunity by the Opposition, the Australian Labor Party and the majority of Australians.

about the matter. He has taken TAA into the realm of being a public company. He is going to arrange for a full and complete investigation of the whole financial structure. I do not think there is one honourable member who will deny that at

MI' JULL (Bowman) (11.43)-The hour is getting late and I will confine my comments to very brief statements indeed. I listened with interest to the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris). I think we have to realise that this legislation fits in as part of the whole package of legislation which the Government has brought into the House tonight. I sincerely believe the package can lead to a fairer and more equitable pricing system for air fares in Australia and ultimately cheaper air fares in Australia. It would be interesting to ponder what my philosophical commitment would have been in 1946 to the establishment of Trans-Australia Airlines. Perhaps I would have found some support for it at that stage. That is 30-odd years ago and the whole of the domestic as well as the international aviation scene has changed very much indeed.

the moment it is almost impossible to find out through the access we have in our everyday operations here in Parliament what really has been going on with TAA, its superannuation scheme, its restrictions on expenditure and its relationship with the Department of Transport. All these matters are adding up.This is really one of the wisest moves that could be made for the sake of TAA, whichever way it might go in the future.
As I said the Bill is part of a total package lining domestic aviation up for the 1980s. The days of 1946 and the early 1950s are long gone. If we can look at the legislation in that respect and with the positive feeling that TAA will be owned by all the people of Australia, then we have to make sure they get value for money and that their investment is sound. This is the only way we can do it. I have every confidence that the Minister will fol-

We have to be careful to avoid the situation that has developed in a number of overseas countries. I will cite just two examples. One relates to New Zealand and its Government owned domestic airline, and the other relates to Britain where British European Airways virtually acted as the country's domestic carrier. I am scared that if we do not have a full investigation of TAA and a proper look at its financial setup we will have such a situation. I am not denying that TAA has been operating on a shoestring for many years.

low the matter right the way through. If in fact his proposition is that part of the shareholding of TAA be sold, to the ultimate benefit of all Australians, so be it. But we do not know yet whether that will be so. We have a long way to go down the track before we know the true nature of the future of TAA. I speak very briefly tonight in support of the Bill. I am confident in the knowledge that the Bill is part of the legislative package that will lead to a much fairer and more equitable air fare arrangement for each and every Australian.

Mr Hunt-And doing it well too.
Mr JULL-It has been doing it well. If we get to the stage at which BEA was at the end of the 1960s we could have an absolute disaster. The British Government's answer was to amalgamate BEA and the British Overseas Airways Corporation to form British Airways. Domestically and internationally that airline is now losing $235m a year. Those Government owned airlines got out of control. If Australia is not careful it could well have the same situation. I dare say that in some respect the Australian taxpayers might be contributing to the situation that has developed in British Airways. The airline is saying quite openly that the Kangaroo route to London is one of its major profit earners and if it does not have exclusive or semi-exclusive rights it will be in all sorts of trouble. Qantas recognises now that we are paying some of that heritage.

Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler) (11.48)-[n my view the Australian National Airlines Repeal Bill is one of the most iniquitous Bills brought into this House by the present Fraser Government. In some respects it is a sale of the Australian people's birth right. As the honourable member for Bowman (Mr Jull) said, Trans-Australia Airlines was established in 1946 by the Chifley Labor Government. Since that time TAA has carried over 71 million passengers and has paid $35m in dividends to consolidated revenue. It has also paid taxes and government charges to the Commonwealth amounting to $423m. That is not bad for a company that a number of Government members are saying is on its last legs. Indeed, in the last financial year TAA showed an improvement in its passenger growth of 7.1 per cent. It carried more freight than Ansett. TAA carried about 57 million tonnes of freight and Ansett carried about 55 million tonnes. That is not bad for an airline

I think it is important that we look at TAA. I which the Government says needs to be

think the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) has deregulated.

3048 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Australian National Airlines Repeal Bill

When looking at the Bill one should ask why the Government is to sell an enterprise that in 1979-80 made $2.9m profit for the Australian taxpayer. In looking at the evidence before us and even the Press statements made on the subject, it is quite clear why the present Liberal-National Country Party Government-even over the National Country Party's head-wishes to sell TAA or set it up in such a fashion that the Government, at some later date, can sell it off. The Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) and a number of speakers in previous debates here this evening have said: 'But of course we do not have any real intention of selling the airline. We are just trying to set it up in such a commercial fashion that it will be competitive'. Indeed, the Minister said in his second reading speech:
The Government intends that the new company be fully commercial with the powers of the Government restricted to rights of shareholders to appoint directors.
If the facts are, as I put them to Parliament just now, that TAA is making a profit, that TAA is getting more traffic than it had in the past, that TAA is doing better than Ansett, why does the Government need to set it up in such a different fashion? I put it to the Parliament and to the Australian people that the reason is that in the long run this Government intends to try to sell TAA despite the fact that many of its own supporters say that it should not do it. Indeed, one of the Government's most influential members, the Deputy Prime Minister and Leader of the National Country Party (Mr Anthony), said at Echuca at the Country Party's Victorian branch conference that the Government must run TAA. It is very interesting that since 10 April 1981 he has not said that it must not sell it. One might ask: Why is the Government wanting to sell TAA? Why is it setting it up in such a fashion? It is quite obvious that it is because Mr Murdoch and his friends wish to buy the airline and wish to try to dominate the airline industry in Australia. A number of Government members are obviously in league with this plan-the gang of seven that voted against the Government this evening, the deregulators who wish to see the airline industry in Australia destroyed so that there can be control of the industry by Mr Murdoch and Sir Peter Abeles. That would be to the great detriment of the people of Australia. Indeed, the people who will be the great losers will be the people of Queensland and the outlying areas of some of the States.
Mr Good luck-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. Does the gang of eight include the Labor Party too?

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- There is no point of order.
Mr LEO McLEAY-I am very interested to see the behaviour of one of the Tasmanian members who so supinely agreed with the Government today that we should set up TAA in such a fashion so that it could be done away with. The Government allowed East-West Airlines Ltd to be done over in the negotiations about trunk routes. East-West Airlines, which provides a cheaper link between Tasmania and the mainland has been done over by these supine people who 'say that they stand for Tasmania. They stand for Tasmania with about as much sincerity as a person who is willing to sell out all of his or her electors. The Government has sold out East-West Airlines which was trying to do something for the Tasmanian people.
Mr Good luck-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order.
Mr LEO McLEAY-Here he comes. The honourable member is going to try to make an excuse for what he has done.
Mr Good luck-The mainlander wouldn't understand anything about Tasmania.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. J. D. M. Dobie)-Order! There is no point of order. I remind honourable members that frivolous points of order are not accepted by the Chair, especially at this late hour. The honourable member for Grayndler will keep his attention to the subject matter of the Bill.
Mr LEO McLEAY-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. I thank you for your protection from these frivolous points of order by people with very guilty consciences here this evening. As I was s~y ing earlier on, the reasons the Government Intends to set TAA up in such a fashion that it can ultimately be sold are quite clear. Look at the Liberal and Country parties' election promises when they went to the people last year. How many of them are still in existence? A promise by this Government is operative until the Minister can make another statement cancelling it. I put to the Parliament tonight that it is obvious that in the near future the Government will attempt to sell TAA. It will attempt to sell what is one of the great assets of the Australian people. The conversion of TAA from a statutory authority to a public company is the first step in the sale of all or part of the airline.
It is interesting to see the people who do not agree with the Government. Indeed, Sir Robert Law-Smith, the Chairman of TAA, an appointee of the present Government and a man who one

Australian National Airlines Repeal Bill

3 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3049

might think is close to the Government's line of disposal to block the sale of TAA. If by any mis-

thinking, said that he did not see any advantage to chance this Government is able to sell part or the

the travelling public in the sale of TAA. Indeed, whole of TAA the next Labor Government will

he went on to say at other stages that he does not restore it to its rightful owners-the Australian

see any advantage to the Government in changing people-so that TAA can continue to provide the

the arrangements in the way it is at present. So service to the Australian people that it has been

said the Government's own appointee as the chief providing since 1934. I hope TAA will continue to

executive of TAA. It is interesting to see that the provide those services for a long time in the future

Government has even fallen out with its own and that we will not have part or all of it sold to

people.

people who would try to stifle the development of

We have seen also a proposal of the Governone of the great institutions of this country.

ment to put consultants into TAA. The consultDr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (11.58)-The

ants, of course, as the Labor Party spokesman on Government's real meaning and purpose with the

transport has said, have been put in there with Australian National Airlines Repeal Bill is clear.

only one purpose in mind and that is to bring up a It aims to sell off Trans-Australia Airlines to the

report which will be favourable to the line that private sector and thereby effectively emasculate

proponents of the sale of TAA are taking in the the quality of the air services provided in this

Government. I have no doubt that the Minister country. However, the Bill also achieves another

for Transport, who is sitting at the table tonight, goal. It exposes the contradictions and incoheren-

feels that he is in a rather difficult position. He cies of the present Government's policies and its

knows that the people who will be the great losers so-called philosophy. When looking at the policies

in any attempt to change the arrangements that of this Government on domestic airlines one does

TAA has will be the people of rural Australia, the not know whether to laugh or to cry. Is it not con-

people in Queensland represented by the Ministradictory and hypocritical for this Government,

ter's party. I recently had occasion to go to which has just rammed through three Bills de-

Charleville on a TAA Fokker Friendship. One signed to reduce competition in the airline indus-

can only wonder what would happen if TAA gave try, to be trying to justify this action by claiming

up that route. There were many women with that the Bill ensures 'that TAA operates as a com-

young children on that flight. It was a very hot petitive, commercially oriented airlines'? Thus

day. As the Minister would be aware, air turbuwith the Bills last before the House we were told

lence in Western Queensland is very bad. Most of that regulation of the industry was essential. With

the people on the flight developed air sickness. this Bill we are told that TAA must be made into a

Where would we be if TAA went off that route company, .which would deregulate its activities

and we had some little commuter airline operatand free it from bureaucratic control. Why can we

ing without a hostess service? Where would those not get some consistency from this Government?

people be? They would be in rather disastrous cirWhy does it present us with this hogwash about

cumstances. It was interesting to hear the member noble principles when what it is really out to do is

for that electorate involved saying here this evento destroy the publicly owned airline altogether

ing that the Government was making a very and to create monopoly control for a small group

wrong decision. For once in my life I would be of rich individuals who want to control this indus-

happy to stand here and say that I hope the try? As a result of the two airlines agreement

Country Party wins an argument between the which the Government has just pushed through it

Government parties. It is unfortunate that the is virtually impossible for TAA to compete effec-

Country Party has been run over as the people of tively with Ansett Airlines of Australia. Yet the

Tasmania also have been run over.

Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) in introducing

Mr Humphreys-We have a Country Party the Bill before us said:

Minister.

By making it a public company and freeing it of many bureaucratic controls it will go from strength to strength.

Mr LEO McLEAY-The Minister, as I said earlier-my colleague the honourable member for Griffith mentioned him-must be very embarrassed to be sitting at the table this evening handling this Bill.

In other words, the Minister in the previous Bills imposed an ad hoc set of controls yet in relation to this Bill he claimed that it is necessary to make TAA a so-called public company in order to free it from ad hoc bureaucratic controls. Simple logic

Other honourable members wish to speak in and coherence of principle is abandoned in the

this debate. I assure the Parliament that the Fedtush to sell off public, profitable assets. What is

eral Labor Party\ when it is returned to power, really happening is this: The Government simply

and even before that, will use every means at its determines what is in the best interest of vested

3050 REPRESENTATIVES 3 June 1981

Australian National Airlines Repeal Bill

interests which support it and then concocts so called philosophical arguments later. This Bill and the previous Bill, which are in blatant contradiction of each other, clearly expose the so-called philosophy as a sham..
Why is TAA to be made into a so-called public company? Why is the Australian National Airlines Commission to be disbanded? The only thing that even resembles an argument for this action is that TAA will be subject to fewer restrictions from the Government if it becomes a so-called public company. Yet, if it is necessary to remove such restrictions, this can be done by amending the regulations governing the Commission. It is not necessary to establish this public company for that purpose. If anyone denies this, let him refer to Hansard of 18 September of last year, when this same Government introduced legislation to achieve this goal of deregulating TAA while retaining it as a commission.
Last year the Government assured this House that TAA could be relieved of government controls while retaining its commission status. Why has the Government now changed that view? The reason will become evident to all Australians in the next few months. This Government is converting TAA to a public company beca~se that way it is easier to move to a situation of selling off its shares to private individuals and private companies. Thus one of the few remaining profitable public enterprises in this country is to become the private property of wealthy Australians and overseas interests. Taxpayers' investments in this company over many years are to be dispensed with at the whim of the Minister. What is serious here is that the Government is being dishonest in the way it is going about achieving the goal. The Minister informed us that the Government has decided to engage consultants to examine the practicality of selling some or all of the shares in TAA, including how this might be done in the light of the Government's domestic aviation policies. So we are to have private sector consultants to analyse and determine whether TAA is to remain publicly owned. That is like asking Mephistopheles to determine whether souls will go to heaven. The Government fools no one with this delaying tactic. Trans-Australia Airlines is as good as gone.
I address myself to a further point. The general philosophy of getting rid of productive and profitable public enterprises is an absurd economic thesis. It is a thesis which, if carried to its extremes, results in higher taxation because more public revenue has to be found. In the last few

years TAA has in fact contributed $35m in dividends to Consolidated Revenue. It has also contributed $423m in government charges and taxes.

Mr Baume-Tell us about the super fund.

Dr THEOPHANOUS-I ask honourable members opposite--

Ml' DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. J. D. M. Dobie)-Order! Far too much interjection is taking place.

Dr THEOPHANOUS-Honourable members opposite do not like to hear good argument. I ask honourable members opposite: Where will they find public revenue to substitute for that profit? Do they intend to further emasculate services throughout the community, as they have already done? Is this the kind of nonsensical economics that we get from this stupid Government? It does not even make economic sense to sell off profitable public enterprises. We give notice to these people that not only will we restore TAA to a public enterprise but we will also increase public enterprises throughout the community. It is only through increasing--

Mr McLean-What will you do with Ansett?

Dr THEOPHANOUS-It is not our intention to take over Ansett as the Minister and other souls on the other side have claimed. It is not our intention to take over Ansett.

Mr Coleman-Why not?

Dr THEOPHANOUS-I will answer the question. We believe in a competitive situation between the private and public sectors. We do not believe in giving everything to the private sector in a monopolistic way.

Mr Groom-What about the banks?

Dr THEOPHANOUS-We also believe in competition between private and public sector banks, and have said so. The Government is trying to destroy competition between the banks because it has given the go-ahead for these - -

Mr Morris-I raise a point of order. The hour is late and there are those opposite who are tired and emotional. Could we have some decorum in the chamber so that the address of the honourable member for Burke, which is important to him and relates to important legislation, can be heard?

MI' DEPUTY SPEAKER-There is no point

of order. The Chair is aware of the need to keep

decorum. The Chair is also aware of honourable

members stimulating others to 'give it to them', as

I heard. I will ignore that comment. I ask the

honourable member for Burke to continue with

his speech.

.

Australian National Airlines Repeal Bill

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3051

Dr THEOPHANOUS-I could take on the
whole lot of them at once, and so could every other honourable member on this side, and I am ready to do so. Let me continue with the points I
am making. The fundamental point is the incoher--
ence of the economic policy which attempts to sell off profitable enterprises and then increase tax-
ation in order to pay for government services. This Government will be forced to increase taxes
if it sells off profitable public enterprises, if it con-
tinues with the sale of TAA, and if it sells off sections of Telecom Australia, Australia Post, the Overseas Telecommunications Commission and
other public enterprises. I warn the Government
that it will be forced into a position where it will have to go to the people and increase taxes on or-
dinary Australians if it is not prepared to accept public revenue from public enterprises.

There is absolutely no reason at all why a profitable public enterprise should be sold off in this
disgraceful way in order to fill the pockets of cer-
tain individuals and overseas interests.

I maintain that this is a half-baked idea which has not been properly thought out but which
clearly shows the extreme right wing policies to which the Liberal Party has resorted. The Liberal
Party used to be an organisation which at least be-
lieved in a certain amount of moderation. We now see extremist policies being put forward, and the
Australian people will reject them. The Govern-
ment has no mandate for this policy. It did not go to the people with this policy. At the next election it will go down because of its attempt to sell TAA
and other such enterprises.

Thursday, 4 June 1981

Question put:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

The House divided.

eMr Deputy Speaker-Hon. J. D. M. Dobie)

Ayes

65

Noes

45

Majority

20

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey,M.H. Burr,M.A Cadman.AG. Cameron, Donald
Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian

AYES

Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde.J. M. Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.1'. Katter, R. C. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A.
Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T.
Macphee,!. M. Millar,P.C.

AYES
Carlton,}. 1. Chapman, H, G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. pean,A.G. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Goodluek, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W.

Moore, J.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian
Rocher. A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC.
Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J.
Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage. J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel
Brown, John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cross, M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U. E.

Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles
Kelly, R.J. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon. Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, \V. L. Mountfonl, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scotl, J. L. Thcophanousj A. C. Uten, T. Wallis, L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young, M.J.

PAlRS

Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William KiIlen,D.J. Nixon,P.l. Viner,R.I.

Campbcll,G. Keating, P. J. Kent, L. Kerin, J. C. Cohen, B.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

Third Reading

Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.

Motion (by Mr Hunt) proposed:

That the Bill be now read a third time.

Mr MORRIS (Shortiand) (12.14 a.m.)-This legislation constitutes a repudiation of firm elec-
tion promises given by the Government at the last election. This legislation is grounded in conspiracy. It is legislation that is utterly opposed by
the Australian Labor Party. I have already
outlined our arguments against the legislation, but
because of the late hour I will not hold the House
further by dividing on the issue. The only reason

3052 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Koongarra Project Area Bill

for not dividing is to save the time of the House at this late hour.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a third time.
KOONGARRA PROJECT AREA BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 28 May, on motion by MrWilsol1:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Ml' WEST (Cunningham) (12.16 a.m.)-The purpose of this Bill is once again to confuse the Northern Territory Aboriginals, by allowing uranium mining at Koongarra to proceed in the Kakadu National Park which has already been submitted for inclusion in the World Heritage List. This Bill amends the proclamation of the Governor-General of 5 April 1979 which was made under section 7 (2) of the National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act 1975 by which an area was excluded from the Kakadu National Park far the Kaangarra mining lease area. Ranger and Jabiluka, the two other major uranium mines, which border the Kakadu National Park, have Australia's largest uranium reserves. Ranger, if it goes ahead, would produce an estimated 110,000 tonnes of yellowcake, and Jabiluka about 206,000 tonnes of yellowcake. Mining at the Ranger proposal would be open cut with an annual production initially planned of 3,000 tonnes of yellowcake with a capacity to increase to 6,000 tonnes. It currently employs 1,560 workers. The permanent jobs are estimated to number only between 250 and 400. Jabiluka plans to use the underground mining technique, with an annual production of 3,000 tonnes of yellowcake. Permanent jobs are expected to number about 880.
No other deposits approach the vastness of these reserves. The fact that these mines border the national park poses grave threats to the environmental safety of the park. Despite these threats at least one can say that these mines only border the Kakadu Park. Koongarra, on the other hand, with only 13,300 tonnes of mineable yellowcake, is geographically situated in the middle of the park. The open cut method for the No. 1 orebody is expected to be used in a rapid short term program lasting 18 months to two years. This is a considerable change from the original proposal which expected total production of Koongarra yellowcake to be about 28,000 tonnes. The original estimates aimed to produce 1,500 tonnes of yellowcake annually, but this estimate has now been dropped to 1,000 tonnes annually. Similarly, employment was expected to number

150 permanent jobs, but this has dropped to only 100 permanent jobs.
The whole history of this deposit reveals shonky wheeling and dealing. The wholly owned Canadian company, Noranda, originally leased the deposits in 1970. When the Kakadu Park was declared in April 1979 the deposits were excised from the park so that it actually became an enclave within the park. Just before the October election last year it was announced in this Parliament that Noranda had sold its interest in Koongarra to another wholly owned Canadian company, Denison. The timing of the announcement was deliberate, to avoid the inevitable uproar and debate about Australian resources being swapped around amongst foreign companies without Australian participation. Denison is still 100 per cent foreign owned.
What is happening with the Government's 80called foreign investment and Australian equity policy? The machinations have not stopped there. This Bill represents the worst of these manipulative and deceitful dealings and amounts to a betrayal of the Australian public. Honourable members may remember that the National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act, as amended in 1978, provided for the declaration of the Kakadu National Park and for leasing of Aboriginal land, granted to traditional owners under the provision of the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act, by the Director of the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service to become the Kakadu National Park.
The disgraceful exclusion of certain areas from the park, including Ranger and Koongarra, for uranium mining purposes then occurred. Of course, at that time amendments to the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act provided for the leasing of former unalienated Crown land then held in trust for the traditional ownersby the Kakadu Aboriginal Land Trust to the Director of the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service. By November 1978 these legislative actions had resulted in the traditional owners leasing their newly acquired land to the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service minus, of course, the Ranger and Koongarra uranium bearing areas.
Then we saw a succession of events. We saw stage one of the Kakadu National Park proclaimed. In April 1980 we saw the draft management plan for the Kakadu National Park released for public comment. By August last year the final management plan was tabled in this Parliament. Only in April of this year the plan of management came into effect. It required 20 days

Koongarra Project Area Bill

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3053

in the Parliament and should have been valid for auspices of the National Parks and Wildlife Ser-

five years. We now find that Denison Mining vice. I know that this was recommended by the

wishes to alter the plan of its proposal to provide Service as the preferable option if mining was to

for the evaporation ponds and the dam to be sited proceed-something, however, which the Oppo-

inside the park area. So the purpose of the Koonsition does not and never will accept.

garra Project Area Bill is to alter the boundaries of Kakadu National Park retrospectively to accede to the demands of Denison Mining. The Government has chosen a particularly dishonour-
able manner of so proceeding.

Let me restate the situation. The Government, through this Bill, is retrospectively changing a Governor-General's proclamation which defined the park boundaries under the Act and excluded the Ranger and Koongarra areas. The Govern-

The Government really had three options and ment is changing that proclamation in retrospect.

it chose the most heinous and despicable option. It would not even abide by its own mechanism set

Let me explain the three options in case the Minup in the 1975 National Parks and Wildlife Con-

ister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilservation Act. What a cynically cowardly exer-

son) and the Government do not know about cise! The Government and the Minister for Home

them. The original Parks and Wildlife Act 1975 Affairs and Environment will not even abide by

provided for boundary changes under sections 7, their earlier legislation or conduct themselves ac-

8,9, 10, 11 and 12. Under these sections 60 days cording to their own rules. Mining should not pro-

should have been allowed for public comment on ceed in Kakadu National Park. The Koongarra

the proposed boundary alterations. The Director area is one of the most scenic places inside the

had to consider any comments and make a report park. What environmentally conscious nation

to the Executive Council. Then the Executive could nominate an area for World Heritage listing

Council had to consider the Director's report and and then proceed to mine its most scenic attrac-

commend a resolution to this Parliament which tion? Only this Government-a bunch of en-

then should have been passed by both Houses of vironmental frauds if ever there were-would

Parliament to become effective.

propose such outrageous nonsense. It is placing

The second option for the Koongarra project to proceed involved no boundary changes to the park under the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act 1976. Either the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs (Senator Peter Baume) and the Northern Land Council had given their approval in writing for uranium mining or the Governor-General had declared that it was in the

the Kakadu Park outside the definitive guidelines as set out by the International Union of Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources and it could be placing the success of the nomination at risk for the listing has not yet been formally accepted. This Government could be putting it at risk. It is going outside the guidelines set by the World Heritage Council on these matters.

national interest for uranium mining to proceed. Mr Hodges-What about some energy for the

Then the Governor-General could have given his Third World countries?

approval for such operations to be carried out in the Kakadu Park under the plan of management. But if mining operations were allowed in the park under those conditions then several of the conditions would have applied as set out in the management plan and the Director of the National Parks and Wildlife Service would have determined the environmental standards and would have had control over the operations.

Mr WEST--I ask the honourable member to wait. Now the Government tells us that we should support this undercover move to change the parameters of Kakadu National Park. It says that the legislation results in a smaller Koongarra mining area which now excludes the Nourlangie escarpment. The Minister points to clause 2 sub-clause (2) of the Bill, which requires that the measures must have the consent of the traditional owners of

But the Government chose a further optionthe Kakadu Aboriginal Land Trust. This is no

the most dishonourable, cowardly and precedent concession at all. I hope that the Aboriginals con-

setting action as outlined in this Bill. The Governcerned understand this. To be precise, under the

ment loses control of the Senate on 1 July. The existing leasing arrangements arising from both

proper option, as provided in the 1975 Act-the the National Parks and Wildlife Conservation

Government's own Act; its method and its own Act and the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern

mechanism-was eschewed because there was no Territory) Act, this Aboriginal consent is already

hope of concluding the arrangements for the required. Any amending proclamation which

alteration before August next. If the Government excises an area from the park will, since the whole

chose the next option-the mining operation inpark is Aboriginal land, therefore, terminate the

side the park without a change of boundary-of leasehold interest of the Director of National

course, mining would have been under the Parks and Wildlife Service in that area. Then this

3054 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Koongarra Project Area Bill

area would revert to its original owners, that is, the Kakadu Aboriginal Land Trust and the traditional owners. The particular excised land would then become subject to sections 40 and 41 of the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act. As this is quite important and exposes the Government's subterfuge in this matter I ask leave of the House to incorporate those sections in Hansard, which will save me reading them out and save the time of the House.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
PART IV-MINING INTERESTS AND MINING OPERATIONS
40. (I) A mining interest in respect of Aboriginal land shall not be granted unless~
(a) both the Minister and the Land Council for the area in which the land is situated have consented, in writing. to the making of the grant; or
(b) the Governor-General has, by Proclamation, declared that the national interest requires that the grant be made.
(2) Where the Minister and a Land Council, after considering proposals placed before them by an applicant for an exploration licence in respect of Aboriginal land, being proposals for the exploration for minerals on that land and the recovery of any minerals found as a result of the exploration, have; for the purposes of sub-section (I), consented to the grant of that licence, that sub-section does not apply to a later grant to that person of other mining interests in respect of that land that are in substantial accordance with those proposals.
(3) Where the holder of an exploration licence in respect of land applied, before 4 June 1976, for another mining interest in respect of that land, sub-section (1) does not apply to the grant of that other interest.
(4) Where, before 4 June 1976, a person was issued with a permit in respect of land under the Petroleum (Prospecting and Mining) Ordinance 1954 of the Northern Territory, as amended from time to time, sub-section (1) does not apply to the grant to that person of a lease under that Ordinance in respect of that land.
(5) Sub-section (I) does not apply to the grant to a person of a lease in respect of Aboriginal land under the Petroleum (Prospecting and Mining) Ordinance 1954 of the Northern Territory, as amended from time to time, if that person applied for the grant of such a lease in respect of that land before the land became Aboriginal land.
(6) If the land, or part of the land, described in Schedule 2, being the land known as the Ranger Project Area, becomes Aboriginal land, sub-section (1) does not apply in relation to that land, or that part of the land.
(7) Sub-section (I) does not apply in relation to the land described in Schedule 3, being the land known as the Eastern Areas on Groote Eylandt.
41. (I) The Atomic Energy Act 1953 or any other Act authorizing mining for minerals does not apply in relation to land that is Aboriginal land so as to authorize the entry or remaining of a person on the land or the doing of any act by a person on the land unless-
(a) the Governor-General has, by Proclamation, declared that both the Minister and the Land Council for the area in which the land is situated have consented to the application of that Act in relation to entry on that land; or

(b) the Governor-General has, by Proclamation, declared that the national interest requires the application of that Act in relation to entry on that land.
(2) If the land, or part of the land, deScribed in Schedule 2, being the land known as the Ranger Project Area, becomes Aboriginal land, sub-section (1) does not apply in relation to that land, or that part of the land.
Mr WEST-1 thank the House. Honourable members will understand that sections 40 and 41 of the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Territory) Act are the Aboriginal right of veto sections which require the consent of Aboriginal owners to all mining except for land for which petroleum leases were issued before the land became Aboriginal land, the Ranger uranium mining project area and the eastern area on Groote Eylandt. Of course, Koongarra is not included in any of these areas where the veto does not apply. So the Aboriginals have the power of veto anyway, as I have explained. There was no need for the Government to put into this Bill clause 2 sub-clause (2). It is simply a means of trying to persuade the Aboriginals that the Government is giving them something. But I am sure that they will not fall for it. It is history that the Aboriginals were not consulted until after the decision had been made; neither was the National Parks and Wildlife Service consulted.
I wish now to refer to a statement issued by the traditional owners of the Koongarra project on 2 or 3 May this year. To save me from reading out all the statement. I seek the leave of the House to incorporate this statement in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows---
TRADITIONAL OWNERS OF KOONGARRA PROJECT: PRESS RELEASE
On Friday I May, a large meeting of traditional owners and the Gagudgu Association Incorporated was held at Patonga in the Kakadu National Park. The meeting was held in response to a letter sent by the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, Senator Baume, to the Northern Land Council which advised that the Federal Government had decided to excise a further area from the Kakadu National Park in response from Denison (Australia) Pty Ltd. Denison for some time had been negotiating with the traditional owners of the area through the NLC for the right to mine Koongarra 20km south of the uranium mine at Jabiru. Denison declared that the existing mining lease was unacceptable for their purposes. Denison asked the Federal Government to excise a further area from Kakadu, thereby excluding any control over their mining lease by the ANPWS which presently manages Kakadu Park under a lease from the traditional owners.
On 28 April, the NLC received a letter from the Minister which advised that the Federal Government would implement Denison's request.
At no time were the traditional owners of the area, the Gagudja Association (the Aboriginal owners of the entire area of the Park) nor the NLC invited to give an opinion about the application of the new lease, although the NLC was aware that a submission was to be made to the Federal Government.

Koongarra Project Area Bill

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3055

Indeed for the owners of the area the very first they heard of the lease question was the Denison application had been already implemented.
The day after receipt of the lctter by the NLC a meeting was held at Patonga to discuss the issue. The meeting lasted two days and was attended by the traditional owners of the mine site, representativcs of the Gagudja association, members of the NLC negotiating team and representatives of the NLC.
The traditional owners after considering various options decided to ask the NLC to write to the Minister and declare their opposition to the granting of the new lease. They demanded that the Minister revoke his decision until such time as the traditional owners had been fully consulted regarding the matter and until they had had the opportunity of having advice from their own advisors as to possible effects the excision would have on the management of the Kakadu Park.
They also resolved to immediately suspend all negotiations until further notice with Denison in respect of the Koongarra project.
They further demanded that Denison cease having any contact with the Aboriginal people of the area.
The traditional owners expressed their absolute disappointment with the Minister regardless of the rhetoric about consultation by himself, his office and those who went before them could again make decisions about what would happen about Aboriginal land.
As the traditional owners asked "How can it be that the Minister can give our land away to a mining company without asking what we want". This is not self determination.
This is the same as always.
White fellahs making their own decisions about what is good for Aborigines.
Mr WEST-I thank the House. I would like to quote briefly from that statement. It states:
The traditional owners expressed their absolute disappointment with the Minister regardless of the rhetoric about consultation by himself, his office and those who went before them could again make decisions about what would happen about Aboriginal land .
As the traditional owners asked 'How could it be that the Minister could give our land away to a mining company without asking what we want'. This is not self determination.
It is the same as always.
White fellahs making their own decisions about what is good for Aborigines.
r trust the Aboriginals will continue to resist this
latest Government manoeuvre. After all, as I have explained, they have the power to prevent this extremely dangerous precedent from being established. 1trust the Aboriginals will not be bamboozled by slick lawyers or Government members saying they must accede to this outrageous denial of their rights-for reasons such as that uranium mining is inevitable anyway, or that the new area is less environmentally sensitive than the current leasehold and so on. They will say anything to confuse and bamboozle the Aboriginals into accepting what the Government decided before it even consulted them. Even if this latter point were true, I trust the Aboriginals concerned-the traditional owners, the Northern Land Council

and the Kakadu Aboriginal Land Trust-will realise that next time the Government wishes to change the park boundaries to accommodate overseas mining companies the area concerned may be an area of intense sacred significance to them. That will not prevent the Fraser Government from interfering with Aboriginal land by the introduction of further legislation. In short, T think the Aboriginal traditional owners will and should remember Noonkanbah.
The Opposition also opposes this legislation because of the obvious precedent it sets and the poor example it gives to future Federal and present State governments. What a great example to give to Mr Bjelke-Petersen in Queensland who now threatens Moreton Island with sand mining and the Great Barrier Reef with oil drilling! The Queensland Premier knows this Government will not stand up to him. That is why he has refused for so long even to name his Ministers-although he may have just done that-to attend the time wasting ministerial council meetings on the Great Barrier Reef so he can prevent any more of the reef being declared a marine park. What a wonderful bonus this Bill is to the enemies of national parks in the Northern Territory and Queensland. We do not tamely accept the Minister's statement that the new area will be less sensitive to damage; not at all. Concerning the revised open cut mining and rapid short term program, it states:
I quote the report on the project circulated by the Denison mining company:
A number of environmental advantages are involved, such as the reduction of the permanent workforce on site, reduction of radiation doses received by pitworkers; reduction of pit dewatering time and thus reduction of quantities of waters to be stored allowing reduced evaporation pond areas and flexibility to the water management scheme.
There we have all the horrors exposed, and the bland remarks by the company as to how to reduce them. How nice it is to know that the workers' doses of radiation will be less because of the reduced time scale and that the threat of water contamination is slightly reduced for the same reason! The report entitled 'Development of the Alligator Rivers Uranium Deposit', compiled by the Australian Atomic Energy Commission in January 1980, assessed the Koongarra area as being 'of high national park value'. The report states:
Any water pollution arising [rom the operations of Koongarra would be a potential threat to the very valuable wildlife of the Woolwonga wetlands. The proposal to build the tailings dam in a natural drainage system gives further ground for concern since it means that, over the long term, as the dam wall and other protective works deteriorated the tailings would probably be subject to erosion.
Do honourable members opposite realise that tailings from uranium mining can give off radon gas,

3056 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Koongarra Project Area Bill

which is carcinogenic, for 100,000 years? Yet the people involved expect to store this material in clay dams in a wetlands area of the Northern Territory. How long will it stay there? Where is their responsibility to future generations? We cannot take any comfort from the statement in the Minister's speech that the most important feature of the new mining plan outlined in the environmental impact statement is that it provides for a system of water management which has a no release objective. He is talking about an area with one of the highest rainfalls in the world. Similarly, his assertions that the project has undergone comprehensive analysis in line with Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act requirements are meaningless. Such so called analysis has never yet prevented dangerous projects from proceeding. Neither can we take comfort from the Denison mining company's report on the water management system being based on this famous no release objective. The objective is fine; the question is whether such an objective can be achieved. In the words of that company's report, the objective is:
There will be no intentional release of waters from the mining. milling and run-off waters from the disturbed areas of the project to the environment.
The problem remains, what if there is an unintentional release of contaminated waters? The protection offered to the environment is based entirely on the supposition that there will be no accidents and no unforeseen hazards. Of course, the answer to that assertion can be seen by everyone. We need only look as far as the Three Mile Island accident in the United States. The authorities still have not been successful in cleaning that up. Again, the report states:
The water management system does not rely on the establishment of water quality standards as there will be no release to the environment.
All this means is that there are no safeguards and no environmental protection in the case of the unexpected. Theoretical models provide no guarantee for reality. Koongarra, as I have said, is in one of the highest rainfall areas in the world. What happens if contaminated waters are released? Not only is Koongarra an enclave in the national park but also it is upsteam of the Woolwonga wildlife sanctuary. Koongarra is situated in the Nourlangie Creek catchment in a great and beautiful valley upstream from the sanctuary, in the second major catchment area in the national park. Any contamination in this area threatens, to quote the Fox report of the Ranger Uranium Environmental Inquiry, 'the most important refuge and habitat for aquatic wildlife in the Northern Territory'. Justice Fox opposed mining at Koongarra on the following grounds:

We would oppose in principle any mining development upstream ofit-
That is, the Woolwonga area-
until it had been demonstrated by experience that it could take place without environmental damage.
What sort of experience has been gained? None; there is no experience at all. I turn now in my concluding remarks to the economic and market effects of what is happening in Australia. Last year the United States produced over 11,000 tonnes of uranium, one and a half times domestic annual consumption, in excess of its needs for nuclear power generation. This is indicative of the overproduction throughout the world. In 1978 the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development estimated world surpluses between 1982 and 1985 of almost 24,000 tonnes each year, and overproduction will continue until the year 2000. World demand has not increased at the rate forecast in the mid-1970s. The Australian Atomic Energy Commission predicted in 1975 that world demand would be 107,500 tonnes in 1985 and 157,500 tonnes by 1990. Yet in 1980 the Commission revised the estimate downwards by almost 65 per cent to 39,000 tonnes in 1985 and 54,000 tonnes by 1990.
The reduced project demands coupled with a crash in the price of uranium from $43 a pound in mid-1979 to $25 a pound in January 1981 have put an economic cloud over many of these projects touted to proceed in Australia during the 1980s. Already it looks as though the Mary Kathleen project will be folding due to the drop in prices. If the nine mines which may proceed in the 1980s get the go ahead-I refer to Ranger, Jabiluka, Yeelirrie, Koongarra, Beverley, Honeymoon, Lake Way, Ben Lomond and Roxby Downs-Australia could be producing at least 14,200 tonnes a year, at a conservative estimate. Yet even the AAEC expects Australia to be able to capture only 20 per cent, or between 8,000 and 9,000 tonnes a year, of the world market by 1990. What will we do with the extra 6,000 tonnes of uranium produced in Australia each year? Will we stockpile it or simply flog it on the world market at bargain basement prices with the Australian public picking up the tab to subsidise the mines if necessary? Of the multiplicity of projects proposed, which ones will be approved; which ones will proceed? No doubt the States and the Northern Territory would allow them all to proceed but the companies may not be happy to proceed without guaranteed markets.
The Northern Territory Minister, Mr Tuxworth, stated a few days ago that if Jabiluka and Koongarra did not go ahead by 1985 they would not be goers at all. If Jabiluka cannot proceed,

Koongarra Project Area Bill

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3057

what chance will projects such as Honeymoon, Beverley, Ben Lomond, et cetera have? These three aforementioned projects, as well as Koongarra, are also environmentally damaging as well as being commercially dubious. Beverley and Honeymoon use the environmentally dangerous method of in situ leaching of uranium ore, which may contaminate the water table and affect the quality of the water of the artesian basin.
Koongarra, as I mentioned earlier, is in the Nourlangie catchment area upstream of the most important wildlife refuge and habitat for aquatic wildfowl in the Northern Territory. As I said, Justice Fox specifically recommended that it not proceed.Irrespective of the environmental hazards of the various projects, their economics make them millstones around the neck of Australia. Since they will have problems finding markets, their uranium may be sold off at cut rate prices, with the Commonwealth providing subsidies to cover the costs.
The reduction in world demand for uranium can be attributed mainly to the problems of nuclear safety and a general turn away from nuclear power. The Japanese nuclear power industry is reeling from the disclosure that this year there have been four or five major leaks from the Tsuruga power station which were not reported by the company. Several tonnes of radioactive water leaked into the sea and caused abnormally high radioactivity in the seabed. Measurement of this heightened level of radioactivity led to the discovery of the spill and revealed the cover-up by the company. Officials believe that the ground under the plant could be contaminated and that 278 workers may have received excessive radiation. The Tsuruga reactor has been closed for six months, but its effects, like those of the more famous Three Mile Island plant, will be felt in the world's uranium market and will seriously affect the viability of new Australian projects coming on stream in the 1980s.
I conclude by pointing out that the Government is not pressing for Koongarra on economic or environmental grounds, but rather to maintain its face as agung ho 'development at all costs' government and to keep in step with like minded State governments. Justice Fox recommended against Koongarra, the Aboriginal traditional owners are opposed to it, the markets are not there, yet the Government is proposing to disregard provisions of its legislation to achieve boundary changes to allow Koongarra to proceed. This is a travesty of the parliamentary system and must be condemned. Koongarra should not proceed. The Opposition will stand by its anti-uranium

mining policy and will vote against this despicable legislation.
Mr TAMBLING (Northern Territory) (12.44 a.m.)-The Koongarra Project Area Bill is ofimmense importance to the Northern Territory. It is a progressive step for the Government to take in its uranium policies. Because the Bill relates to uranium mining it has engendered much emotional debate in the community-debate on issues that are far removed from what this Bill sets out to do. For that reason, I would like not only to place the Koongarra development in its context but also to dispel some of the more fanciful myths that have been peddled to belittle this legislation. This Bill has one objective-to alter the boundaries of the Koongarra project area. It does not give approval for mining to take place. It does not change the status of Aboriginal land. It does not supersede Commonwealth environmental legislation. I will deal with those matters later.
Exploration for uranium in the Northern Territory first commenced in 1947. The first important discovery was made in 1949 at Rum Jungle, 64 kilometres south of Darwin. This find initiated a short but intense prospecting boom that resulted in the discovery of 12 small but high grade uranium-gold deposits in the South Alligator River area 220 kilometres south east of Darwin. Treatment plants were established in both Rum Jungle and the south east Alligator Rivers region. The latter operated between 1959 and 1964 and produced 800 tonnes of uranium oxide. The Rum Jungle plant operated between 1954 and 1971 and produced 3,500 tonnes of U30 S' In 1967 the Government announced an export policy for uranium which was designed to encourage exploration for new uranium deposits. Subsequent exploration revealed significant new deposits at Nabarlek, Jabiru, Jabiluka and Koongarra. Those four sites contain over 330,000 tonnes of U30 S and there is potential for further discoveries in the region. Indeed, only last week Energy Resources of Australia raised its probable and possible reserves at its No.3 ore body at Ranger by 24 per cent, or 13,800 tonnes. To gain an idea of the importance of the region and the magnitude of these projects, suffice it to say that the total estimated capital expenditure in the uranium province on these developments is in excess of $1 ,000m.
In 1968 Noranda Australia Ltd began exploring for uranium in the Northern Territory as part of a wider program of mineral exploration it had begun several years earlier. In 1970 the company discovered in the Alligator Rivers region the uranium deposits now known as Koongarra. By mid-1971 investigations showed that the deposit

3058 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Koongarra Project Area Bill

was a major energy resource and that development was technically feasible and economically viable. In May 1972 Noranda and other companies with exploration rights in the region joined the Commonwealth in commissioning the Alligator Rivers study-a series of investigations undertaken during 1972-73 which provided a valuable inventory of the environment of the region. In 1976 Noranda applied for a special minerallease of 12.5 square kilometres, which was considered appropriate for the then proposed project area. The following year the Minister for Environment, Housing and Community Development directed Noranda, pursuant to the administrative procedures under the Environmental Protection Act, to prepare and submit to him an environmental impact statement. This was published in December 1978. In its environmental impact statement the company presented a revised concept requiring the tailings and evaporation ponds to be located outside the lease application area. One of the reasons for this was the reservations expressed by Mr Justice Fox in the Ranger Uranium Environmental Inquiry about mining in this area.
It certainly intrigues me that opponents of the Koongarra development are obsessed with quoting Justice Fox's reservations as a means of defeating this proposal. They completely ignore that it is partially in response to Justice Fox's reservations that the proposal to alter the boundaries has come about. The proposal contained within the Bill is to alter the boundaries of an area which has already been excised from the park following the whole review process entailed in the Ranger inquiry. Therein lies the most important feature of the new mining plan. The new boundaries provide for a system of water management which has a no-release objective. Being a self-contained system, it would not affect the Nourlangie Creek catchment or the Woolwonga Wildlife Sanctuary. Such a proposal can hardly be described as 'environmental vandalism', as the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) would like us to believe. It should be pointed out that the revised project area is actually smaller than the area now excluded from the park. Furthermore, the area to be added to the park will include the area adjacent to the Nourlangie Rock-Mt Brockman massif. Not only is this area environmentally important, but also it has great traditional significance to the Aboriginal people of the area.
Critics of the Koongarra project are touting this proposal as a gift of Aboriginal land to a mining company. There is no question of this Government giving away Aboriginal land to mining

companies. It should be understood that, regardless of whether the project area is in or out of the national park, it remains Aboriginal land. Moreover, no lease can be granted over the area to Denison Mines Ltd until the Aboriginals have concluded an agreement with the company. It is worth stressing that this Bill contains a specjfic provision that the changes will not take place unless Aboriginal consent to the project is forthcoming. The only confusion in the whole area is that which has been induced by the honourable member for Cunningham. As I mentioned before, this Bill in no way supersedes environment legislation, nor does it bypass the foreign investment guidelines. If anyone has any doubts about this I refer him to a question answered in this House on 24 February by the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony). He said:
. . . the object of the environment protection legislation had been met and complied with in relation to the Koongarra project . . .
On Australian ownership he said:
It will be necessary for 75 per cent equity participation.
On this matter where does the Australian Labor Party really stand? On 29 April this year the Northern Territory Opposition Leader, John Isaacs, issued an apology for a public statement on Koongarra, ostensibly opposing all forms of mining in the Kakadu National Park. It is the most wishy-washy statement that the Northern Territory Opposition Leader has come up with to date. He said:
It's the location we object to, not mining per se.
The ALP would rather write off the expected $1,OOOm capital investment in the region. That is the only conclusion I can draw from Mr Isaacs statement. He also said:
The exclusion of Kakadu from any form of mining development would have an insignificant effect on the predicted value of this boom.
He then apologised for such stupid ALP policies. He said:
. . . the economic impact of the decision not to mine would, fortunately, be less severe.
The ALP in the Northern Territory spends most of its time nowadays trying to dissociate itself from the embarrassing anti-uranium mining policies which it knows the electorate will not buy and which its federal colleagues have adopted. The Northern Territory ALP must really cherish its colleague, the honourable member for Cunningham, the alternative Minister for Environment when he says:
A Federal Labor government will repudiate any commitments made by a non-Labor government for mining, processing or export of uranium and we will demand a moratorium on uranium mining.

Koongarra Project Area Bill

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3059

The Koongarra Project Area Bill is a sensible piece of legislation and a major step forward for the uranium industry. I urge that it be passed without delay.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-I call the honourable member for Melbourne Ports.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (12.53 a.m.)-Mr Deputy Speaker, the honourable member for the Northern Territory-
Mr Uren-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. As I understood from the lists given to both the Opposition and the Government I was to be the next speaker. Can you inform me why I was not called?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Chair informs the honourable member for Reid that the list currently before it indicates that the honourable member for Melbourne Ports is to be next called. I point out to the honourable member for Reid that the Chair's only commitment is to alternate from left to right and call the member first rising. In this case the honourable member for Melbourne Ports and the honourable member for Reid rose together. Established practice in this House is that a list is provided for the guidance of the Chair which, it hopes, is the product of sweet accord between the Whips and members of the respective parties. In this situation, as both members rose simultaneously, the Chair is inclined to be guided by the list which is prepared on the instruction of the Whip.
Mr Uren-May I correct you, Mr Deputy Speaker. As I understood the list on both the Opposition side and the Government side, I was to be the next speaker. If that list has been altered it has been altered without my knowledge.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Reid is quite correct insomuch as the original list showed the order of speakers consistent with the case he has presented.
Mr Uren-That is the only point I want to make.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member's argument is with the Whip, not the Chair. I call the honourable member for Melbourne Ports.
Mr HOLDING-It is regrettable that the honourable member for the Northern Territory (Mr Tambling) in defending this legislation has established himself primarily as an exponent of uranium mining. Not once in his speech was he concerned to deal with the environmental factors that this proposal involves. Not once did he concern himself with the rights of traditional owners. Of all the legislation that has emanated from the

Fraser Government this is the saddest and the most contemptible. It is contemptible because it contemplates a gross abuse of the legislative process. It is the saddest because it constitutes one more betrayal of Aboriginal hopes and aspirations.
This Bill contemplates the Parliament's not complying with the procedures of its own legislation at the request of the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson). The National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act contemplates parks and reserves being established by the Governor-General by proclamation. Once proclaimed, any exclusion of any area shall not be made except by resolution passed by each House of the Parliament by a motion which must be before each House for 15 sitting days before being moved. It seems to me to be extraordinary that the Parliament in its wisdom has decided the course which must be followed by this House and the Senate in dealing with any additions or alterations to the Governor-General's proclamation in respect of the creation of a national park. It is extraordinary that from time to time the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and other Ministers say that trade unionists must comply with the law and that parliamentarians are pledged to uphold the laws made by the Parliament. Yet in this situation the very procedures which have been established by this House have not been adhered to, nor has there been any attempt to adhere to them.
This is a Bill by which the Minister asks the Parliament to deem that those procedures have been followed. What a novel concept that is. Every member of this House knows that the procedures established by the will of the Parliament have not been followed. If members of parliament are not prepared to comply with the spirit and, indeed, the letter of their own legislation, how can they command respect from the rest of the community? This legislation has all the worst defects of retrospective legislation. It has one more defect. Not only is it retrospective but also it asks the Parliament-it seems to me to come very close to being a contempt of the Parliament-to support what the Minister knows is a retrospective lie. He knows that the procedures established by the Parliament have not been followed. We all know that. So we have this device by which all the members here will say to the community at large: 'Although we know the procedures established by the Parliament for dealing with this legislation have not been followed and have been deliberately ignored what we will do is deem that they have been followed'. That is a very dangerous precedent.

3060 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Koongarra Project Area Bill

I believe any parliament which adopts that approach on any form of legislation is bound ultimately to hold itself up to public ridicule and contempt. We cannot as parliamentarians require the average citizen to comply with the laws of the Parliament, we cannot ask the average COl'POTation, trade union, trade unionist or company director, to comply with laws which we have passed but, when it suits the Executive or the Minister, introduce a Bill and simply tear up Acts of the Parliament. What is the purpose of this? Not only does the Minister choose to legislate in this way; but also we have to ask ourselves why, when the procedures are so clearly established, does the Minister choose to legislate in this way. The answer is very simple. His purpose is simply to ram this legislation through both Houses before the political composition of the Senate changes to reflect more accurately the views of the Australian people. That in itself is a thoroughly bad principle.
The honourable member for the Northern Territory referred to the environmental impact statement produced on behalf of the Koongarra project. If he had looked at that November 1977 impact statement he would have seen at page 2-180 and page 2 208 a map which accords, in all respects, with the boundaries proposed by the Bill. That is to say, in November 1979 in respect of the submission and environmental impact statement, what was contemplated by the Koongarra people was the very outlines of the very map now before this Parliament. I find it extraordinary that in the nomination dated May 1980, which goes from this Parliament to the World Heritage List, the old boundaries are indicated on the map on page 12 of the accompanying submission. Of course, that is the old map. What an extraordinary situation! Koongarra in November 1979 used the map shown in the Bill but in the submission on behalf of the Government to get the Kakadu National Park listed in the World Heritage List we are using the map which is about to be changed if the Bill is passed. I believe that that also is a situation which needs some explanation.
J believe that the Government's actions in regard to this legislation must put in jeopardy the seri~,)Us consideration of the Australian application for the inclusion of Kakadu in the World Heritage List. It is indeed novel that while specifying the uniqueness of the environment-the habi-
tat of flora and fauna and the fact that this area contains one of the world's great prehistoric art collections-the Government produces legislation which must be unique-in order to extend
mining within that very area. Of course, if the honourable member for the Northern Territory

had been completely frank with the House he would have pointed out that the Koongarra submission concedes that if this proposal is passed three important art sites will be directly affected. They will be covered by dumped waste material. Another nine sites will be indirectly affected. It is a strange thing that the honourable member for the Northern Territory, who quoted from the environmental impact statement, misstated those very facts.
My colleague the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) will enlarge upon aspects of the Fox report. I will leave that matter to him. However, I will now turn to what I believe is the very serious treatment of the traditional owners. By legislative enactment this Parliament gave the traditional owners of the land their rights in fee simple. They are the owners of the land. Their rights are as enforceable in law as are the rights of the Prime Minister in respect of his property at Nareen.
Earlier this week the Parliament was told how the Minister for Communications (Mf Sinclair) was not only concerned to discuss with Mr Murdoch and the Packer interests important legislation dealing with communication but was also happy to give them the draft legislation. We were told that that discussion was continuing. Those people made suggestions to the Minister and the Minister made suggestions to them. Pieces of draft legislation were floating around. I suppose the Prime Minister would justify that action on the basis that it involved consultation with interested and affected parties. Can there be any more serious interference with the rights of an individual-particularly by a government which prides itself on preserving the rights of the individual and talks about the rights of private property-than a situation in which the rights of an owner of property are affected by legislation of this kind without any consultation? What is it that gives the Packer and Murdoch interests the right to an ongoing and very considered consultation and the capacity to affect legislation that the Parliament has not even seen? On the other hand traditional Aboriginal owners can have their rights to property affected by legislation without discussion, consultation or any involvement. I refer the House to the Press release of the traditional owners of the Koongarra project. To save time. I seek leave to have the statement incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-

Koongarra Project Area Bill

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3061

PRESS RELEASE. BY TRADITIONAL OWNERS OF KOONGARRA PROJECT
On Friday 1st Maya large meeting of Traditional Owners and the Gagudgu Association Inc. was held at Patonga in the Kakadu National Park.
The meeting was held in response to a letter sent by the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs (Senator Baume) to the Northern Land Council which advised that the Federal Government had decided to excise a further area from the Kakadu Park in response to a request from Denison (Australia) Pty Ltd.
Denison have for some time been negotiating with the traditional owners of the area, through the Northern Land Council, for the right to mine uranium at Koongarra, which is 20km south of the uranium mine at Jabiru.
Denison declared that the existing mining lease was unsuitable for their proposed mine. Denison asked the Federal Government to excise a further area from the Kakadu Park, thereby excluding any control over their mining lease by the ANPWS which presently manages the Kakadu Park under a lease from the traditional Aboriginal owners.
On the 28th April, the Northern Land Council received a letter from the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, Senator Baume which advised that the Federal Government would implement Denison's request.
At no time were the traditional owners of the area, the Kakadu Association (the Aboriginal owners of the entire area of the Park) nor the Northern Land Council invited to give an opinion about the application for the new lease, although the Northern Land Council were aware that a submission was to be made to the Federal Government.
Indeed, for the owners of the area, the very first they heard of the lease question was that Denison's application had been already implemented.
The day after receipt of the letter by the Northern Land Council, a meeting was held at Patonga to discuss the issue. The meeting lasted two days and was attended by the traditional owners of the mine site and surrounding areas, representatives of the Gagadju Association, the members of the Northern Land Council negotiating team and representatives of the Northern Land Council.
The traditional owners, after considering various options, decided to ask the Northern Land Council to write to' the Minister and declare their opposition to the granting of the new lease. They demanded that the Minister revoke his decision until such time as the traditional owners had been fully consulted regarding the matter and until they had the opportunity of having from their own advisors as to possible effects the excision would have on the management of the Kakadu Park.
They also resolved to immediately suspend all negotiations until further notice with Denison (Australia) Pty Ltd in respect of the Koongarra Project.
They further demanded that Denison cease having any contact with the Aboriginal people of the area.
The traditional owners expressed their absolute disappointment that the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs regardless of the rhetoric about consultation by himself, his officers and those who went before them could again make decisions about what would happen to Aboriginal land.
As the traditional owners ask 'How can it be that the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs can give our land away to a mining company without asking what we think' this is not self determination, this is the same as always, white fellahs making their own decisions about what is good for Aboriginals.
Further Enquiries: To be made through Gagadju Association, Mr Ross Hebblewhite. Phone 81 4228.

Mr HOLDING-I will quote from the very last sentence of the Press release. This is the voice of the traditional owners:
As the traditional owners ask 'How can it be that the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs can give our land away to a mining company without asking what we think' this is not self determination, this is the same as always, white fellas making their own decisions about what is good for Aboriginals.
In respect of the recommendations of the Fox report I wish only to make a comment about a matter which was not mentioned by the Minister in his second reading speech. It is not for this side of the House to argue the veracity of the Fox report. If we are not going to comply with those recommendations the onus is clearly upon the Government to say why the House should ignore those findings. That has not occurred. If this legislation is passed in this form and ramroded right through this Parliament and the Senate, what it does--
Mr Fisher-Don't say it again.
Mr HOLDING-I suspect that if this was happening to any of the honourable member's constituents such as the farmers he would be heard to complain. I am not going to give lip service or support-no one on this side of the House would give such support-to legislation which does not comply with the processes or the standards which the House has set itself and which interferes with the rights of owners of property. The Koongarra people are traditional Aboriginal owners. Although some members of the National Country Party might choose to treat them as second class citizens with second class rights, that is not the view of the Opposition. Of course, the passage of this legislation is designed to do one more thing. The honourable member for the Northern Territory clearly gave away the intentions of the Government. Does anybody seriously believe that the honourable member does not think that mining will proceed? That was the basis of his whole speech.
When this legislation goes through the Parliament all the pressure will be asserted on the traditional owners by the mining companies, the Department of Aboriginal Affairs and the Minister. They will say: 'You are going to have mining; like it or leave it. Although we will make public statements saying we will not do anything without your approval, the only right you really have is to approve mining'. That is the position that this Government takes. That is what this legislation is about.
The Opposition is totally opposed to this legislation because it does not comply with the processes which the House itself has established. It clearly involves a great breach of the legislative

3062 REPRESENTAT[YES 3 and 4 June 1981

Koongarra Project Area Bill

process. We are opposed to the legislation because traditional Aboriginal legal land owners are having their rights eroded in a way which constitutes a public scandal. Finally, we are opposed to it because it is simply an attempt to pressure traditional owners to give their approval to uranium mining. I will finish on this note and quote what I believe are some words of nobility by that great Australian author, Xavier Herbert, which I believe, ought to be constantly quoted in this House when we are dealing with Aboriginal affairs. He says:
Until we give back to the blackman just a bit of the land that was his, and give it without provisos, without strings to snatch it back, without complete generosity of spirit in COIlcession for the evil we have done him-until we do that, we shall remain what we have always been so far, a people without integrity, not a nation, but a community of thieves.
Mr UREN (Reid) (1.11 a.m.)--At this early hour in the morning in the stealth with which we are putting through this important piece of legislation, it is important to consider two important aspects. First of an the Koongarra Project Area Bill deals with one of the major gems of our national heritage and a gem of world heritage. We are also dealing with a question of substance which is basic to one of the most serious problems, which, in fact, can end mankind. Uranium mining-Government members hate to be reminded of this-cannot be divorced from the interrelationship with the nuclear industry which, in due turn, is interrelated with nuclear weapons and in turn with nuclear war. What Government members always want to forget are the recommendations and findings of the Fox Ranger Uranium Environmental Inquiry report set out at page 185. The report states:
3. The nuclear power industry is unintentionally contributing to an increased risk of nuclear war. This is the most serious hazard associated with the industry.
It does not matter whatever one does; one cannot divorce the peaceful uses from the warlike uses of nuclear industry. That is one aspect. Another aspect of the nuclear power industry is that it is sick and stagnant in the northern hemisphere. Later I will show the House certain figures to prove the fact that the nuclear industry economically is stagnant and sick. Forecast growth is falling sadly. I will show the House reports of Australian atomic energy interests on that aspect. The real price of uranium oxide, in fact, is only half the price it was five years ago. These are just some of the aspects.
I want to emphasise and interrelate the serious aspects that we are now talking about in regard to a national park with the spread of nuclear weapons which the third finding and recommendation of the Fox report deals with. Of course, at

the time of the Fox inquiry's examination we knew that India had got the bomb by stealth. Now we know that Israel has got the bomb by stealth. We know that South Africa has got the bomb by stealth. We know that Pakistan is well on the way to getting the bomb by stealth. We know that during the recent conflict in the Middle East, Israel thought that Iraq was on the way to getting the bomb by stealth. Some of the major statesmen in the world believe that within a short term-a decade-anything up to 20 nations in the world could have the bomb. In these early hours, when the newspapers have been put to bed, when we are not on the air, we are discussing this legislation.
This Bill is a disgraceful and cynical piece of legishtion. Its purpose is to short-circuit the normal procedures for altering the boundaries of a national park. They are reasonable procedures, but this Government is sweeping them aside so that it can alter the boundaries of the Kakadu National Park to suit a 100 per cent foreign owned uranium mining company, Denison (Australia) Pty Ltd. The reason for the Government's manipulation are blatant and cynical. At the federal election last October nearly 52 per cent of the electorate voted for two parties-the Australian Labor Party and the Australian Democrats--which oppose the mining and export of uranium. Those parties, after 30 June, will have half the seats and therefore half the votes in the Senate. That is why this legislation is being pushed through in the stealth of the night.
Under the National Parks and Wildlife Conservation Act there has to be 60 days for public comment on proposed changes to national park boundaries. After that both Houses of Parliament have to support the change. This procedure is a reasonable safeguard to protect national parks which have been set aside for the benefit of generations to come. National parks should not be subject to short term interests and political manipulation by governments. This Government is manipulating in the interests of wealthy mining companies and foreign mining companies at that. That is why there should be 60 days for public comment and the support of both Houses of Parliament before any changes take place. The Government's action undermines those procedures. Its intention is to thwart the majority vote against uranium mining at the last election, which will be reflected in the Senate after 30 June. This Bill is an abuse of the parliamentary institution and an affront to the Australian people. It demonstrates this Government's scant regard for democracy. The Government certainly has no

Koongarra Project Area Bill

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3063

understanding of the democratic procedures or environmental procedures.
The Government's fiddle becomes even more serious when one considers that it was this Government which nominated the Kakadu National Park to be part of the World Hertitage List. It is a national disgrace that this Government nominates the park as part of the World Heritage List and then in such a cavalier fashion brings this piece of legislation before the House. The Government's action opens up a Pandora's box for the future. Think about it. You are a Queenslander, Mr Deputy Speaker. Think about the implications of the same attitudes on the question of the Great Barrier Reef, of what can happen with the procedures that have come down under this piece of legislation. The Government has fiddled with the boundaries of national parks to suit the conveniences and expediencies of the day. It is a shameful and irresponsible precedent which poses a threat to our national parks everywhere.
The Bill highlights once again the absurdity of the Kakadu National Park as declared by this Government. The Government has left a series of mining reservations in the middle of the Kakadu National Park area out of the park. These are at Ranger, Jabiluka and Koongarra. Uranium mining is to take place at these locations. This destroys the whole concept of a national park. I stress that one cannot isolate areas in the middle of a complex and fragile ecosystem. These artificial boundaries in no way change the interrelationships of the ecological system. The uranium mines are a threat to the sensitive and beautiful wetlands which are downstream and within the national park. This is particularly true for the Koongarra project which is upstream of the Woolwonga Wildlife Sanctuary and in the South Alligator River catchment area. As the honourable member for the Northern Territory (Mr Tambling) knows, the interrelationship in those wetlands is very important because of the floods that occur, because of the Aboriginal people's relationship in having to fish in the way they do, particularly in the lagoons in the dry seasons. This is the saddest thing. This is why the second report of the Fox inquiry said that if we go ahead with mining we affect all the interrelationships which are set down in that second volume. This second volume of the Fox report has been torn up and thrown out because of the hypocrisy of this Government. The Government has by-passed and prostituted this document, which set down the guidelines if mining were to proceed.

With the Koongarra in operation as well as the Ranger project, both the major river systems of the region-the East Alligator and the South Alligator-would suffer the environmental effects of uranium mining. The Fox report clearly intended that if the mining were to proceed it should be restricted to the East Alligator catchment for the time being. It is envisaged that the South Alligator catchment be protected. The second Fox report also stated that the Woolwonga area is valuable ecologically and that we should oppose in principle any mining development upstream, at least until it has been demonstrated by experience that it can take place without environmental damage, and 1 stress the word 'experience'. I challenge Government members to tell me what experience they can point to as an example for saying that this legislation should go forward.
Again, I draw the attention of honourable members to the second Fox report, which stated that if the Government were to go ahead with uranium mining then quite clearly the development should be sequential. The report warned against the development of both areas. If development is carried out at Koongarra and at the same time at the Ranger project, two catchment areas will be affected. That shows the stupidity and blundering of this Government. The terribly sad things about the issue is that we do not know enough about this delicate environment. We were warned that we have to be aware of what is going on. We just cannot go ahead with these procedures. We are drawing on experience. The fact is that so many blunders have been made in the past. That is why this second report went into such detail, and that is why we are asking the Government to give consideration to this matter even at this late hour. Might I say that even the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), at the time he announced the Government's uranium decision, recognised the environmental sensitivity of Koongarra. On 25 August 1977 he stated:
That deposit has particular environmental problems because of the sensitivity and fragility of the environment of the area and the location of the deposit upstream of a major wetlands area.
That was said by the Prime Minister on 25 August 1977. I ask the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson) to tell the House what has happened since the time the Prime Minister made his statement on 25 August 1977. What has changed? The fact is that nothing has changed. The Government is under pressure from the wealthy mining companies. That is the situation. This Government really represents corporate capital. It does not represent the Australian

3064 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Koongarra Project Area Bill

people and our national heritage, it represents corporate capital particularly that of foreign corporations. I ask you, Mr Deputy Speaker, as a Queenslander, and no doubt you are proud of it, to make sure that you express your views within your own party room. Unless you do, they will do more of this. You will find that next the Government will be into exploiting the mineral aspects of the Great Barrier Reef.
As with so many of the Government's promises on uranium, it now seems that the interests of the mining companies will override environmental considerations. I think I have set the case clear on that situation. It is no good the Minister simply saying that there will be no problems because the company plans a 'no water release policy'. If there were a breach in the tailings dam at Koongarra the consequences for the wetlands in the South Alligator River could be very serious, and I give honourable members an example. There is a history of this sort of thing occurring in uranium mines. Only two years ago a modern tailings dam at the United States uranium mine at Church Rock in New Mexico burst, releasing radioactive water across Indian lands. The implications of this spill were so great that the water supply of southern California was contaminated. The consequences of such a spill occurring at Koongarra would be devastating for the Kakadu National Park. The Minister has said that his Department has examined the Koongarra environmental impact statement and the overall physical consequences of the proposal will fall within acceptable and manageable limits. That is a pretty vague statement which entails a considerable amount of judgment. Let them make the statement available for assessment and scrutiny by the Parliament. The statement has not been put before the Parliament or the public. Why does not the Minister make it available to the public? Let independent scientists examine it to see whether they agree with the Department's assessment. Let the public judge whether the limits of environmental damage are acceptable and manageable.

These are judgments which should be made explicitly and in an open fashion, not behind the closed doors of a government department. After all, it is a part of the world heritage with which we are dealing, as well as a part of our national heritage. That is what is involved.
The Minister has said that the Bill does not mean that the Government has approved the Koongarra project. That statement rings very hollow indeed. Why has the Government gone to such extraordinary lengths to thwart the will of the people if it has not made up its mind to give the go-ahead to this uranium project? It sounds like those hollow assurances of 1976, when the Fox inquiry was still under way. The Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) came into this House day after day and said: 'We have not made up our minds yet'. The fact is that the Government, and particularly the Deputy Prime Minister, are doing everything in their power to get the Koongarra project under way. In doing so, once again it has thrown out the key recommendations of the Fox report and gone back to one of its undertakings of 1977, as expressed in the Prime Minister's statement.
It is a pity that the Government does not wake up to the real situation in the nuclear industry throughout the world. Up until the election of President Mitterrand, France was the only Western country where there had been any consistent growth in the nuclear industry. Now even that is in doubt. I am sure that the socialist government in France will eventually respond to people's questioning of and opposition to nuclear programs. Only last week President Mitterrand announced that a planned 6,000 megawatt nuclear power scheme in Brittany was to be cancelled. That is the pattern throughout the world. To give some indication of the cancellations of new orders for nuclear power stations which have occurred since 1972, I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table setting out the position.
Leave granted. The table read as follows-

NEW ORDERS OF NUCLEAR POWER STATIONS SINCE 1972

1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980

USA Units orders
Cancellations and deferrals
JapanUnits ordered .
West GermanyUnits ordered
FranceUnits ordered

34 47 24

7

3

4

2

2

7

9

18

4

3

6

14

16

5

3

3

5

5

2

3

5

7

7

8

8

9

5

Koongarra Project Area Bill

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3065

United Kingdom Units ordered
OECDUnits ordered .

1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980

4

44

56

49

33

13

16

10

9

9

Mr UREN-I thank the House. I will run briefly through the list. In the US in 1978 two nuclear power station units were ordered, none in 1979, none in 1980, and six cancellations and deferrals were received in 1978. In 1979 there were 14 cancellations and in 1980 there were 16. If we look at Japan, we see that for the three-year period no new units were ordered. In West Germany no new units have been ordered since 1976. In France five units were ordered in 1980. In the UK four units were ordered, and in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries a total of nine were ordered, of course, that number is just the British and French orders. To give some indication of the annual forecasts of the Australian Atomic Energy Commission in relation to the requirements of the Western world for uranium, I seek leave to incorporate a table in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

FORECASTS OF ANNUAL WESTERN WORLD

REQUIREMENTS FOR URANIUM MADE BY THE

AUSTRALIAN ATOMIC ENERGY COMMISSION IN

EACH OF THE LAST SIX YEARS.

(in thousand tonnes u/y-r). - - - - -

Date of forecast

1980

1985

1990

1975
1976 1977 1978
1979
1980 % Change
1975-80 %Change-
1979-80

55.5

107.5

157.5

49.0

90.0

140.0

37.8

70.0

106.0

29.8

54.0

79.0

27.2

44.0

59.0

26.4

39.0

54.0

52

64

66

3

11

8

From AAEC Annual Reports 1974-75, 1975-76, 1976-77, 1977-78,1978-79,1979-80.
Mr UREN-I thank the House. I have only a few seconds in which to run through the table. Honourable members will see that in 1975 the Atomic Energy Commission forecast that the Western world required 55.5 tonnes by 1980 and that by 1990 it would need 157.5 tonnes. But in the 1980 forecast the figure had dropped from 55.5 to 26.4. If honourable members look at the forecast in 1975 for 1990 requirements and compares it with that for 1980 they will see that the figure drops from 157.5 thousand tonnes to 54

thousand tonnes, in other words, less than one-third. I ask for leave of the House to incorporate in Hansard a table setting out figures which indicate how fast the price for uranium is falling.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows
RECENT MOVEMENTS IN THE EXCHANGE VALUE (SPOT PRICE) OF YELLOWCAKE ($US per pound, Nuexco published exchange value)

1976January-June
July-December 1977-
January-June
July-December 1978-
January-December 1979-
end of May end of July 1980January
March April May June July November

Current

Constant

prices $US prices $US*

about 35.0 about 40.0
about 41.0 about 42.0
about 43.0
43.3 42.7
40.0 38.0 35.0 32.0 31.5 31.5 28.0

37.50 40.00
38.50 38.00
36.50
34.00 33.00
29.50 28.00 25.00 23.00 22.50 22.00 19.50

- Based on average US consumer price index for first and fourth quarters of 1976.
Mr UREN-I thank the House. That table clearly shows that since 1976 the price has dropped substantially from $US40 in December 1976 in constant price terms to $USI9.80 in November 1980. This is an important piece of legislation. It concerns our national heritage. It is also important as it relates to the nuclear industry, nuclear
weapons and to nuclear war. r ask honourable
members on the other side of the House to support the Opposition and to oppose the Bill.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Question put:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The House divided.

3066 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Koongarra Project Area Bill

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

61

Noes

44

Majority

17

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony. J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bour.hier, I. W. Bradfield, I. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A.
Bungey,M.H.
Burr,M.A. Cadman,A.G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowao,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J.D.M. Edwards, H, R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C.
Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, I. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M.

Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,I.M. Jarman, A. W.
Jull,D.I'. Katter, R. C. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A.
MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. 'Macphee, I. M. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. Porter, J. R. Robinson. Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White, P.N. D. WilsOTI.I.B.C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C.
Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Browo, John Brown, Robert Cass,M.H.
Child,J. Cross,M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. I. Innes, U.E.

Jacohi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J. Klugman, R. E.
McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott,J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uron, T. Wallis, L. G. West,S.J.
WiIlis,R. Young,M.J.

PAIRS
Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William Killen, D.J. Nixon, P.J. Viner,R.1.

Campbell,G. Keating, P. J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.C. Cohen,B.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Motion (by Mr Wilson) put:
That the Bill be now read a third time.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Spealcer-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

62

Noes

45

Majority

17

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron1lan Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W.P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D. B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher,P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller)

Hodgman, W.M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,I.M.
Jarman,A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter,R.C. Lloyd,B.
Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. 1. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T.
Macphee, I. M. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. Porter, J. R. Robinson, fan Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M.
Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. I. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Cass,M,H. Charles, D. E.
Child,J. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T.
Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S.
Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R.V. Fry, K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller)

Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, O. O. D. Scott,J.L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. Wallis, L. G.
West,S.J. Willis,R.

Papers

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3067

Hurford, C. J. Innes. D.E.

NOES

Young, M. J.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. McMahon, Sir William Killen,D.J. Nixon,P.J. Viner,R.1.

Campbell,G. Keating,P.J. Kent,L.
Kerin,J.C. Cohen,B.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a third time.

ADJOURNMENT Vietnam Veterans Motion (by Mr Wilson) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (1.44 a.m.)-It is a matter of record and regret that many Vietnam veterans--
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:
That the question be now put.
Original question resolved in the affirmative. House adjourned at 1.45 a.m. (Thursday)

NOTICES
The following notices were given-
Mr Newman to present a Bill for an Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Mr Newman to present a Bill for an Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.

PAPERS The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 3 June 1981, pursuant to statute:
Defence Act-Determinations-1981No. f7--RecreationLeave. No. 18-Attendance Allowance.
Defence Amendment Act-Interim DeterminationStatutory Rules 1981, No. 114.
Income Tax Assessment Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No.116.
National Health Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1981, No. lIS.
Navigation Act-Navigation (Dangerous Goods) Regulations-Determination, dated 1 June 1981.
REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Joint House Department Mr Holding to ask Mr Speaker:
(1) When was Mr James Murray Jorgensen appointed to the position of Permanent Head of the Joint House Department.
(2) Was the appointment announced in either House; if so, when; if not, why not.
(3) Prior to the appointment of Mr Jorgensen to his current position, was he Federal Executive Director of the Master Builders' Feduration of Australia; if so, for what period.
(4) Has he been a Director of Palmdale Insurance; ifso, for what period.

3068 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Australian Flag
(Question No. 893)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(1) How many (a) Australian flags, (b) colour photographs of Her Majesty The Queen and (c) cassettes of the National Anthem and National Tune have been issued by his Department in each Commonwealth Electoral Division during the year ending on 28 February 1981.
(2) How many complaints have been received by his Department in regard to the standard of quality of the Australian flag.
(3) What firm is contracted to produce and supply the Australian flags issued by his Department.
(4) What was the total expenditure on (a) Australian flags, (b) colour photographs of Her Majesty The Queen and (c) cassettes of the national anthem and national tune distributed during the year ending 28 February 1981.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) Because of the additional costs involved in extracting details of the number of free-issue items issued in each Commonwealth Electoral Division during the year ending 28 February 1981, it is not possible to give all the details as requested.
Numbers issued were:
(a)-

Australian national flags

Size

Size

1.83m x 0.91m l.37mx 0.69m

Queensland

1,279

180

New South Wales

2,556

352

Victoria

1,785

166

South Australia and Northern

Territory

786

355

Western Australia

719

520

Tasmania

299

138

Australian Capital Territory

108

'+

(3) George Pickers (Brisbane) Pty Ltd. (4) Expenditure on items distributed during the year ending 28 February 1981 was: (a) National flags $181,110; (b) Photographs of Her Majesty The Queen $2,115; (c) Cassette recordings of the national anthem and national tune $3,607.
Department of Education: Television Advertising
(Question No. 948)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(I) What sum was spent on television advertising by his Department and Instrumentalities under his control in 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred during the months of (a) December 1979 and (b) 1980.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Nil.
(2) Nil.
Electoral Division of Wannon
(Question No. 996)
Dr Klugman asked the Ministe: for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
(1) Does the Electoral Division of Wannon have the lowest enrolment of voters in any Electoral Division in New South Wales and Victoria.
(2) If so, can he say what makes it so unattractive to former and potential residents.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes. (2) The second part of the honourable member's question implies that the residential attractiveness of an electoral Division depends on a high enrolment of voters, and the honour-
able member's judgment is wide of the mark irhe rcally thinks
that the electoral Division of Prospect is more attractive than any part of Tasmania.

7,532

1,715

Total . . . . . .

9,247

(b) Colour photographs of Her Majesty The Queen-

Total all States and Territories-4,230.

(c) Cassette recordings of the national anthem and national tune-

Queensland New South Wales Victoria
South Australian and Northern Territory Western Australia Tasmania . . . . . . Australian Capital Territory

1,073 2,408 1,531
859 1,073
244 173

Total

7,361

(2) Two.

Appointments to Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Foreign Affairs
(Question No. 1010)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 1 April 1981 :
What are the (a) names, (b) dates and terms of appointment and (c) salaries of all persons appointed to the Boards and Commissions of Statutory Authorities under his jurisdiction.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
There is only one Statutory Authority under my jurisdiction, that is the Australia-Japan Foundation.
The names and dates of appointment of the members of the foundation are as follows:
Chairman---

Answers to Questions

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3069

Sir Russell Madigan, OBE.-appointed June 1976.
Deputy ChairmanMr S. B. Myer-appointed June 1976.
MembersSir John Crawford, A.C., CBE.-appointed June 1976,
Dr E. S. Crawcour-appointed June 1976, Professor O. Harries-appointed June 1976, Mr M. Moon-appointed June 1976, Ms I. C. Buttrose, OBE.-appointed January 1978, Mr H. Gordon, C.M.G.-appointed October 1979, Sir Keith Shann, CBE.-appointed Apri11977, Mr P. W. Thomson, M.B.E.-appointed December 1976, Mr D. Horgan-appointed October 1979, Mr A. R. Parsonsappointed February 1978, Mr P. I. Nolan-appointed August 1976.
Each member is appointed for a period not exceeding five years and may be re-appointed for a further term.
The Chairman receives $90 for each full day he sits as Chairman. All other members, except two who are also public servants, receive $72 for each full day they sit. The public servant members are not paid a sitting fee.
Following the Government's decision in its Review of Commonwealth Functions, the question of remuneration to members of advisory bodies is being examined and once new guidelines for payment are established these will be the basis for future payment to members of the Foundation.
Air Travel: Department ofImmigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 1143)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) How many travel warrants have been issued for his Departmental officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980 to 31 March 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this travel.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2). Records maintained in my Department are not in a form which provides the particular detail sought and I am not prepared to authorise use of the resources which could be required to identify that detail. Departmental records show:
(a) number of travel warrants issued in Canberra for domestic travel were: 1978-79-867, 1979-80-860, 1980-81-681 to 30.4.81.
(b) the total amount expended on domestic travel involving Canberra based staff was $310,937 in 1979-80 and has been $267,333 in the period 1.7.81 to 30.4.81.
Telephone and Television Services in Remote Areas
(Question No. 1154)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 8 Apri11981:
(I) Will the microwave link repeater stations that are to be located through the Kimberley region, Western Australia, be of assistance to persons living in remote situations in obtaining telephone and television services.
(2) In particular, is it planned to locate a repeater station near Turkey Creek, Western Australia.

(3) Will it be possible for the community there to utilise this repeater station for connection to television and STD telephone services.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The microwave link planned to be established between Port Hedland-Broome-Derby by the end of 1982 and between Derby-Halls Creek-Kununurra by the end of 1983 will provide a reliable trunk system which will support the provision and continued development of telephone services throughout the region.
(2) A repeater station on the Derby-Halls CreekKununurra microwave link will be located 10 km from Turkey Creek.
(3) The microwave link in general, and the Turkey Creek repeater in particular, will be utilised in the provision of STD telephone services to the community at Turkey Creek.
Further to the answers given above, my Department advises that, notwithstanding the installation of the microwave link to the Kimberley region, the proposed domestic communications satellite system may well prove to be the most effective means of providing adequate national television service to the North West of Western Australia generally and, in the context of this question, to the Turkey Creek area.
Television and Telephone Senices: Dampier Land Peninsula
(Question No. 1156)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(1) Has he received representations from the community of the Dampier Land Peninsula, Western Australia requesting television and telephone services for their area.
(2) Has he or his Department replied to these representations; if so, what was the nature of this reply.
(3) Is it possible to have television and telephone services extended to the Dampier Land Peninsula during the installation of the microwave link to the Kimberley region.
(4) Has a decision been made as to which route the microwave link into and through the Kimberley region will take.
(5) If so, will the route selected be of assistance to the people of the Dampier Land Peninsula in their aspirations for telephone and television services.
(6) If the decision has not yet been reached, will he ensure that Telecom Australia investigates the possibility of routing the microwave link to be of some assistance to the Dampier 1 qmt Peninsula.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) Yes. Replies have acknowledged the lack of adequate television reception and have explained the Government's objectives and problems in providing an adequate television service throughout Australia.
(3) The microwave link planned to be established between Port Hedland-Broome-Derby by the end of 1982 and between Derby-Halls Creek-Kununurra by the end of 1983 will provide a reliable trunk system which will support the provision and continued development of telephone services throughout the region, including the Dampier Land Peninsula.
With regard to the provision of television services to the Dampier Land Peninsula, my Department has been requested to consider the communities in that area for inclusion in a

3070 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Answers to Questions

future television planning program. However, the proposed domestic communications satellite system may well prove to be the most effective means of providing adequate national television service to those areas, installation of the microwave link to the Kimberley region notwithstanding.
(4) The microwave links between Port Hedland-Derby and Derby-Kununurra will generally follow the Great Northern Highway.
(5) and (6) See (3) above.
Telecom Particular Person Call Service
(Question No. 1157)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 8 April 1981 :
(1) Has Telecom Australia recently altered its operation of the Particular Person Call service.
(2) If so, does this alteration include the dropping of the facility of the caller being able to ask the operator to reach the particular person called and, if that person is not available when the call is placed, to advise when available.
(3) Does this alteration discriminate against Kimberley residents who are not yet equipped with an STD service.
(4) Will he undertake to have Telecom reconsider its position on this matter if this alteration has come into effect.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1, 2, 3 and 4) Telecom Australia has advised that in the interests of improved efficiency and service to customers the operating procedures in relation to the Particular Person service were varied from February last by introducing a 'Try Again' service in place of the former 'Left Word' procedure. The 'Left Word' procedure relied on the person answering the called number advising the wanted person that the caller was wishing to make contact. Telecom was not able to ensure that the wanted person received this advice. With the 'Try Again' procedure Telecom retains responsibility for the connection of Particular Person unavailable calls.
When the wanted person is unavailable the operator will advise the caller, giving all available information. The caller may then-
inform the operator to keep trying the call until the wanted person is available. In this case the operator will, if possible, ascertain when the person will be available or will attempt the call again in 30 minutes.
speak to an alternative party at the same number. if it is known that the wanted person can be reached at another number anywhere in Australia, ask the operator to attempt connection to that number. advise the operator to hold the call until he wishes it to be tried again. cancel the call.
The service outlined is available to aU telephone customers and does not in any way discriminate against customers who do not have STD access.
Aid to China
(Question No. 1174)
Mr Howe asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) Is he able to state whether in China 190 million people have been affected by one of the worst famines in that country's history and that 25 million people are close to starvation.

(2) Is he also able to state whether a United Nations team which returned from China at the commencement of April 1981 reported that stg300m and 1.5 million tons of food were needed to ease conditions in drought-ridden Hebei Province, south of Peking and flooded Hubei Provitlce, west of Shanghai.
(3) If so, has the Chinese Government appealed to the Australian Government for assistance.
(4) What was the Government's response to any appeal.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Accordingto a report issued by the United Nations Disaster Relief Organisation (UNDRO) which visited China from 12 to 31 January 1981 at the request onhe Chinese Government, the flood and drought disasters experienced in 1980 affected some 173 million people in seven provinces. However, the most serious effects of the flood and drought disaster were in Hubei and Hebei Provinces respectively, where a total of 43.2 million people were affected with over 20 million most seriously affected.
(2) The UNDRO report, which is based on detailed information provided by the Chinese authorities, did not seek a level of monetary commitment from international donors but did outline a number of requirements for Hubei and Hebei Provinces including food, clothing, quilts/covers, seeds, fertiliser, medicines and pesticides. The food requirements were listed as follows:
Rice-SOO,OOO metric tonnes; Wheat-600,000 metric tonnes; Maize/Sorghum-440,000 metric tonnes; Soya Beans-7S,000 metric tonnes; Cooking Oil-l0,000 metric bnnes; Milk Powder-2,000 metric tonnes.
I am unaware of any further United Nations team which returned from China at the beginning of Apri11981, although I am informed that a UNICEF representative made a visit to the disaster affected areas in April to monitor the distribution of assistance being provided by that organisation.
(3) The Chinese Government sought international aid through UNDRO which approached the Australian Government for assistance.
(4) Bearing in mind the humanitarian aspects of the disasters, the Australian "Government appt6ved the following response to the Chinese appeal:
0) the provision ofllledical supplies, valued at $100,000;
and
(ii) the provision of 10,000 tonnes of wheat currently valued at $1.Sm.
Both the Chinese authorities and UNDRO have been informed of Australia's offer, and arrangements are being made for the delivery of our assistance in accordance with the wishes of the Chincse Government.
Age Pensions in OECD Countries
(Question No. 1178)
Dr Klugman asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(1) Is he able to state (a) how many persons are (i) in the work force and (ii) eligible for age pensions and (b) the ratio of those referred to in part (a) (i) to those referred to in part (a) (ii) in OECD countries; ifso, what are the details.
(2) Where estimates are available what is the ratio 'for the years 1990 and 2000 (assuming no change in eligibility for age pensions).

Answers to Questions

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3071

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) Information on the number of people eligible for the age pension in each OECD country is not readily available. The eligibility requirement for age pensions differs from country to country. In addition, apart from Australia and New Zealand, all OECD countries have contributory systems as an element in their age pension schemes under which entitlement is related to a person's contributions (or an employer's on their behalf) during their working life and in most cases to past earnings.
The OECD has produced a study ('Demographic Trends 1950-1990', OECD 1979) which gives an estimate of the labour force and number of persons 65 and over in each member country for 1975, and projections up to 1990-a copy of the study is available in the Parliamentary Library. Projections of the population aged 65 and over and the labour force for most countries including OECD members for the years 1975, 1980, 1985, 1990 and 2000 are contained in 'Labour Force Estimates and Projections, 1950-2000', International Labour Office, Geneva, second edition, 1977. It must be noted that these projections are subject to a number of reservations and limitations, and given differing eligibility criteria (including different age criteria between countries) it is not possible to assume that persons of a certain age and over will be those eligible for age pensions.
Recruitment: Department of Foreign Affairs
(Question No. 1289)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Were any staff of his Department or statutory authorities under his aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No staff were recruited through private employment agencies.
Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department oCtile Treasury
(Question No. 1395)
Ml' Bungey asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(l) Have any officers and employees of his Department been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many.
(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment approved in each case.
Mr Howal'd-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No officers currently employed in the Treasury have Treasury approval to engage in outside employment other than as provided in Section 91 of the Public Service Act.
(2) Not applicable.
Overseas Travel: Department of the Treasury
(Question No. 1447)
M.. Dungey asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(1) How many officers and employees of his Department travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances, etc.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) A total of 18 Treasury officers travelled overseas during 1979-80. Eleven officers undertook 21 visits funded by Treasury and 7 officers undertook 13 visits funded by the Department of Foreign Affairs.
(2) Funds expended by Treasury totalled $71,746.

Air Travel in Australia: Department of Communications

(Question No. 1469)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

What sum was paid by his Department, or by Departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by his Department, to each airline for travel within Australia during 1979-80.

Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:-

TAA Ansett . . . . . . . MacRobertson Miller Airlines Bizjets . . . . . . . East West Airlines
Bush Pilots Airways (Cairns) Northern Territory Air Charter Redcliff Flying Service
Royal Queensland Aero Club Executive Airlines

$ 153,936 60,926
6,615
84 321 650 1,092
622 440
97

Air Travel in Australia: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

(Question No. 1483)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9April 1981 :

What sum was paid by his Department, or by Departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by his Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.

Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Payments in 1979-80 as shown in the accounting records of my Department are:

Trans-Australia Airlines Ansett National Airlines Air Tasmania MacRobertson Miller Airlines

$ 321,842
140,922 91
1,331

Head Office, Department of Communications
(Question No. 1495)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, on notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) Are any sections of the Head Office of his Department not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many staff are in each.

3072 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so,when.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Elements of the Central Office of my Department which are not located in Canberra are as follows. Current staffing of these elements are as indicated:
Melbourne-
Broadcasting Planning and Operations DivisionStation Establishment Branch-l~ persons; Station Planning Branch (part only)-18 persons; Divisional Support & Engineering Policy Section-2
persons.
Broadcasting Development DivisionResearch and Forward Planning Branch-IO persons.
Radio Frequency Management DivisionOperations Branch-47 persons. Management Services Branch-21 persons.
SydneyBroadcasting Planning and Operations DivisionStation Planning Branch (part only)-7 persons.
(2) Decisions to relocate units ofGovernment employment to Canberra are taken by Government on the advice of the Location of Australian Government Employment Committee (LAGE), an IDC chaired by the PSB. The advice tendered to Government by the LAGE Committee is based on submissions by the relevant Department, and consultations with interested bodies such as staff associations. Any plans to relocate the sections in Canberra is a matter for LAGB consideration and subsequent decision by Government.
Head Office, Department of the Treasury
(Question No. 1499)
Mr Bungey asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(1) Are any sections of the Head Office of his Department not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many staffarc in each.
(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so,when.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No.
(2) Not applicable.
Head Office, Department oflmmigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 1509)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs upon notice on 9 Apri11981:
(1) Are-any sections of the Head Office of his Department not located iii CaJlberra: if so, what are the sections and how many staff are in each.
(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so, when.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) All sections of the Central Office of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs are located in Canberra.
A total of 12 Central Office staff are located in Sydney (8) and Melbourne (4) covering designations such as journalist

and internal auditor. These are outposted staff from various areas within Central Office whose duties require them to be in Sydney or Melbourne as appropriate.
(2) Not applicable.
Head Office, Department ofAdministrative Services
(Question No. 1511)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Are any sections of the Head Office of his Department not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many staff are in each.
(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so,when.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) There are four elements of the Head Office of my Department which are not located in Canberra. They are:
the Commonwealth Fire Board which is located in Melbourne and has a staff of 6;
the Australian Government Advertising Service, which has 13 staff employed in Sydney and 4 staff employed in Melbourne;
the Food Services and Transitory Accommodation Sections located in Melbourne each employing a staff of 6. The future role and responsibilities of both these Sections is to be considered as part of the implementation of the Review of Commonwealth Functions decisions.
(2) Decisions to relocate units of Government employment to Canberra are taken by Government on the advice of the Location of Australian Government Employment (LAGB) Committee, an IDC chaired by the Public Service Board. The advice rendered to Government by the LAGB Committee is based on submissions by the relevant department and consultations with interested bodies such as staff organisations. Any plan to relocate the sections in Canberra is a matter for the LAGE Committee and subsequent decision by the Government.
Head Office, Department of Housing and Construction
(Question No. 1516)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(1) Are any sections of the Head Office of his Department not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many staffare in each.
(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so,when.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) There are two branches of the Department's Central Office that are not located in Canberra. These are the Experimental Building Station located at North Ryde, Sydney which comprises 73 employees; and the Central Investigation and Research Laboratory at Port Melbourne which comprises 45 employees.
The Department is in the final stage of a three phase relocation of other Central Office units from Melbourne to Canberra. A further 5 Mechanical Engineers and 39 Systems and ADP staff have received or will shortly receive notices of

Answers to Questions

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3073

compulsory transfer for times between late 1981 and late 1982.
(2) Decisions to relocate units of Government employment to Canberra are taken by Government on the advice of the Location of Australian Government Employment Committee (LAGE), an IDC chaired by the Public Service Board. The advice tendered to Government by the LAGE Committee is based on submissions by the relevant Department, and consultations with interested bodies such as staff organisations.
Any decision to relocate the Central Investigation and Research Laboratory to Canberra would be a matter for LAGE consideration and subsequent decision by Government.
The Government has announced its intention to dispose of the Experimental Building Station after a review of its activities.
Tea Services: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 1613)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many (a) full time and (b) part time staff are employed on tea making and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (ii) other offices of his Department.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in his Department in 1979-80.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) (i) and (ii). There are no full time staff employed on tea making and distribution within the Department.
(1) (b) (i). There are no part time staff employed on tea making and distribution within Central Office of the Department. (ii) Part time staff employed on tea making and distribution in the Regional Offices of the Department are as follows:
Adelaide-one employee.
Darwin-one employee (ceased 3.12.80).
Perth-one employee.
(2) (a). Salaries for 1979-80 amounted to a total of $15,849.00. (b) $8,525 was paid to Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services Ltd, for the provision of beverage services.
Department of Communications: Relocation of Staff in Canberra
(Question No. 1636)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Did the Annual Report of his Department for 1979-80 state that the new organisation involved a greater proportion of the staff being relocated in Canberra for greater efficiency.
(2) If so, will he detail the savings and areas of greater efficiency resulting from the relocation of staff to Canberra.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) The comments in the Annual Report of my Department for 1979-80 referred to by the honourable member relate to a new organisation which came into effect after June 1980. This was the result of recommendations made in reviews of the Department's functions conducted in conjunction with

the Public Service Board. The new organisation changed a number of elements of the Department's structure and brought together in one location those elements which are involved in preparing policy advice to the Government on the various responsibilities within my portfolio. Prior to the reorganisation, these policy elements of the Central Office of the Department were fragmented between Sydney, Melbourne and Canberra. Co-location in Canberra has overcome areas of duplication of work and has resulted in more effective coordination and communication between the interrelated policy elements of the Department.
Entry and Exit Procedures between Australia and New Zealand
(Question No. 1733)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) Further to the answer to a question without notice given by his predecessor to the former Member for Hindmarsh, on 6 November 1979 (Hansard, page 2597), what further steps have been taken in reviewing entry and exit procedures between Australia and New Zealand.
(2) Is he satisfied that the current procedures are not being used by drug smugglers; if so, on what information is this view based.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I draw the honourable member's attention to my statement in the House on 28 April 1981 (Hansard, page 1650).
Departure Tax
(Question No. 1740)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
What was the cost, including salaries, printing, etc. of collecting departure tax in 1979-80.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The direct cost of collecting departure tax in 1979-80 was approximately $840,000. This amount covers salaries and related expenditures, printing and distribution of stamps, booth hire, cleaning and security services where applicable. In some instances, salary costs are for officers performing duties additional to collection of departure tax.
Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 1884)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37 that London metropolitan police reduced its telephone bill by $985 000, or about 20 per cent by use of a monitoring device whJch recorded length, time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of his Department controlled; if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in his Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.

3074 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Departmental instructions make it clear that phones are for official use. Local personal calls are to be kept to a minimum and use of phones for such calls is to be monitored by supervisors. All personal trunk calls are to be booked through the switch board and paid for on completion.
(2) In the Department's Central Office calls on each extension are separately recorded on a metering device. This information is regularly monitored and provides a control on the use of telephones. STD facilities are only made available to officers who have a need for frequent use of this facility.
In all other offices of the Department with the exception of Melbourne, the STD facility is only made available to senior officers. In Melbourne, the Department is not responsible for the PABX and STD access has not yet been controlled. It is understood that action is in train to implement STD barring on this PABX.
(3) The individual metering arrangements referred to above enable the Department to exercise control over the degree of use of telephones. Preliminary consideration was given to the use of additional monitoring devices but the department did not pursue the matter because of the technical limitations of the currently available equipment. Further STD barring is under consideration.
2,4-D and 2,4,5-T
(Question No. 1931)
Mr Howe asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a Swedish study published in the British Journal of Industrial Medicine, linking exposure to the herbicides 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T with substantially increased risk of developing cancer of the soft tissues.
(2) Does the study show that the increase in risk is seventeenfold; if so, is he prepared to ban the use of these highly toxic chemicals.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) This further contribution from the Swedish group does report a seventeenfold increase in the relative risk of softtissue sarcomata and exposure to 2,4,5-T. In addition, it also reports increased risks associated with a number of similar chemicals.
This study is clearly important and its results cannot be ignored. However, confirmation in other populatio.ns is urgently needed to help assess the possible causal significance of the reported association.
The Public Health Advisory Committee (PHAC) at its recent meeting on 9-10 April 1981 considered the report and agreed that an investigation of cliloroplienoxy compounds

should be undertaken in Australia. It has been proposed that a special working group, including experts in pathology, epidemiology, toxicology and oncology, should be convened to consider the implications of this Swedish study and other recently published reports.
No further comment is possible until this further expert assessment has been made of the study and its implications.
Borrowing by States
(Question No. 1968)
Mr Willis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(I) What has been the total amount of borrowing by each of the States under the infrastructure borrowing program in each year since the program began and what is the expected borrowing for 1980-81.
(2) How much of this borrowing by each State in each year has been from overseas, and what proportion of the total sum borrowed is this figure in each case.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The total amounts borrowed under the infrastructure program in 1978-79 and in 1979-80 and the estimated total amounts to be borrowed in 1980-81 by authorities in each State are published in Budget Paper No.7, Table 90, page 127.
(2) In 1978-79, overseas borrowings comprised $143m (or 96 per cent) of the $149m borrowed under the infrastructure program in that year by State authorities. The corresponding figures for 1979-80 are $322m (or 81 per cent) out of a total of $399m. State-by-State details are confidential to Loan Council. Information on the amounts borrowed by authorities in each State under the infrastructure borrowing program for 1980-81 and the proportion of the total borrowed overseas will be available after the end of the financial year and it is expected that it will be included in the 1981-82 Budget papers.
School Teachers: Percentage Increase
(Question No. 1996)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 29 April 1981:
(1) What was the percentage increase in the number of school teachers employed in Australian schools for each of the last 5 years.
(2) What was the percentage increase in student numbers in those schools during the same years.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The percentage increase in the number of school teachers employed in Australian schools for each of the last 5 years for which figures are available is set out in the following table.

Year 1975 1976 1977 1978

School teachers

Full time 145,006 151,864 159,436 162,888

Part time 15,602 16,086 15,652 16,119

Number of teachers

Full time equivalent of part time

Total Full time equivalent (a)

7,425 7,504

152,431 159,368

7,400

166,836

7,669

170,557

Percentage increase from previous year
7.1 4.6 4.7 2.2

Answers to Questions

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3075

School teachers

Number of teachers

Year

Full time

Part time

Full time equivalent of part time

Total Full time
equivalent (a)

Percentage
increase from previous year

1979(b) 1980

167,782 n.a.

15,740 n.a.

7,413

175,196(c)

2.7

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

(a) Full time plus full time equivalent of part-time.
(b) 1979 data are on a revised basis and are not strictly comparable with previous years. The percentage increase shown between 1978 and 1979 is therefore slightly understated.
(c) Components do not add because ofrounding.
n.a. not available Source: Based on Australian Bureau of Statistics data

(2) The percentage increase in student numbers in those

(b) Cassette Recording of the National Anthem and the

schools during the same years is indicated in the table below.

National Tune-

Year

SCHOOL STUDENTS
Number of students

Percentage increase from previous year

Total-9,389. (c) Portraits of Her Majesty The QueenTotal-5,951. (d) Coats of Arms-

1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980(p)

2,910,266

1.4

2,947,085

1.3

2,979,151

1.1

2,992,628

0.5

2,986,931

-0.2

2,984,562

-0.1

(p) Preliminary. Source: Based on Australian Bureau of Statistics data.

Display of National Flag
(Question No. 2040)
Mr Adermann asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 5 May 1981:
(l) What number of (a) Australian flags, (b) cassettes of the national anthem, (c) portraits of Her Majesty the Queen and (d) Coats of Arms have been provided to (i) schools, (ii) youth organisations, (iii) service organisations, (iv) sporting organisations and (v) other groups in (A) Australia and (B) the Electorate Division of Fisher since 1 January 1980.
(2) Has there been an increase in the desire of Australian organisations to display the national flag and portrait of the Queen since the guidelines for the distribution of these items were extended by the Government.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Because of the additional costs involved in extracting details of the number of free-issue items issued in Commonwealth Electoral Divisions since 1 January 1980 it is not possible to give the details requested for the Electoral Division of Fisher. Neither is it possible to give the breakdown by categories of organisations for free-issue items other than National Flags. Numbers issued since 1 January 1980 in Australia are:
(a) Australian National F1ags-
(i) Schools-l,996; (ii) Youth Organisations-1,533; (iii) Community Service Organisations3,414; (iv) Sporting Organisations-l,617; (v) Other eligible groups-3,223;

Total-2,683.
(2) As stated in my media release for Australia Day 1981, there has been a substantial increase in the desire of Australian organisations to display the National Flag and portrait of The Queen since 1 January 1980. This was particularly so after my predecessor, the Hon. J. E. McLeay, announced the extension of the programme on 3 August 1980.
World Council ofIndigenous Peoples
(Question No. 2071)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) What non-member countries were represented by observers at the Third General Assembly of the World Council ofIndigenous Peoples (WCIP) in Canberra.
(2) Have (a) Japan, (b) Malaysia, (c) India or (d) the Soviet Union expressed interest in, or taken steps towards, joining the WCIP.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) I am informed that observers from the indigenous populations of India, Japan, the Philippines, Thailand, Guyana, New Caledonia and Tahiti attended the Third General Assembly of the WCIP in Canberra.
(2) The WCIP is an independent non-governmental organisation. Applications for membership are lodged with and determined by the Council's Executive and I am not therefore privy to steps which mayor may not have been taken by various parties to make such applications. It should also be noted that eligibility for membership of the WCIP extends to indigenous peoples within the territory of a State, but not to States as such.
However, for the honourable member's information, I can advise him that, as far as my Department is aware, indigenous representatives from India and Japan have expressed interest in membership of the Council on behalf of the peoples they represent. I have no information as to whether indigenous peoples from Malaysia or the Soviet Union have at this point sought membership or expressed interest in doing so.

3076 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Reduction of Staff and Functions: Department of Communications
(Question No. 2122)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) Will he provide a detailed list of the (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of his Department that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions are implemented.
Mr Sinc\air-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) There were no functions eliminated from the Department in the Australian Capital Territory. However, one of the Committee's recommendations was that a review should be undertaken by the Public Service Board to examine the scope for staff savings in rationalising areas of the Department responsible for policy advice in the field of broadcasting. This review is yet to be undertaken.
Translation and Interpreter Services
(Question No. 388)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 4 December -1980:
(1) What other translation services besides the telephone interpreter service will be provided by his Department.
(2) Does the Government propose removing the Translation Section from his Department and replacing the work with outside contractors.
(3) What discussions have there been with staff in the Translation Section over possible changes to the area.
(4) Is there a need for high quality migrant, technical and commercial translations which are best met by a translation unit within the Australian Public Service.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
You will be aware of the Prime Minister's and my own public announcements concerning decisions taken following the Review of Commonwealth Functions.
At this stage, I have nothing further to add to those statements, other than to assure the honourable member that appropriate consultations with affected staff and staff associations will occur in accordance with guidelines issued by the Public Service Board.
Review of Services: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 389)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) What are the areas under review within his Department as at 4 December 1980.
(2) What are the reasons for (a) the urgency in reviewing his Department and (b) the review.
(3) Is it a fact that officials within his Department have no way of knowing whether the Government will or will not direct that existing services be expanded, maintained, reduced, devolved to other agencies.

(4) Are there any mechanisms of communication or avenue of input for staff of his Department to the review panel.
(5) Who are the members of the review panel.
(6) Has the review panel consulted with any outside agencies, organisations or with ethnic communities; if not, why not; if so, which organisations.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
You will be aware of the Prime Minister's and my own public announcements concerning decisions taken following the Review of Commonwealth Functions.
At this stage, I have nothing further to add to those statements, other than to assure the honourable member that appropriate consultations with affected staff and staff associations will occur in accordance with guidelines issued by the Public Service Board.
Unemployment
(Question No. 533)
Mr Free asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981.
(1) How many (a) males and (b) females aged (i) 15 and (ii) 17 years were registered with the Commonwealth Employment Service as at 24 February 1981.
(2) How many (a) males and (b) females aged (i) 16 and (ii) 17 years were in receipt of unemployment benefit as at 24 February 1981.
(3) How many vacancies are currently registered with the Commonwealth Employment Service for juniors (a) males and (b) females.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) This information is not available as data on persons registered with the Commonwealth Employment Service (CES) were not collected by single year age groups.
(2) The Minister for Social Security has advised that the latest available statistics of unemployment benefit recipients classified by age and sex relate to 20 February 1981 and, in respect of that date, the information sought is as follows:

Aged 16

Aged 17

Males . . . . . . . . Females

10,275 12,018

13,149 17,314

(3) Because of an industrial dispute in the CES between September 1980 and March 1981 these data are not available.

Exhibition of Ancient Treasures
(Question No. 547)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Enviroment, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
Is the exhibition of ancient treasures dealing with the life and times of Alexander the Great (the Greek Exhibition) to be brought to Queensland.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Greek Government has agreed in principle to send to Australia an exhibition of ancient treasures dealing with the

Answers to Questions

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3077

life and times of Alexander the Great. Timing of such an exhibition will be decided later following the end of the exhibition's current tour of the United States and after discussions with the Supreme Greek Archaeological Committee and other appropriate Greek Government services. On present commitments the exhibition will be in North America until 1983.
Apart from objects lent by Greek Museums, the exhibition will include objects lent from European and American public and private collections. The exhibition shows the superb craftsmanship and artistry of ancient Macedonia from the time of Alexander the Great (336-323 BC) and the Hellenistic era he introduced.
The International Cultural Corporation of Australia, a company recently set up with financial assistance from the Commonwealth Government to undertake important international cultural projects, will be invited to manage the exhibition and it would be the responsibility of that company to consider venues for the exhibition in consultation with the Greek authorities.
I am advised that large scale international art exhibitions require a high level of private sponsorship and although it is the policy of the International Cultural Corporation of Australia to encompass all States within its programme, implementation of such policies is determined mainly by the availability of funds. In bringing the Greek Exhibition to Australia the Corporation will be seeking private sponsorship to the order of $400,000.
I am further advised that another factor in determining where major exhibitions are to be shown is the availability of suitable venues. The conditions of loans specified by the countries concerned include stringent environmental control in display galleries and the best possible security surveillance equipment. In the past such conditions have limited the display of certain major collections. In this regard I am informed, however, that the Queensland Art Gallery, Brisbane, has mounted the Pompeii AD79 Exhibition and the Century of Modern Masters Exhibition. That Gallery will also mount several major international art exhibitions in the future including Aboriginal Australia, William Strutt and the Chinese Classical Paintings Exhibition.
Translation and Interpreter Services
(Question No. 553)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) Is it a fact that the Government intends to divert translation and interpreter services which are now provided through Commonwealth Departments, to private enterprise.

Nugan Hand Bank
(Question No. 662)
Mr Willis asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 3 March 1981:
(1) Did the Narcotics Bureau conduct an investigation into the activities of the Nugan Hand Bank and its employees during 1977 and 1978.
(2) If so, were the inquiries suspended during 1978 and what was the reason.
(3) Were any investigations into the internal security of the Bureau undertaken in view of allegations that details of the reported inquiry were constantly leaked to persons outside the Bureau; if so, (a) what was the result of the investigation; and (b) what action was taken.
(4) Have any further inquiries been instigated since into the activities of the Nugan Hand Bank and its employees.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) No, but the direction of the inquiries was changed to concentrate on intelligence gathering.
(3) An inquiry was conducted into alleged leaks but failed to produce any conclusive evidence of how any such leaks occurred.
(4) See (2) above and also answer by the Prime Minister to a Question Without Notice, Hansard pages 701/702 of 11 March 1981.
Uranium Enrichment
(Question No. 781)
Mr Uren asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the conclusions of the Australian Atomic Energy Commission (AAEC) contained in its 1979-80 Annual Report, that the uranium enrichment production capacity available to the western world will be in excess of requirements through the 1980s.
(2) What are the specific production plans on which the AAEC bases its estimates of future supply of enrichment services in the western world.
(3) Are there any proposals which would further increase the supply of enrichment services; if so, what are they?

(2) If so, (a) how many translators and/or interpreters presently employed by the Commonwealth Public Service will be dispensed with and (b) which Commonwealth Departments or authorities and which centres will be affected.
Mr MacpheeThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
You will be aware of the Prime Minister's and my own public announcements concerning decisions taken following the Review of Commonwealth Functions.

(4) For what period does the AAEC expect there to be an excess of enrichment production capacity over requirements for the western world if its low estimate of western world requirements for enrichment services proves more accurate than its best estimate.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes.

At this stage, I have nothing further to add to those statements, other than to assure the honourable member that appropriate consultations with affected staff and staff associations will occur in accordance with guidelines issued by the Public Service Board.

(2) In its 1979-80 Annual Report, the AAEC estimates the total available production capacity of operating and committed enrichment plants supplying the western world to be some 43 million separative work units (SWU) per year. This estimate includes the following suppliers:

3078 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Organisation

Location

Capacity (million
SWU/year)

US DOE

USA (diffusion

plants)

(centrifuge plant)

EURODIF

France

URENCO

Netherlands, United

Kingdom

TECHSNABEXPORT USSR*

25.6 2.2 10.8
1.0 2 t04

- The USSR has contracted to supply Western European utilities with 2 to 4 million SWU per year through to 1990. After 1990 the USSR is expected to continue supplies only to Finland at the rate of 0.1 to 0.2 million SWU per year.
(3) Yes; additional proposals for enrichment services have been announced as listed in the following table:

Organisation
US DOE
COREDIF URENC;O
UCOR PNC ..

Capacity/process

Location

(million SWU/ycar)- - - - -

USA

up to 6.6/centrifuge plant expansion*

France

up to IO/diffusion*

Netherlands, United Kingdom, West Germore than 1.0/centrifuge*

many South Africa

0.2j'Helikon'

. . . . . . Japan

l.O/centrifuge

The South African and Japanese plans are for supplying domestic markets.

* These plans are subject to the availability of markets.

(4) If the AAEC's low estimate of western world requirements for enrichment services proves more accurate than its best estimate, then the estimated total production capacity of existing and committed western enrichment plants would be in excess of requirements, possibly up to 1996.
Commonwealth Employment Service Office in Belmont, Western Australia
(Question No. 908)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(1) When will the proposed Commonwealth Employment Service office in Belmont, Western Australia be opened and where will it be located.
(2) Will the office be associated with a job centre.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) It is expected that the proposed Belmont Commonwealth Employment Service office should open in October/ November 1981, subject to the availability of suitable premises for which negotiations are currently proceeding.
(2) Yes.
Birds: Smuggling
(Question No. 989)
Mr Good luck asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 1 April 1981 :
(1) What species of birds can be exported from Australia. (2) Is he able to say whether some birds which are destroyed as pests in Australia would create a lucrative market to overseas ornithologists. (3) Are many exotic birds smuggled out of Australia.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) The exportation of birds native to Australia is only permitted in terms of the Customs (Prohibited Exports) Regulations:
(i) to approved publicly operated zoos for zoological display purposes;
(ii) to approved scientific institutions for bona fidc research; and
(iii) as household pets subject to certain stringent conditions.
The conditions relating to the export of household pets are as follows:
(a) the exporter is departing from Australia with the intention of taking up permanent residence in another country;
(b) he has been resident in Australia for not less than three years prior to departures; and
(c) he has owned and kept the specimen as a household pet for not less than two years prior to departure.
The concession may be allowed once only, either to an individual householder or to one member of a family unit, and normally may be granted in respect of one specimen of a species ordinarily kept as a household pet.
(2) No, but Australia's export policy allows certain overseas scientific institutions to obtain from approved Australian institutions specimens of native birds for bona fide study and research purposes. These specimens are available to trained ornithologists for serious scientific research work.
The second Report of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation dealing with trafficking in Fauna in Australia made a recommendation in favour of government controlled exports of inter alia wild trapped common and pest species of birds. After consideration of this recommendation the Council of Nature Conservation Ministers (CONCOM), which comprises the States and Federal conservation Ministers, decided that no action should be taken to relax the existing policy.
(3) It is known that birds of species native to Australia, some of which by reason of their rarity or endangered status may be described as exotic, are available for sale in other countries. Where possible all information concerning such

Answers to Questions

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3079

cases is investigated with a view to identifying the source of exportation and taking appropriate action.
Australia Post Courier Service: Advertising
(Question No. 1031)
Mr Groom asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 2 April 1981:
(1) What sum was spent by Australia Post in advertising the Australian Post Courier Service during (a) 1979-80, (b) the period 1 July 1980 to 31 March 1981 and (c) what is the estimated sum to be spent during 1980-81.
(2) When was Courier-Fax established and what is its purpose.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Australia Post advertises its services nationally and at State and local levels. The form of advertising can vary widely (eg, television advertising, press advertising, brochures) and cover more than one service.
While there is some difficulty in determining precise details of expenditure for a particular service such as Australia Post Courier, the following amounts have been calculated for the periods nominated:
1 July 1979-30 June 1980-$71,000 I July 1980-31 March 1981-$184,000 I July 1980-30 April 1981-$187,000.
In accordance with the decision arising from the Government's Review of Commonwealth Functions, that the Australia Post Courier service be abolished, all advertising in respect of this service ceased with the announcement of that decision. (2) The Courier-Fax service was introduced, in conjunction with Telecom Australia, on 30 July 1979. The service is designed to meet the needs of postal customers for a fast and reliable means of transmitting facsimile copies of documents.
In view of the abolition of the Australia Post Courier ser-- vice, the future of Courier-Fax is currently being reviewed.
Medical Practitioners' Records
(Question No. 103~)
Mr Groom aked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 2 April 1981:
(l) Have officers of the Australian Federal Police Force entered the professional rooms of any medical practitioner and taken possession of records or other written material containing the names and other personal information relating to patients at any time during the last 5 years.
(2) If so, how many medical practitioners have been involved.
(3) If he cannot provide the precise number of medical practitioners referred to in part (2), will he give an estimate of the number involved.
(4) Have records or material, or part of these, been retained in some instances for a period of 3 months or longer without formal charges being laid.
(5) What is the longest period that records or material have been held without formal charges being laid.
(6) How many patients of medical practitioners have been interviewed by officers of the Australian Federal Police Force in connection with the investigation of medical practitioners during the last 5 years.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) Yes.
(2) and (3) I am advised that records of Australian Federal Police investigations into allegations of fraudulent claims upon the Commonwealth by some medical practitioners are not kept separately from records relating to other offences and crimes against the Commonwealth and to fully research the queries raised by the honourable member would require an extensive redeployment of resources. Whilst I accept, of course, the need to provide as far as possible information sought by honourable members, I do not consider it would be appropriate in this instance for me to authorise such an extensive redeployment of resources away from other Australian, Federal Police fUnctions, including investigative work. If, however, the honourable member has any specific case in mind, I would be happy to discuss the matter further with him.
(4) I am advised that in some instances material has been kept for longer than three months while inquiries have been concluded.
(5) and (6) See (2) and (3) above.
Prices Justification Tribunal Inquiry into Petroleum Pricing
(Question No. 1044)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 2 April 1981:
(1) When did the Prices Justification Tribunal commence its inquiry into the basis of petroleum product pricing.
(2) When is the Tribunal expected to report on this inquiry.
(3) Which companies, organisations and individuals have made submissions to the Tribunal on this matter.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Prices Justification Tribunal commenced public hearings on 20 October 1980.
(2) The Tribunal reported on 31 March 1981.
(3) Amoco Australia Ltd, Ampol Petroleum Ltd, BP Australia Ltd, Caltex Oil (Australia) Pty Ltd, Castrol Australia Pty Ltd, Esso Australia Ltd, Mobil Oil Australia Ltd, Shell Australia Ltd, H. C. Sleigh Ltd, Total Australia Ltd, Australian Automobile Association, Australian Automobile Chamber of Commerce, Australian Council of Trade Unions, Australian Gas Association, Department of the Capital Territory, Department of Mines Queensland, Government of New South Wales, Government of South Australia, Leroc Oil Company Pty Ltd, Municipal Association of Victoria, National Farmers' Federation, Newcastle Gas Company Ltd, Service Station Association of NSW, Gas and Fuel Corporation of Victoria, The Queensland Graingrowers Association, Consolidated Fertilisers Ltd.
Non-official Postmasters
(Question No. 1075)
Mr Wallis asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :
(1) When were the rates paid to non-official postmasters last reviewed by (a) Australia Post and (b) Telecom Australia where manual exchanges operate.
(2) What is the basis for establishing the rates paid to nOnofficial postmasters by Australia Post and Telecom Australia.
(3) Are these rates adjusted at regular intervals to compensate for the effects of inflation; if so, at what periods.

3080 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) 30 June 1980.
(2) The Business Allowance (the major payment made to non-official postmasters and postmistresses) is determined by the level of postal, and postal agency work, conducted at a particular office and is based on the rate of payment to official staff performing similar duties.
Work performed by the non-official postmaster as an agent of Telecom Australia is included and paid as part of the Business Allowance.
Telecom Australia pays an additional after-hours exchange attendance allowance which is based on the pay rates of official staff.
Australia Post pays additional allowances for such duties as cleaning and after hours attendance and these are based also on the rate of payment to official staff. Other allowances for the provision of accommodation, heating and lighting for postal facilities, and performance of outdoor services (for example, clearance of street posting boxes), are based on negotiations with the individual non-official postmaster or postmistress.
(3) All allowances are reviewed annually and adjusted if necessary. In addition, the Business Allowance and the afterhours exchange attendance allowance are adjusted in line with National Wage Case decisions, the most recent of which was handed down on 8 May 1981.
Underspending of Estimates: Governor-General's Office, Auditor-General's
Office, Public Service Board
(Question No. 1091)
Mrs Darling asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division (a) 500-Administrative, (b) 50S-Official Establishments, (c) 506-Governor-General's Office, (d) 515-Auditor-General's Office and (e) 516--Pub1ic Service Board.
(2) Has there been an underspending in these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, Statement of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos. 141 and 142-appropriation Acts (No.1 and 2) 1980-81; ifso, what are the reasons.
Mr Malcolm Fraser--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
See the answer given by the Treasurer, on behalf of the Minister for Finance, to Question No. 1101 (Hansard 13 May 1981, page 2374).
Underspending of Estimates: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 1095)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division (a) 430-Administrative (b) 431-Division of National Mapping and (c) 432---Bureau of Mineral Resources, Geology and Geophysics.

(2) Has there been an underspending in these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, Statement of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos. 141 and 142-Appropriation Acts (Nos. 1 and 2) 1980-81; if so, what are the reasons.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the Minister for Finance's reply to Question No. 1101 which appeared in the House of Representatives Hansard for 13 May 1981 (page 2374).
Underspending of Estimates: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 1110)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division (a) 130-Administrative, (b) 132 Remuneration Tribunal, (c) 138-Australian Federal Police, (d) ISO-Furniture and fittings and (e) 155Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services Limited.
(2) Has there been an underspending in these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, 'Statement of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos. 141 and 142-Appropriation Acts (Nos. 1and 2) 1980-81'; if so, what are the reasons.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) I refer the honourable member to an answer provided by the Minister for Finance to Question No. 1101 on 13 May, 1981 (Hansard, page 2374).
Departmental Air Travel: Department of Education
(Question No. 1142)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :
(I) How many travel warrants have been issued for his DepartmentaJ officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980 to 31 March 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this travel.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) A total of 1250 travel warrants were issued during the period. In addition to travel by Departmental officers, the warrants cover travel by non-departmental staff, e.g. members of advisory committees.
(2) 1976-77-$117,283.00; 1977-78-$100,669.00; 1978-79-$94,317.00; 1979-80-$116,727.00; I July 1980-3 I March 1981--$100,578.00.
Television and Film Violence
(Question No. 1185)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a recently published statement by a Queensland Uniting Church minister calling for a review of television and film violence, following the

Answers to Questions

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3081

attempted assassination of the President of the United States of America, Mr Ronald Reagan.
(2) Has his attention also been drawn to the statement by a lecturer in Psychology at North Brisbane College of Advanced Education, Father Alan Soares, that violence in the community could probably be traced back to the portrayal of violence on television.
(3) What are the present procedures and guidelines for review of violent content in (a) television programs and (b) films.
(4) Does the Government hold the view that these guidelines are adequate.
(5) In what censoring priority does the Government place (a) explicit sexual content, (b) physical violence content, (c) dangerous and reckless driving content and (d) profanity in (i) television programs and (ii) films.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) All imported television program material including cinema films for use in television, and those Australian programs produced outside the control of television stations are examined and classified by the Film Censorship Board in terms of Television Program Standards determined by the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal. The standards contain provisions relating to the portrayal of violence in programs and set down a system of classifications ('G', 'PGR', and 'AO') based on the time of day of transmission and the expected composition of the audience at these times. Television stations are expected to observe these provisions of the Standards in the production and scheduling of Australian material.
In order to ensure that all stations, commercial, national and multi-cultural, maintain a consistent approach to program classification a Classification Consultative Committee has been established consisting of representatives of the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal, the Film Censorship Board, the Australian Broadcasting Commission, the Federation of Australian Commercial Television Stations and the Special Broadcasting Service. The committee is designing a uniform censorship classification system to cover all Australian and imported television material and this will be incorporated in amended Standards being devised by the Tribunal.
The classification of films for use in the cinema is the responsibility of the Film Censorship Board which is under the control of my colleague, Senator the Honourable Peter Durack QC., the Attorney-General.
(4) Yes.
(5) The Government has confidence in the work of the Film Censorship Board and the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal and does not set down priorities as to the view to be taken of various aspects of programming.
Annual Reports and other Publications: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 1232)
Mr Bungey asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(1) What annual reports are produced by his Department and authorities under his aegis.
(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.

(3) Are other regular publications issued by his Department and these authorities; if so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of ellch.
MI' Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Annual reports are produced by:
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet Public Service Board Commonwealth Ombudsman Commonwealth Ombudsman-annual report to the Aus-
tralian Capital Territory Legislative Assembly Office of National Assessments Official Establishments Trust Australian Science and Technology Council Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations
(2) $19,714
(3) Other regular publications, including those issued as part of a regular series, and production costs for 1979-80 were:

Publication

Production costs

Report of the Auditor-General upon the Financial Statement prepared by the Minister for Finance for the year ended 30 June 1979 and upon other Accounts . . . . . . . . . . . .
Supplementary Report of the Auditor-General upon other accounts for the year ended 30 June 1979 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Report of the Auditor-General upon audits, examinations and inspections under the Audit and other Acts-April 1980 . . . . . .
Report of the Auditor-General on an Efficiency Audit-Department of Administrative Services-Australian Property Function
Australian Public Service Conditions of Entry and Advancement 1980. Commonwealth Gazette No. PI . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Compendium of Australian Public Service Information (Nov. 1979, April 1980)
Public Service Board Bulletin
Public Service Board pUblications: AEQUA Equal Employment Opportunity Newsletter . . . . .
Personnel Development News Aboriginal Bulletin
Establishment Bulletin
Statistical Year Book
Your Career Service (not published in 1979-80)

$
16,819
8,203
4,529
3,167
328 1,415 4,572
460 488 503 2,749 3,047

The Auditor-General's Office has advised that distribution by post for each of its Reports costs approximately $100. The Public Service Board has advised that information on distribution costs of their publications is not separately recorded.
Recruitment through Private Employment Agencies: Department of Employment and Youth
Affairs
(Question No. 1295)
MI' Bungey asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Were any staff of his Department or statutory authorities under his aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.

3082 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes, on four occasions for temporary steno-secretarial duties at a total cost of $1 ,125.00.
Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department of Industry and Commerce
(Question No. 1390)
Ml' Bungey asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Have any officers and employees of his Department been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many?
(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission and what was the nature of outside employment approved in each case?
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes. Twenty-one officers have been granted permission to engage in outside employment.
(2) 4 Fourth Division, 17 Third Division and 1 Second Division officers commanding the following salaries:
$9,946, $10,157, $12,272(x2), $13,084, $13,334, $15,546, $18,233, $19,990, $22,359(x4), $23,414, $24,083(x2), $24,725, $25,973, $27,555, $28,654, $32,228.
The nature of employment approved was lecturers/tutors, service station attendants, bar attendant, magazine columnist, union organiser, electrical mechanic, writer, musician, legal practitioner, licensed bookmaker, researcher/writer, shop assistant, milk vendor, pool attendant and vocalist.
Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 1392)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 April, 1981:
(I) Have any officers and employees of the Department of National Development and Energy been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many?
(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment in each case.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(l) Yes. Since the Department of National Development and Energy was formally established on 8 December 1979, applications by 14 officers to engage in outside employment have been approved.
(2)-

No. of Current Nature of Division officers salary outside employment

$

4

13,377 After hours newspaper deliv-

eries.

4

2

18,531 Part-time lecturing

3

1

10,507 After hours taxi driving

- _ . - - " " ,...
No. of Current Division officers salary

Nature of outside employment

$

3

19,107 Part-time lecturing

3

19,933 Part-time lecturing

3

20,317 Preparation of papers for

mining year book

3

2

20,974 Part-time lecturing

3

3

24,200 Thesis assessment and part-

time lecturing

3

27,904 Preparation of papers for

mining year book

3

28,301 Part-time lecturing

Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department of Employment and Youth Affail's
(Question No. 1399)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Have any officers or employees of his Department been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many.
(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment approved in each case.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes, 28.
(2) Fourth Division
1 Model-maker, $12,678 pa: Grandstand attendant 1 Clerical Assistant Grade 1, $9,541 pa: Shop assistant 1 Clerical Assistant Grade 2, $10,417 pa: Entertainer 1 Clerical Assistant Grade 2 $10,417 pa: Model
I Clerical Assistant Grade 3$11,350pa: Shelf slacker
1 Graphic Designer Grade 1, $15,922 pa: Grandstand attendant
Third Division
Clerk Class 4, $15,546 pa: Musician 1 Clerk Class 4, $15,546 pa: Photographer I Clerk Class 4, $15,113 pa: Dance instructor I Clerk Class 4, $15,546 pa: Manager-sports shop I Clerk Class 4, $15,546 pa: Taxi driver 1 Clerk Class 4, $15,546 pa: Stipendiary steward I Clerk Class 4, $15,546 pa: Console operator I Clerk Class 4, $15,546 pa: Migrant information interpreter 1 Clerk Class 4, $15,546 pa: Honorary company director I Clerk Class 5, $16,848 pa: TAFE tutor 1 Clerk Class 5, $16,848 pa: Ambulance bearer (unpaid) I Clerk Class 5; $16,848 pa: Receptionist 1 Clerk Class 5, $17,280 pa: Lecturer 1 Clerk Class 5, $15,981 pa: Amwayagent 1 Clerk Class 5, $17,280 pa: Amway agent 1 Clerk Class 5, $17,280 pa: Musician 1 Clerk Class 6, $18,879 pa: CAE lecturer 1 Clerk Class 7, $20,618 pa: Male model I Clerk Class 7, $20,038 pa: Teacher 1 Psychiatrist Gr 2, $18,292 pa: Lecturer 1 Clerk Class 10, $25,821 pa: Writer 1 Clerk Class 10, $25,821 pa: Football commentator

Answeps to Questions

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3083

Overseas Travel: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 1444)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many officers and employees of the Department of National Development and Energy travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances, et cetera.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development ?ond Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Forty-six officers of the Department of National Development and Energy undertook 68 official visits overseas in 1979-80.
(2) The cost of these visits to the Commonwealth was approximately $283,000.

(2) What was the cost to his Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.

Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1)-

Department of Business and Consumer Affairs . . . . . . .
Trade Practices Commission
Industries Assistance Commission Prices Justification Tribunal

No. of officers
257 23 37 4

(2)-
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs . . . . . . .
Trade Practices Commission Industries Assistance Commission Prices Justification Tribunal

Cost $
36,381 2,374 5,112
488

Overseas Travel: Department ofEmployment and Youth Affairs
(Question No. 1451)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, includil'lg fares, accommodation, allowances, et cetera.
Mr N. A. Brown: The answer to the honourable members question is as follows:
(1) Eleven officers travelled overseas in 1979-80.
(2) The total cost of the travel was $62,027.
Overseas Travel: Department ofBusiness and , Consumer Affairs
(Question No. 1460)
Mr :nungey asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel including fares, accommodation, allowances, et cetera.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) T~enty-six, including 8 visits to New Zealand.
(2) $110,202.
Home T?lephone Rentals: Department of Business and Consumer Affairs
(Question No. 1538)
MI' Bungey asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully or (b) partially paid by his Department.

Recycling ofPaper: Department ofHome Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 1595)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Has any action been taken by his Department to recycle paper; if so, what action.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
My Department established a paper recycling program on 4 June 1979, and staff were advised of operating procedures by departmental circular.
Paper for recycling is collected from staff by the Registry Section and placed in central recycle bins which are ,c;leared regularly by a paper recycling firm.
Tea Services: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 1600)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many (a) full time and (b) part time staff are employed on teamaking and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (li) other offices of the Department of National Development and Energy.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in the Department in 1979-80.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) (a) (i) 8. (ii) Nil.
(b) (i) 2. (ii) Nil.
(2) (a) $81,098.
(b) Nil. Staffcontribute to other costs.

3084 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Tea Services: Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 1614)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many (a) full time and (b) part time statT are employed on tea making and distribution in (i) the Head Officc and Oi) other offices of his Department.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in his Department in 1979-80.
MI' Thomson- -The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) This Department employs:
(a) no full time tea attendants; and
(b) 10 part time tca attendants.
(i) 4 attendants provide the tea service in the Head Office of my Department.
(ii) 6 attendants provide the tea service in other offices of my Department.
(2) (a) The cost of salarics for 1979-80 was $64,193.
(b) The other charges associated in the provision of tea were:
(i) $69,488 reimbursement for tea services provided by Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services Ltd; and
(ii) $348 for uniforms and other incidental expenses.
Tea Services: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 1621)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many (a) full time and (b) part time statT are employed on tea making and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (ii) other offices of his Department.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in his Department in 1979-80.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that:
(I) (a) 0) one, (a) (ii) nil, (b) (i) two, (b) (ii) nil.
(2) (a) $14,268.08, (b) $33.00.
Travel Agencies
(Question No. 1627)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) What Australian travel agencies have collapsed in the last 3 years.
(2) What action has been taken or is contemplated by the Government to protect Australians travelling or about to travel.
Sir Phillip Lynch--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The following travel agencies operating in Australia are known to have collapsed during the last three years:

(A) Licensed Travel Agents (NSW)
(i) Ta Khattar (Consolidated Travel Services) (ii) M. and T. Fragakis (iii) AUS Student Travel Pty Ltd (iv) Kacar Entl'Orprises Pty Ltd (Contact Travel) (v) Adria Travel Agency Pty Ltd (vi) Milsons Point World Travel Pty Ltd (vii) Trail Finders Pty Ltd (viii) Comserve (No. 522) Pty Ltd (Paddington Inter-
national Travel)
(B) Unlicensed Operators (NSW)
(i) Travellers Facilities Ply Ltd (ii) M. Bartlett (Air Pacific) (iii) Port Royale Charters Pty Ltd (iv) See Australia First Pty Ltd
(C) Agents in other States/Territories
(i) Kings Travel (SA) (ii) Blue Sky Travel (ACT)
(D) Australian Offices of Overseas Operators
(i) Treasure Tours (ii) Transit Travel Pty Ltd (iii) Penn World Ltd (2) Regulation of the activities of travel agents operating in Australia falls within the responsibility of the States and Territories.
The only State/Territory to have legislated to regulate the activities of travel agents is New South Wales through its Travel Agents Registration Board. Under the New South Wales Travel Agents Act (1973) all persons, firms or corporations carrying on the business of a travel agent are required to be licensed. Members of the public have access to the travel agents compensation fund in the event of a licensed travel agent failing to account for monies entrusted to the licensee or his employee.
No other State or Territory is understood to be intending to introduce similar legislation at this time.
In 1978 the Commonwealth Government considered the introduction of legislation to be administered in conjunction with the States, to regulate the activities of travel agents operating in Australia, but as a result of objections raised by the States and industry and following advice from the Travel and Tourist Industry Advisory Council, decided n'ot to proceed with the legislation.
In deciding not to proceed with the legislation the Commonwealth had had regard to the degree of protection for the travelling public which already existed, including Commonwealth and State laws relating to protection of the consumer, the regulation of corporate bodies and crimes matters generally.
Commonwealth and State Consumer Affairs Ministers recently reviewed the desirability of licensing travel agents and decided that it should be left to each jurisdiction to take whichever action it felt appropriate.
The Australian Federation of Travel Agents is currently investigating the possibility of establishing a self-regulatory consumer protection scheme. The objective is to design, fund and administer a traveller's protection scheme which would provide the public/travellers with security in the case of financial collapse experienced by member retail travel agents, tour wholesalers and general sales agents.
Consular assistance from Australia'8 overseas missions and posts is of course available to Australians travelling abroad who find themselves stranded or in distress as a result of circumstances beyond their control including the collapse of travel agencies.

Answers to Questions

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3085

Protective Security Review
(Question No. 1750)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What decisions have been made and what action taken on Mr Justice Hope's recommendation contained in his Protective Security Review that the career structure, training and organisational structure of fire safety officers should be thoroughly examined.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
As stated by the Prime Minister in May 1980 in reply to a question upon notice (Hansard, 22 May 1980, p. 3225) my Department, in association with other relevant departments and organisations, is examining Mr Justice Hope's recommendations with respect to fire safety arrangements, including the career structure, training and organisational structure of fire safety officers.
It is expected that this examination will be completed in the near future. .
Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs
(Question No. 1878)
Mr Bungey askeq the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London Metropolitan Police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000, or about 20% by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of his Department controlled; if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in his Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) Most Departmental telephones are STD-barred and staff must book trunk calls through a switchboard. STD facilities are restricted to key officers.
(3) The Department is undertaking a feasibility study on the use of monitoring devices.
Architecture and Design Panel of the Australia Council
(Question No. 1904)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What is the current level of funding provided to the Architecture and Design Panel of the Australia Council.
(2) Has this Panel been elevated to Board status with the Australia Council; if not, will he undertake to do so, in recognition of the importance of developing the quality of the man made environment.

Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1 ) The allocation by the Australia Council to the Architecture and Design Panel in 1980-81 was $50,000.

(2) No. I am currently giving consideration to the future of

the Architecture and Design Panel.

.

Lucas Heights Atomic Energy Establishment
(Question No. 2003)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 29 April 1981:
Were requirements set down by the Australian Atomic Energy Commission around the Lucas Heights establishment, NSW, drawn up with local conditions in mind only, or were they drawn up with reference to regulations set down by (a) the International Committee for Radiation Protection (b) the Environmental Protection Agency or (c) any other international agency governing safety requirements regarding nuclear reactors.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourabkmember's question:
The requirements adopted by the Australian Atomic Energy Commission (AAEC) for the research Establishment at Lucas Heights were drawn up with local conditions in mind, and incorporated advice from the United Kingdom. The requirements complied as appropriate with the recommendations of the International Committee for Radiation Protection and are compatible with the general safety recommendations published by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
The Environmental Protection Agency, which was established in 1970 subsequent to the formulation of the AAEC requirements, is a United States Government organisation having no direct relevance to nuclear requirements in Australia.

Analysis of Suspected Fire-damaged KTCP
(Question No. 2060)
Mr West asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) Is he able to say whether an analysis has been carried out by the Western Australian Government Chemical Laboratories on a sample of suspected fire-damaged KTCP sent to it from the Australian Government Analytical Laboratories for the lAC.
(2) If so, what are the results.
(3) Is the remainder of the sample at the AGAL; if not, where is it and what has happened to it.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (3) Yes.
(2) The results of analysis have been forwarded to the Industries Assistance Commission.

Commonwealth-occupied Office Space
(Question No. 2146)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:

3086 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Further to his answers to questions No. 178 (Hansard, 24 February 1981, page 74) and No. 783 (Hansard,S May 1981, page 2005) will he also indicate, of the total Commonwealthoccupied office space, whether leased or owned, in (a) Sydney, (b) Melbourne, (c) Brisbane, (d) Adelaide, (e) Perth and (f) Hobart, what is the proportion which is located in the central business district of each of those cities.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's questioti is as follows:

PERCENTAGE OF CITY OFFICE SPACE LOCATED
IN CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS (AS AT 7 MAY 1981)

(a) Sydney

62.0

(b) Melbourne

79.6

(c) Brisbane

88.4

(d) Adelaide

61.8

(e) Perth

81.1

(f) Hobart

96.0

(Note: Figures are for office space used by civil departments and the Department of Defence. Statutory Authorities are not included.)

Fire Fighting Aircraft
(Question No. 21S6)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
( 1) Did he say in answer to question No. 45 (Hansard, 25 February 1981, page 197) that precise cost estimates for offers of fire fighting aircraft were not provided but estimates of up to $2m were mentioned.
(2) Did the Commonwealth Government receive an offer in August 1980 of the lease of one aircraft to be used in trials in live bushfire situations for a period of 3 months in the summer of1980-81 for less than $500,000.
(3) If so, has the Government ever responded to this offer.
(4) If no response was made to this offer, what is the reason, given that, in financial terms, it appears to be far better than the $2m mentioned in his answer to question No. 45.
(5) Did the Commonwealth Government receive an offer in October 1980 of the sale of 2 aircraft specifically developed to fight bushfires; if so, what response was made to this offer.
Mr Malcolm Fraset-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) An offer was made on 23 September 1980 to provide on lease one Canadair CL 215 aircraft for 3 months at a cost in the region of$515,000.
(3) I had announced on 22 September 1980 that the Government would commission a study by CSIRO to evaluate the effectiveness of using aircraft to fight bushfires. The Canadair offer was put to the then Minister for Science and the Environment and he replied on 24 October noting that the CSIRO study was intended to obtain essential,.objective information to evaluate the role of aircraft in fighting bushfires and that this objective would be unlikely to be satisfied by ad hoc demonstrations on uncontrolkd fires.
(4) See (3) above.
(5) See the ans-.yer by the Minister for Transport on 13 May 1981 to Question on Notice 814 (House of Representatives Hansard, p. 2389).

Australian Democrats: Staff
(Question No. 2247)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 13 May 1981:

(I) How many persons are employed on ~he staffs of the

members of the Australian Democrats Parliamentary Party,

other than those employed pursuant to normal electorate

entitlements.

.

(2) What are the Public Service classifications and salary levels of these persons and what other emoluments, both fiscal
and otherwise, are provided to them.

Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Two. From 1 July 1981 two additional positions will become available.

(2) The present positions are each at Assistant'Private Secretary Grade I level. The salary range of these positions is $14,602-15,380 and overtime is payable. One of the.two additional positions to become available from 1 July 1981 will be at the Ministerial Officer Grade 1 level with salary in the range of $18,356-19,559 plus Ministerial Staff Allowance of $5,868 p.a. in lieu of overtime. The other will be at Assistant Private Secretary Grade 2 level with salary $16,257-17,101 and overtime will be payable. As with ministerial and officeholders' staff, the above staff are employed under normal Public Service conditions. They do not receive any other
emoluments.

Metallurgy Graduates
(Question No. 417)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to an address by the head of the School of Metallurgy at the University of New South Wales, Professor H. Muir, on the ABC radio program Notes on the News in July 1980, which referred to the critical shortage of graduate metallurgists in Australia, and which ,,"ted that over 500 jobs for metallurgists have been advertised within the last year but the current output of metallurgy graduates from all Australian universities and colleges of advanced education is less than 100 per year.
(2) If so, and in view of the expected future expansion in the aluminium processing industry and other mineral industries which will require skilled tradesmen and technologists, will the Government take action to ensure that sufficient personnel are trained in Australia for these tasks.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No, my attention had not been previously drawn to Professor Muir's address.
(2) The Government's policy with regard to the labour market aspects of resources development was set out in the statement made by my predecessor, the Hon. R. I. Viner, MP in the House on 4 December 1980. On Thursday, 26 March 1981 the Minister for Education tabled Volume I of the report of the Tertiary Education Commission for the 1982-84 triennium. Chapter 4 of Part 1 of the Report sets out the Commission's views on the relationship between students seeking to enrol in particular disciplines, limitations which may be needed on the number of student places in particular courses and likely job opportunities for graduates.

Answers to Questions

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3087

Appointments to Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Questiou No. 1020)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
What are the (a) names, (b) dates and terms of appointment and (c) salaries of all persons appointed to the Boards

and Commissions of Statutory Authorities under his jurisdiction.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The only Statutory Authority responsible to me as Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs is the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs.
Details for the Institute are set out below:

(a) Names

(b) Dates and terms

(c) Salaries

Mr Francis Eugene Galbally Mr Michael Steven Diamond Mr Herman Huyer Miss Helen Lesnewski Professor Jerzy (George) Zubrzycki Mrs Yolanda Klempfner Mr George Lapaine
Mr Petro Georgiou Mr J. L. Menadue

2 years from 20.12.79 2 years from 20.12.79
2 years from 20.12.79 2 years from 20.12.79 2 years from 20.12.79 16.1.80-19.12.81
1 year from 20.3.80 (re-appointed on 25.3.81 until 19.12.81)
5 years from 1.2.80 ex-officio

$ 10,675 p.a. 4,300p.a. 4,300p.a. 4,300p.a. 4,300p.a. 4,300p.a.
4,300p.a.
41,286p.a. + 1,400 allowance
nil

Note: Mr Georgiou is a full-time employee and is paid a salary as a 'holder of public office'. The other seven officers named above are paid 'annual fees' for their part-time services.

Social Service Benefits
(Question No.1067)
Mr Milton asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) Will the Minister define what is meant when the Minister refers to 'people in genuine need' in relation to proposed cuts in social service benefits.
(2) What criteria are needed to establish 85 per cent incapacity for persons claiming invalid pensions.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(l) I do not understand the reference to 'proposed cuts in social service benefits'. The term 'people in genuine need' refers to people who are unable to provide for themselves from their own resources.
(2) On 7 May 1981 revised guidelines in relation to medical evaluation for invalid pensions were issued to Commonwealth Medical Officers.
The revised guidelines are:
Medical Evaluation
(a) Eligibility
To be eligible for an invalid pension a person must be permanently incapacitated for work to the extent to not less than 85 per cent or must be permanently blind.
(b) Assessment of permanence
An incapacity is considered permanent if no fundamental or marked change for the better can be expected in a person's condition in the future.
(c) Assessment ofincapacity
Incapacity is defined by the degree of permanent incapacity of a person compared with the capacity for work which that person would have had, but for his incapacity.

The comparison is to be made with regard to all work that could reasonably be regarded by the assessor as being within the claimant's capacity.
Assessment of incapacity is made having regard to the degree of the claimant's impairment which, together with relevant facts about the applicant such as age, sex, education, lack of skills and personal disabilities, constitutes incapacity. It is important to recognise that it is permanent incapacity and not permanent impairment that is relevant for invalid pension purposes.
Permanent impairment-This is a purely medical condition. Permanent impairment is an anatomic or functional abnormality of loss after maximal medical rehabilitation has been achieved, which abnormality or loss the Commonwealth Medical Officer considers stable or non-progressive at the time evaluation is made. It is always a basic consideration in the evaluation ofpermanent incapacity.
Permanent incapacity-This is not a purely medical condition. A person is permanently incapacitated or under a permanent incapacity when his actual or presumed ability to engage in gainful employment is reduced or absent because of impairment which, in turn, mayor may not be combined with other factors.
While fluctuations in the labour market are to be disregarded in the assessment of the applicant's capacity for work, that capacity must be assessed in the light of work of kinds that (subject to such fluctuations) are available in Australia, regardless of whether or not they are available at places reasonably accessible to the applicant at his current place of residence. However, age, sex, education, lack of relevant skills and personal disabilities are factors to be taken into account, together with impairment, in determining the capacity of an individual applicant for work that is not so reasonably accessible.
The fact that a severely handicapped applicant might be able to get work at a time of full or over-full employment because of the scarcity of labour would not disentitle him if he was unlikely to get work at any

3088 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Answers to Questions

reasonable foreseeable time given the general level of demand for labour in Australia.
Self-inflicted incapacity brought about for the purpose of obtaining a pension disqualifies a person from pension.
(d) Employment considerations
While it is not generally possible for a person engaged in employment to be considered as being permanently incapacitated for work all relevant factors should be considered where a person is engaging in some form of employment, including
the nature of employment (part time, sheltered, therapeutic, token);
whether employment is within the claimant's remaining capacity for work;
whether employment is compatible with the claimant's medical condition;
whether employment will continue.
The Department of Social Security may request a review of medical entitlement if a pensioner commences work.
(e) Other considerations
A person who has lost the use of both arms or legs may be considered to be permanently incapacitated, independent of their personal and employment circumstances, even when engaged in some limited employment. A similar assessment may be made if a person has suffered some other permanent impairment which is as broadly disruptive of his capacity for work as the loss of both arms or legs would be.
Youth Housing
(Question No. 1068)
Mr Scott asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawll to a report on the problems of youth housing circulated to the media ill Adelaide on 23 March 1981 which reportedly represented the views of 30 organisations, including Commonwealth and State Government Departments and community service organisations such as Emergency Accommodation Services for Youth at the YWCA and Saint Vincent de Paul.
(2) Is it a fact that in South Australia there are an estimated 6,000 homeless young persons.
(3) Has the Government been approached by the South Australian Government for an increase in funding under the Homeless Persons Assistance Act.
(4) Will the Government consider adopting the recommendations contained in the report by the South Australian Government Working Party on Youth Housing, particularly recommendations 5 (i), 5 (ii) and 5 (iii) which respectively relate to raising the rate of unemployment benefit, providing supplementary assistance to young unemployed persons living independently and increasing the unemployment rate for persons 16 and 17 years of age to that of the single adult rate if they have been living independently for a suitable qualifying period.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes. My attention has been drawn to a Press release with attached background material, dealing with the problems of youth housing, which was issued on 23 March 1981 by

a South Australian organisation called 'Shelter'. This is an organisation whose members are individuals concerned about the problems of homeless people. Many of the members are employees of welfare organisations involved in providing accommodation services, and some are employees of Government Departments. These latter are members of the organisation in their capacity as private citizens, and are not representatives of their employing Departments.
(2) A report called 'Survey of Youth Homelessness in Metropolitan Adelaide', December 1979, which was released by the Council for Homeless Persons (SA), estimated that there were 6,000 homeless young persons in Metropolitan Adelaide. Another report, entitled 'Youth Housing', which was published in June 1980 by the South Australian Council of Social Service, estimated that 9,000 young people seek housing assistance each year in Metropolitan Adelaide.
It is difficult, however, to estimate accurately the homeless youth popUlation. The estimates given above were calculated from the number of homeless young people who contacted some welfare accommodation agencies in a given survey period, usually one week. An overestimate of the population size will, of course, occur if a homeless young person approaches more than one accommodation agency during the survey period, whereas there will be an underestimate if a young person seeking temporary accommodation does not contact any welfare agency. In addition, the surveys did llot contact every possible agency which might have received requests for accommodation assistance.
The government nevertheless accepts that these estimates point to a problem on a scale which warrants serious concern. The Commonwealth has therefore offered assistance to the States to provide additional facilities for emergency accommodation for young people up to 18 years. This assistance is provided through the Youth Services Scheme and is jointly cost shared with each State Government which administers its Commonwealth funding component. Four South Australian projects providing emergency accommodation and support for youth currently receive funding under the Scheme.
(3) There is no record of an approach by the South Australian Government for an increase in funding under the Homeless Persons Assistance Act.
(4) The recommendations in the report of the South Australian Government Working Party on Youth Housing have been noted and will be taken into account by the Government in its current Review of Improved Opportunities for Youth and in the annual Budget context.
Underspending of Estimates: Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 1109)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division (a) 522-Administrative, (b) 523-Patent, Trade Marks and Design Office, (c) 540-Administrative, (d) 542-Analytical services, (e) 543-Antarctic Division, (f) 544-Commonwealth Bureau of Meteorology, (g) 545Ionospheric Prediction Service, (h) 546-Metric Conversion Board and U) 552-Australian Institute of Marine Science.
(2) Has there been an undel'spending in these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, Statement of Savings Expected in Annual Appropriations made by Acts Nos. 141 and 142Appropriation Acts (Nos. 1 and 2) 1980-81; ifso, what are the reasons.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3089

I refer the honourable member to the Minister representing the Minister for Finance's response to House of Representatives question No. 1101 (Hansard, 13 May 1981, page 2374).
Underspending of Estimates: Department of ~cience and Technology
(Questiou No. 1113)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 7 Apri11981:
(1) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division (a) 690-Administrative and (b) 693Defence Service Homes Corporation.

Recruitments Through Private Employment Agencies: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 1303)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Were any staff of his Department or statutory authorities under his aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(2) Has there been an underspending in these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, 'Statement of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos. 141 and 142-Appropriation Acts (Nos. 1 and 2) 1980-81; ifso, what are the reasons.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the answer by the Minister representing the Minister for Finance to Question No. 1101 (Hansard 13 May 1981, page 2374).

One Typist Grade 1 was recruited for the Commission of Inquiry into the Viability of the Christmas Island Phosphate Industry at a total cost of $190.13.
Industrial Action: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 1375)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers or employees in the Department of Social Security have been:

Departmental Air Travel: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 1139)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:

(a) on strike; and
(b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions, in each of the last 2 years.
(2) How many manhours were involved in these actions.
(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike; if so, on what occasions.

(1) How many travel warrants have been issued for Department of Social Security officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980to 31 March 1981.

(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what occasions.

(2) What was the total cost of this travel.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
In accordance with the Australian Archives General Disposal Schedule, all travel and freight warrant books prior to 1 July 1979 have been destroyed. Consequently the earlier information requested is not available. Also, it would require the commitment of considerable staff resources to calculate accurately the cost of the warrants issued for travel to and from Canberra in the later periods, and I am not prepared to direct that they be diverted from other essential duties. The following information is, however, available:
(1) The number of travel warrants issued in the Department during 1979-80 and 1980 to 31 March 1981 for air travel to and from Canberra is as follows:

Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

1979 1980

(1) Officers or Employees (a) on strike (aggregate absenteeism)
(b) exact figures of staff on restrictive work actions have only been kept when disciplinary action was taken. In those cases the numbers were: . . . . .
(2) Manhours involved in these actions (a) on strike . . . . .
(b) as a result of 'stand downs'

3,148
134 13,846 2,619

5,684
nil 32,999
nil

1979-80-2,411 1980-31.3.81-1,869.

(3) No officers on strike action were paid by this Department for the period of absence.

(2) The cost of all air travel for the Department (including fares and travelling allowance) was:
1979-80-$2,574,525 1980-31.3.81-$1,947,571.

(4) In 1979 officers in NSW, Victoria and Western Australia were stood down for applying work bans in support of ACOA action against the Commonwealth Employees (Employment Provisions) and Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) legislation. The details were:

3090 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Answers to Questions

NSW 129 officers Vic. 4 officers WA 1 officer-

varying periods between 17.7.79 and 2.8.79
26.7.79 to 2.8.79 30.7.79

Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department of Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 1410)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Have any officers and employees of the Department of Veterans' Affairs been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many.

(2) What is the division' and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment approved in each case.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's questioll;:
(1) Thirty-one officers and employees of the Department of Veterans' Affairs have been granted permission to engage in outside employment.
(2) The information sought by the honourable member is as follows:

State Tasmania
Western Australia New South Wales South Australia Queensland Victoria
Australian Capital Territory

No. Division

9

3rd

3rd

3rd

3rd

3rd

3rd

3rd

3rd

3rd

3

3rd

3rd

4th

34th

3rd

3rd

3

3rd

3rd

4th

3

3rd

4th

4th

8

3rd

3rd

2x3rd

3rd

4th

3rd

3rd

2

3rd

2nd

Salary
$
15,679 10,157 19,990 10,507 40,839 40,839 40,839 13,807 29,799 17,280 10,859 7,413 9,345 20,743 17,480 16,800 19,443 9,946 10,157 12,061 13,116 24,504 15,981 16,696 11,252 9,605 10,157 10,157 20,618 35,250

Adult education lecturer Taxi driver Electronic service Waitress Visiting renal physician Physician Prosthetics specialist Table tennis sales Limited general practice Part-time bookmakers clerk Assistant in wine store Kitchenhand
Waitress Lecturer Architect
Lecturer Tutor Snack bar cook Lecturer Taxi driver Taxi driver
Academic training Academic training Vocational experience Vocational experience Vocational experience Part time sales assistant Academic training Orthoses manufacturer Bookmaker

Overseas Travel: Department ofIndustry and Commerce
(Question No. 1442)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances et cetera.
Sir Phillip Lyncb-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) One hundred and seven officers and employees.
(2) The total cost was $463,220.
The above figures include the elements of the former Dcpartment of Productivity which were transferred in

November 1980 to the Department of Industry and Commerce.
Air Travel in Australia: Department of Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 1488)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What sum was paid by the Department of Veterans' Affairs, or by Departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by that Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

Answers to Questions

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3091

The information sought by the honourable memher is as follows:

Section

Actual staff (as at 1.4.81)

Airline

Payment Defence Service Homes, Internal Audit

5

$

Sub-total

71

Advance Airlines

3,800

Aeropelican Pty Ltd

700

Victoria

Air Great Lakes

200 ADP

7

Air Tasmania . .

339 Management Review

Ansett Airlines of Australia Ansett Airlines of South Australia

333,373 11,086

Medical

7

Bisjet

318 Appeals

6

Bushpilot Airways

3,497 Office of Australian War Graves

10

Clubair Pty Ltd

300 Defence Service Homes, Internal Audit

6

Countrywide Airlines

700

Davey Airlines

1,400

Sub-total

39

East-West Airlines Emu Airways . . Falcon and Sopar Transport Pty Ltd Islandair . . . . . .

75,700 430 100 806

Management Review Appeals

Queensland

Kendall Airlines

200 Office of Australian War Graves

6

Masling Commuter Services

3,900 Defence Service Homes, Internal Audit

3

MacRobertson Miller Airlines

6,923

Opal Air

76

Sub-total

13

Qantas Sandon Airlines Skywest

616

200

South Australia

143 Office of Australian War Graves

2

Southern Cross Airways

4,900 Defence Service Homes, Internal Audit

Trans-Australia Airlines Tumut Air Service

254,005 600

Sub-total

Total

704,312

Head Office: Department of Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 1514)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Are any sections of the Head Office of the Department of Veteran's Affairs not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many staff are in each.
(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so, when.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) The details of Central Office Sections and Staff of the Department of Veterans' Affairs not located in Canberra are as follows:

Section
New South Wales
ADP Management Review Repatriation Review Tribunal Medical . . . . . . . Appeals . . . . . . . Office of Australian War Graves

Actual stafr (as at 1.4.81)
38 3 4 4 6 II

Western Australia

Management Review . . . . . .

Office of Australian War Graves

5

Defence Service Homes, Internal Audit

3

Sub-total

9

Total

137

(2) Decisions to relocate units of Government employment to Canberra are taken by the Government on the advice of the Location of Australian Government Employment Committee (LAGE), an Inter-Departmental Committee chaired by the Public Service Board. The advice tendered to the Government by the LAGE Committee is based on submissions by the relevant Department and consultations with interested bodies such as staff organisations. Any plans to relocate any of the sections listed in (1) to Canberra is a matter for LAGE consideration and subsequent decision by the Government.
Home Telephone Rentals: Department of Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 1540)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of the Department of Veterans' Affairs have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully or (b) partially paid by the Department.
(2) What was the cost to the Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.

3092 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) (a) I, (b) 76.
(2) $9,097.29.
Recycling of Paper: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs
(Question No. 1581)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Has any action been taken by his Department to re-cycle paper; if so, what action.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Surplus or obsolete forms, letter heads and other proformas are used by Departmental staff as note and scribble pads. Bulk paper, e.g. computer print-out, is despatched to paper and pulp mills within the States for re-cycling. Waste paper is collected daily by contract cleaners engaged by the Department of Administrative Services and is disposed of in accordance with contract provisions.
There are no formal arrangements for Offices of the Commonwealth Employment Service outside metropolitan areas for the re-cycling of paper. Offices would be expected to comply with local arrangements concerning disposal of waste paper.
Recycling of Paper: Department of Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 1592)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Has any action been taken by the Department of Veterans' Affairs to re-cycle paper; if so, what action.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
In leased premises, the removal of unclassified waste paper is undertaken by cleaners employed by the Department of Administrative Services and recycling is usually arranged by the owners in conjunction with the Department of Administrative Services. In departmentally-owned premises, including hospitals and other institutions, arrangements exist with charitable organisations and private contractors for waste paper to be collected for recycling.
Classified waste is normally burnt or shredded under Departmental control or supervision.
The Department of Veterans' Afi'airs is conscious of the current emphasis on the need to recycle waste materials and the trend for community involvement in such projects. In all areas where waste is produced, investigations are carried out into the possibility of recycling and the means available in the area concerned.

Australian Capital Territory Fire Brigade Vehicle Maintenance

(Question No. 1776)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

(1) Is the statement in the 6th Annual Report of the Aus-
tralian Capital Territory Fire Brigade for 1979-80 that regular servicing and maintenance of vehicles by the Brigade's workshop staff kept private contractor repairs to a minimum
throughout the year an accurate indication of the vehicle maintenance and servicing policy of the Brigade.

(2) What sums were expended on Brigade vehicle repairs with private contractors in each year from 1977-78 to
1979-80.

(3) What vehicle repairs and servicing staff have been employed during these years, and what has been their cost.

Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) Yes, as only major repairs such as panel beating, machining of parts etc. have to be contracted to private industry. All basic mechanical work can be handled within the
workshop.

(2) 1977-78-$30,384.11; 1978-79-$15,752.24; 1979-80$32,215.30.

(3)-

1977-78 one motor man 1978-79 one motor man
1979-80one motor man one mechanic

Estimate $

Estimate $
14,000 15,000

18,000 21,000

39,000

Australian Capital Territory Fire Brigade Annual Report
(Question No. 1777)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Were records unavailable for inclusion in the Annual Report of the Australian Capital Territory Fire Brigade for 1979-80 because of industrial disputes during that year, if so, what records.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
All normally recorded information included in the Annual Report was tabulated. However, information for the periods 13.2.80 to 15.2.80 and 3.3.80 to 14.3.80 was not available because of non-processing of paperwork by Brigade members due to industrial disputes.

Department of the Capital Territory Representation at Meeting
(Question No. 1781)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What was the cost to his Department of being represented at the annual meeting of the Committee of Heads of Australian Herbaria and the Royal Australian Institute of Parks and Recreation in 1979-80.
(2) What benefits resulted from this representation.

Answers to Questions

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3093

Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The cost of the Department being represented at the annual meeting of the Committee of Heads of Australia Herbaria held in Alice Springs from 24 to 29.9.1979 was $526.80 and the cost of represen,tation at the Royal Australian Institute of Parks and Recreation held in Brisbane from 7 to 12.10.1979 was $1,910.85.
(2) The Department benefited from representation at the meeting of the Committee of Heads of Australian Herbaria through the discussion of scientific and management matters designed to improve and expand co-operative arrangements amongst State and Commonwealth herbaria. The effective operation of herbaria is dependent upon exchange of specimens and information between institutions. By meeting together the Heads of Herbaria are also able to resolve complex taxonomic issues which cannot be dealt with readily by correspondence.
The 52nd R.A.I.P.R. Conference held in Brisbane involved general and concurrent sessions on 'Parks, Recreation & Community'. It was attended by over 400 delegates from all Australian States and overseas representing industry and educational institutions; Municipal, State and Federal Government. The advantages were the presentation, discussion and exchange of knowledge of latest policies, approaches and techniques in the parks and recreation field.
Yarralumla Nursery
(Question No. ~782)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, On 9 April 1981:
(1) What was the total cost of operating the Yarralumla Nursery for 1979-80.
(2) What income was earned by the nursery in the same year.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The total cost of operating the Yarralumla Nursery and the annexe at Pialligo for 1979-80 was $782,583 made up of $170,118 for maintaining the grounds for public visitations and $612,465 for the cost of propagating plants.
(2) An amount of $534,434 was recovered by the Nursery in 1979-80 from sales and issues to householders, the National Capital Development Commission and Departmental projects.
MajuraOval
(Question No. 1784)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(1) What is the result of negotiations with the Australian Capital Territory Hockey Association for a long term lease of Majura enclosed oval.
(2) If a lease has been granted, what are the terms and tenure.
(3) Who is responsible for maintenance work on the oval, and what annual costs are required to be met by the Commonwealth Government.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Department has offered the Australian Capital Territory Hockey Association a lease. The Association is still considering the offer.

(2) The Hockey Association presently occupies Majura Oval on an annual tenancy at a nominal rent.
(3) Under the annual tenancy arrangements the Australian Capital Territory Hockey Association is responsible for maintenance work on the oval. The Commonwealth has undertaken to mow the grass on request not more than twelve times per annum and to bear any cost in excess of $800 in respect of the maintenance of the fixed irrigation system.
Supply ofPlants to New Householders in the Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 1787)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What was the cost of supplying plant to new householders in the Australian Capital Territory in (a) 1977-78, (b) 1978-79 and (c) 1979-80.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourble member's question is as follows:
The cost of supplying plants to new householders was:
(a) 1977-78-$121,658. (b) 1978-79-$148,762. (c) 1979-80-$124,391.
There is a component in the reserve price of leases to cover the free issue of trees and shrubs.
Northbourne Oval, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 1799)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Has Northbourne Oval been leased by the Australian Capital Territory Rugby League at an annual rental of $2,540; if so, (a) what is the duration of the lease, (b) what is the anticipated expenditure by the Commonwealth Government on the oval during the term of the lease, (c) what was the capital cost of development of the oval to the commencement of the lease, (d) who is responsible for the upkeep of the oval and associated facilities during the term of the lease and if such costs are shared, on what basis are they shared, (e) how was the rate of rental determined and (f) are other organisations permitted to use the oval; if so, under what conditions and with whose approval.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(a) Fifty years from 13 November 1979.
(b) Nil.
(c) $118,550.
(d) The lessee is responsible for the upkeep of the oval and associated facilities.
(e) One per cent of the value of improvements which were valued at $54,150 plus four per cent of the notional value of the club house site which was valued at $50,000.
(f) Yes. Subject to having the maximum hiring fee agreed to by the Commonwealth, the lessee may hire the premises or part for use by others for recreational or sporting purposes.
The lessee shall also permit the Commonwealth or any person authorised by it to use the premises on no more than four occasions in each year during the term of the lease.

3094 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Answers to Questions

Lease of Deakin Oval, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 1800)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for t.he Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Has Deakin Oval been leased by the Australian Capital Territory Soccer Federation at an annual rental of $583 per annum; if so, (a) what is the duration of the lease, (b) what is the anticipated expenditure by the Commonwealth Government on the oval during the term of the lease, (c) what was the capital cost of development of the oval to the commencement of the lease, (d) who is responsible for the upkeep of the oval and associated facilities during the term of the lease and if such costs are shared, on what basis are they shared, (e) how was the rate of rental determined and (f) are other organisations permitted permitted to use the oval; if so, under what conditions and with whose approval.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(a) Twenty-five years from 21 December 1979.
(b) Nil.
(c) $55,460.
(d) The lessee is responsible for the upkeep of the oval and associated facilities. An annual subsidy of up to $5,000 is payable to the lessee provided a turf wicket is maintained and made available to the ACT Cricket Association.
(e) One per cent of the value of improvements.
(f) Yes. The ACT Cricket Association uses the oval during the period 1 October to 31 March in each year, or such other times as approved by the Commonwealth, for the purpose of cricket matches and cricket practice sessions. The field must also be made available to other organisations nominated by the Commonwealth upon such terms and conditions as the Commonwealth may determine. Subject to having the maximum hiring fee agreed to by the Commonwealth the lessee may hire the premises or part for use by others for recreational or sporting purposes.

centralised systems. A comparison may be considered once the connection of these systems is completed.
(3) No such convictions are shown in Brigade records.
False Fire Calls, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 1827)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) Was 38.8 per cent of total firefighting time spent by the Fire Fighting Section of the Australian Capital Territory Fire Brigade at false alarms at Government premises in 1979-80.
(2) Does this affect the contribution rate calculated for inclusion in the Canberra Mulicipal Accounts as Brigade time occupied on municipal functions; if so, how.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) Yes. It is incorporated as time spent by the Brigade in the National/Territorial sectors as opposed to the Municipal sector. A resulting effect overall is the reduction of the Municipal contribution rate for 1979-80.
Aborigines on Utopia Station, Northern Territory
(Question No. 1846)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
How many Aborigines on Utopia Station, Northern Territory, are in receipt of (a) aged pensions, (b) unemployment or sickness benefits and (c) other forms of Commonwealth social security payments.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
As at 9 April 1981, the number of social security recipients on Utopia Station was as follows:

False Fire Calls, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 1826)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Were 2,820 calls of a total 4,027 to the Australian Capital Territory Fire Brigade in 1979-80 false calls; if so, what action has been taken to reduce this figure.
(2) Has any comparison been made with the number of false calls in other cities; if so, what are the results of these comparisons.
(3) How many persons were convicted of offences relating to false fire calls in 1979-80.

Type of income supplement

Number

Age pension . . . . . . .

17

Unemployment or sickness benefit

77

Family allowance

46

Supporting parent's benefit

2

Wife's pension

11

Other pension

10

Social security claim forms do not provide for identification of the racial extraction of claimants. I am advised that it is
likely that all the pension and benefit recipients are Aboriginals, but that a few family allowance recipients are probably
of European extraction.

Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Of the records held 2,820 calls were false alarms and were treated as potential fire situations until otherwise established. A centralised fire alarm system (computerised), once fully operational, will indicate whether a call is either a fire or a line or equipment fault. Turnout to the latter two types will not be required.
(2) No such comparison has been made. Many other major fire brigades are presently connecting to computerised and

Northern Territory Disabled Persons: Veterans' Affairs Projects
(Question No. 2055)
Mr Tambling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 6May1981:
(I) What financial appropriations have been allocated by the Department of Veterans' Affairs for use in the Northern Territory for projects to assist the disabled during 1980-81.

Answers to Questions

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3095

(2) For what specific projects has this sum been allocated.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Approximately $57,000 has been allocated to cover the expense of conducting the Repatriation Limb and Appliance Service centred in the Casuarina Hospital, Darwin.
(2) The sum has been allocated for provision of artificial limb and orthotic appliances for Repatriation and community patients in the Northern Territory.
Northern Territory Disabled Persons: Department of Home Affairs and the
Environment
(Question No. 2058)
Mr Tambling asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) What financial appropriations have been allocated by his Department for use in the Northern Territory for projects to assist the disabled in 1980-81.
(2) For what specific projects has this sum been allocated.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No financial appropriations have been allocated by the Department of Home Affairs and Environment for use in the Northern Territory for projects to specifically assist the disabled in 1980-81.
Fisheries Surveys
(Question No. 2259)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 13 May 1981:
(1) Are fisheries surveys, including studies of the demersal fish and benthic invertebrates of 8ass Strait, demersal fish in Western Australia and pelagic fish off the Northern Territory, currently being undertaken by the research vessel Hai Kung from the National Taiwanese University staffed by 10 scientists of which only 2 are Australian.
(2) If so, (a) why is this research program reliant on a Taiwanese research vessel, research facilities and scientific manpower and (b) cannot this type of research program draw on Australian research facilities and manpower.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Hai Kung was in Australian waters from 26 January to 17 April 1981 during which time there were no less than two Australians on board at any time. In total, 18 Australians took part in various aspects of the research including representatives from the CSIRO, Tasmania,Victoria, South Australia, Western Australia and the Northern Territory. In some areas as many as five Australians were involved in the research at one time.
(2) (a) and (b) Australia has research programs directed towards each of the topics mentioned, conducted by Commonwealth and State Fisheries research organisations and Museums. In 1979, the CSIRO Division of Fisheries Research was strengthened by chartering the 53m research vessel Soela and increasing the numbers of research staff in order, inter alia, to further study fisheries resources in olir northern and north western waters.

For many years Australian scientists have participated in co-operative research cruises with their overseas colleagues on an opportunity basis. Such co-operation strengthens links be-
tween scientists and provides an additional and cost effective means for Australia to broaden its understanding of the waters surrounding the continent.

Fisheries Research
(Question No. 2260)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 13 May 1981:
(1) Which Australian States are presently collaborating with the Commonwealth in respect of the fisheries research being carried out by the Hai KUlig, a research vessel from the National Taiwan University.
(2) What is the cost to the Commonwealth for funding this research effort.
(3) Will the research findings be available to Taiwanese fishing interests, for example, the Taiwanese Provincial Fisheries Bureau, or any other commercial fishing interest in Taiwan.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Tasmania, Victoria, South Australia, Western Australia and the Northern Territory.
(2) $12,102, comprised of $7,677 in living and overtime allowances for staff and $4,425 in travel costs.
(3) Yes. A report on the research findings produced by the National Taiwan University will be provided to the Department of Primary Industry. Records of the vessel's operations were maintained by Australian participants in the expedition. The results will be made available to the public and the Australian fishing industry through fisheries magazines and scientific journals.

National Soil Conservation Program

(Question No. 2269)

Mr Kerin asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:

( 1) What soil conservation programs were under way at the time of the Review of Commonwealth Functions.

(2) Had any preparation been undertaken to establish a national soil conservation program.

(3) How many Commonwealth Government employees were working on projects directly related to soil conservation programs and what were their designations.

(4) What Commonwealth Government bodies were involved in administering the soil conservation programs.

(5) Will the Commonwealth Government have any involvement in soil conservation following the report of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions.

(6) What is the justification of the Government's belief that soil conservation works are the responsibility of the States
given that it recognised the national importance of soil conservation in 1980.

(7) How much of the $3.2m for a national soil conservation program promised by the Commonwealth Government in 1980 has been allocated to date.

(8) What are the major areas of soil conservation on which

the funds have been spent.

.

(9) Do the findings of the Review Committee in relation to soil conservation programs mean that research presently being

3096 REPRESENTATIVES 3 and 4 June 1981

Answers to Questions

undertaken by the CSIRO into soil conservation will now cease.
(10) Will the Commonwealth Government still allow full deductibility of capital expenditure by a primary producer on soil conservation.
Mr Aothony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) None.
(2) Guidelines and administrative arrangements for a National Soil Conservation Program had been prepared in consultation with State soil conservation authorities.
(3) Two, mainly in relation to (2) above: A Clerk, Class 11 and a Clerk, Class 9.
(4) See (1) above.
(5) Yes, as appropriate through Commonwealth/States consultative forums, such as the Standing Committee on Soil Conservation, the Australian Agricultural Council and the Australian Water Resources Councii!.
(6) In its response to the Commonwealth/States collaborative soil conservation study report, the Government drew attention to various aspects of soil erosion which could have a major impact on national economic indicators, but it stressed that primary responsibility for soil conservation rested with landholders, local and State governments.
(7) and (8) $3m was committed for a start to a National Soil Conservation Program in 1981-82; no forward commitments had been made in respect of this sum at the time of the decision of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions.
(9) No.
(10) Yes.
Control of Plague Locusts
(Question No. 2272)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(1) Is control of plague locusts now to be entirely a State responsibility (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1847).
(2) What plans does the Government have for the Commonwealth employee currently associated with the Plague Locust Commission.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Control of plague locusts has always been a State responsibility. By agreement with the States, the Australian Plague Locust Commission, which consists of six Commissioners (two from the Commonwealth and one each from the contributing States) and a Director assisted by permanent staff, engages in operations designed to combat outbreaks or potential outbreaks of the Australian plague locust in New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Queensland, which in the opinion of the Commission are likely to result in damage to ruralindustries in another State.
(2) The general approach and procedures concerning staffing relating to the implementation of Government decisions following the Review of Commonwealth Functions have been detailed by the Public Service Board. These include the situation where a function is to be transferred to the States. Any change in Commission staffing arrangements will be in accord with these guidelines.

Expenditure on Wool Promotion
(Question No. 2273)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(I) What was the level of Commonwealth expenditure on wool promotion in (a) 1978-79, (b) 1979-80 and (c) 1980-81.
(2) What are the implications for wool growers of fixing expenditure for the next three years at $60m (Hansard, 30 April 1981, pages 1834 and 1847).
(3) What is the level of grower contribution to wool promotion.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (3) The level of Government grant and grower contribution by way of Wool Tax for wool promotion in each of the three years has been as follows:

Year

Commonwealth

Grower

grant contribution*

1978-79 1979-80 1980-8\

$m

$m

21.3

32.7

14.0

41.3

20.0

(Est) 41.75

- Grower contribution from Wool Tax. Contributions for 1978-79 and 1979-80 included a small component for marketing administration expenses.
(2) The announced decision of the Government to contribute $20m for wool promotion in each of the next three years provides a certainty of that amount of income for wool promotion planning purposes.
It enables also a firm estimation to be made of the residual amount of funding which would have to be found by the wool industry to finance proposed wool promotion programs. It provides a clear indication also of the determination of the Australian Government to assist in ensuring the best interests of wool producers, and through the promotion of wool consumption the best interests also of the other areas of the wool trade.

Storage Capacity for Wool
(Question No. 2274)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(1) On what basis will minimum storage capacity for wool be determined (Ha/lsard, 30 April 1981, page 1847).
(2) What action will the Government take if the minimum capacity proves to be inadequate.
(3) What would be the cost of this action in comparison with maintaining existing storage capacity.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I have been informed that the Australian Wool Corporation regards an eight months supply of wool as the minimum storage capacity required.
(2) In an emergency, by block stacking, this area could provide storage for over six million bales or about 18 months production of wool.
(3) Action foreshadowed in (2) would entail some additional costs but the maintenance of existing storage capacity may also require significant capital outlays on the repair and modernisation of some stores.

Answers to Questions

3 and 4 June 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3097

Use in Australia of Americallese
(Question No. 2319)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 26 May 1981:
(1) Did the notice placed on the Press Gallery Notice Board in Parliament House by the Honours Secretariat on 12 May 1981 say that as a mark of respect to the late General Sir John Wilton, flags will be half-masted on all Commonwealth Buildings.
(2) Is half-masted a particular military expression; if so, did it originate from General Haig, the Secretary of State of the United States of America.
(3) Is it more accurate to say that flags will be flown at half-mast.
(4) What symbolic importance can be deduced from this apparent ad hoc adoption of Americanese.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) No.
(3) No. The Oxford English Dictionary recognises 'halfmasted', and records an example of its usage in England in 1891.
(4) As the Oxford English Dictionary identifies the term in English usage, it is not, therefore 'Americanese'. The honourable member would seem to be hoist with his own petard.
Television Translators
Mr Sinclair--On 13 May 1981 (Hansard, page 2297) Mr Tuckey asked me as Minister for Communications the following question, without notice:
I refer the Minister of Communications to the recent amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act which allow community groups to erect national television translators. Can the Minister advise the House of the number of applications that have been received as a result of this legislation? Can he further state when the residents of Howick and Condingup in the Esperance Shire might receive approval of their applications?
The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Expressions of interest relating to the establishment of translators which may be licensed to relay national (ABC) television programs have been received for seven such services.

The group which has expressed an interest in establishing a privately funded translator to relay national (ABC) television programs to Howick and Condingup in the Esperance Shire is presently considering the options open to it. The most expeditious of these options would appear to be donation of the transmission facility to the Government'so that it will become part of the National Broadcasting Service at the time programming commences. Under these circumstances it would not be necessary for the group to obtain a licence for the translator and the project could proceed with a minimum of delay.
Should the group decide to pursue the option of applying for a licence to operate the translator as a privately owned outlet of the National television service, it is unlikely that the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal would be able to grant a licence until well into 1982.
This delay is entirely usual and is a result of the administrative processes involved in preparation and distribution of a draft planning proposal, preparation of a final planning proposal, the calling of applications for a licence and the actuallicence inquiry by the Tribunal. In addition to the time taken for administrative proc.esses, there are statutory periods set aside to allow interested parties to comment on draft planning proposals and to allow applications for the licence to be submitted to the Tribunal.
Commonwealth Census
Mr Malcolm Fraser-On 31 March 1981 (Hansard, page 1092) Mr Les Johnson asked me a question, without notice, concerning the Commonwealth census.
The following is in answer to the honourable member's question:
A circular has been sent to all Commonwealth Departments and Authorities seeking their co-operation in the conduct of the 1981 Census, and advising that public servants will be allowed to accept employment as temporary Census field officers whilst on leave from their regular employment and to retain the additional payment for the Census work.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics has advertised widely for temporary field staff for the Census and it is open to anyone to apply. The ABS has also sought the assistance of the Commonwealth Employment Service in specifically drawing the attention of those registered with them to the availability of this work. However, despite the unemployment situation, in a number of localities response to the advertisement has been disappointing.
Although the ABS has obtained the approval of the Public Service Board to employ public servants for this work, preference will be given, as far as practicable, to the recruitment of suitable people who are not already in employment.


