House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 123, 1981 Tuesday, 26 May 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2507

Tuesday, 26 May 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2.15 p.m., and read prayers.
DISTURBANCE IN KING'S HALL
Mr Sinclair-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. Quite obviously the noise that is presently coming from King's Hall will affect the proceedings of the Parliament. I wonder whether some action might be taken so that Parliament can meet in a proper way and without interruption.
Mr SPEAKER-The point of order raised by the Leader of the House is, of course, not a surprise to me because I heard the noise as I came into the chamber.. I have been aware of the noise all morning and I have considered very seriously what action should be taken. I have come to the conclusion that to take any action which would result in any forcible removal would probably be exactly what the protestors would wish. I am not prepared to allow the protest to prevent the Parliament from continuing to sit. Therefore, I think it would be best for us all if we proceeded with the business of the House forthwith.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Trans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in:
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Campbell, Mr Humphreys, Mr Hurford, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Morris.
Petitions received.

1. The hotel industry in Australia is long-established and a valuable part of the community of this nation, providing places where the people may partake of the three basic needs of life: a place to eat, a place to drink, a place to sleep.
2. The hotel industry is accepted throughout the nation as occupying an important place in the social and economic activities of Australia.
3. The hotel industry is almost entirely within the private sector and makes a large contribution to the government in taxes of various kinds.
4. The hotel industry has a need to sustain an appropriate level of turnover and growth, to make profit, and to sustain and improve the level of employment.
5. The hotel industry of Australia is gravely concerned at published reports that the Government intends to increase excise charges on beer in the forthcoming Budget.
6. Sales of beer constitute the major source of income of most of the industry's 5811 hotels in Australia.
7. The very steep rises in beer excise in 1975 and 1978 severely retarded the growth of the Australian hotel industry.
8. Any further increases in excise on beer in the 1981 Budget would further retard the industry at a time when growth is essential to maintaining economic viability and the ability to serve the constantly growing needs of the community.
9. Such is its significance as a community requirement, beer occupies a place on the Consumer Price Index, and any alteration to its cost to the community would have an inflationary effect.
10. Any increase in excise would result in and force the hotel industry to pass on such increase to the consumer by way of higher prices for beer.
II. Higher excise wQuld be only the starting point for an upward spiral in beer prices because of the presence of other factors, such as State Licence Fee taxes, which are directly linked to excise rates.
12. The hotel industry of Australia already is gravely handicapped by heavy excise and other tax imposts, its growth is at a standstill; and, inevitably must decline if beer excise is increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives:
1. Recognise the importance and place of the Australian Hotel industry in the social and economic life of the nation.
2. Accept that the viability of the hotel industry is essential to the maintenance of employment opportunities and stability of the industry is essential to enable it to continue to provide for the hotel needs of the nation in this period of growing population and increasing tourism.
And further, that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives resist and reject any move to increase excise on beer.

Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth: '

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bourchier and Mr Les McMahon. Petitions received.

2508 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Petitions

Bendigo College of Advanced Education
To the Honourable, the Speaker and Memhers of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully petition:
That the government will act to reverse the decision to cease funding professional engineering education at Bendigo College of Advanced Education, since the removal of engineering studies from this College would seriously restrict educational opportunity for citizens in a large region of Victoria.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bourchier.
Petition received.
Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia, respectfully calls for:
The immediate and unconditional withdrawal of any proposals to deny unemployment benefits to unemployed people under ]8 years old.
That the level of benefits for all unemployed people, and including people receiving sickness benefits and pensions, be raised to at least 120 percent of the poverty line.
That future employment policies be devoted to job creation and the restoration of full employment rather than the evasion of this responsibility by hiding the unemployed in short term training and education schemes.
Public acknowledgement of the fact that unemployment is the result of insufficient jobs and not the fault of any minority group, the education system or the unemployed themselves.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

Toxic Shock Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned by the threats to women's health and lives posed by Toxic Shock Syndrome, and urge the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
(1) Tampons, sanitary napkins, vaginal deodorants an.d similar sanitary products to be re-classified under Therapeutic Agents (not under "Cosmetics" as at present), in order to bring them under the scrutiny of the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee. We believe manufacture must be under the strictest hygienic conditions.
(2) After fe-classification, we urge an immediate government-funded inquiry into all aspects of manufacture and content of these products. This must lead to: (i) contents of product and instructions for correct usage to be shown on packaging; (ii) removal of synthetic fibres, chemicals or ingredients that are potentially or actually harmful to users.
(3) Allocation of extra funding for ongoing research by the National Health and Medical Research Council into these products, results of this research to be made public to ensure all health workers and potential users are fully informed. This campaign of public education would necessitate multilingual distribution of the information where appropriate.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert possible threats posed to women's health by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.

by Mr Ewen Cameron.
Petition received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
A substantial contribution to Australia's economy by the payment of taxation and to the quality of life of fellow Australians, is made by parents in the work-force who have preschool children.
Taxation relief for adequate child-care is necessary to enable these parents to avail themselves of child-care facilities in order to take paid employment.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that tax-payers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other tax-payers can deduct business expenses from their assessable income.

Pensions
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That there is an urgent need to ensure that the living standard of pensioners will not decline, as indeed, the present level of cash benefits in real terms requires upward adjustment beyond indexation related to the movement of the Consumer Price Index, by this and other means your petitioners urge that action be taken to:
1. Adjust all pensions and benefits quarterly to the Consumer Price Index, including the 'fixed' 70's rate.
2. Raise all pensions and benefits to at least 30 per cent of the Average Weekly Earnings.
3. Taxation relief for pensioners and others oflow incomes by:
(a) The present static threshold of $75 per week for taxation purposes be increased to $100 per week.
(b) A substantial reduction in indirect taxation on consumer goods.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Campbell.

by Mr Cohen.

Petition received.

Petition received.

Petitions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2509

Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned Austi:alian citizens showeth:
That the last increase in the Supplementary Assistance or rent allowance payable to Invalid and Age pensioners was made in 1974;
That since that time, average weekly rents, as gauged by increases in average Queensland Housing Commission rents, have risen by approximately 150 per cent and continue to rise at an alarming rate.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will at the earliest opportunity index Supplementary Assistance to increases in the cost of living by the same biannual process applied to increases in the pension itself.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Rosemount Repatriation Hospital
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled~ The petition of undersigned Australian citizens showeth:
Rosemount Repatriation Hospital has been of inestimable value to eligible repatriation beneficiaries for many years, and the closure or dispersal of the facilities available at the hospital would be a retrograde step.
The proposed decision to close Rosemount Repatriation Hospital through active discouragement by departmental administrative officers of any further referrals by medical officers of patients for medically prescribed occupational therapy is objectionable.
Closure of Rosemount Repatriation Hospital would severely disadvantage veterans in Brisbane's northern suburbs, as well as their relatives and friends who would be required to travel a great distance in order to visit hospitalised veterans at either of the two alternative repatriation hospitals.
Closure of Rosemount Repatriation Hospital and transfer of patients to Greenslopes would greatly add to the administrative burden of that repatriation and general hospital.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the government will reverse its announced decision to close the Rosemount Repatriation Hospital.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education Fees
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That public investment in tertiary education in the form of Federal Government funding is an investment in Australia's future and enables Australia to meet the demands of technological innovation.
That grave concern has been generated as a result of the Government's decisions to:
(a) abolish the education research and development committee,
(b) terminate special support for educational research, (c) scale down in-house and contracted research activities
of the Department of Education,

(d) scale down participation in international education activities, particularly UNESCO and OECD,
(e) further tighten already restrictive eligibility guidelines for TEAS,
(f) supplement TEAS assistance by means of a loan scheme,
(g) phase in tuition fees for students undertaking degrees and diplomas subsequent to an initial tertiary qualification,
(h) reduce grants to universities and colleges to take account of fee income,
(i) completely abolish 30 colleges of advanced education and
U) scale down various engineering schools in colleges of advanced education around Australia;
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will rescind these regressive decisions and desist from obvious attempts to pave the way for a complete re-introduction of tertiary fees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Privacy and Personal Information
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Paragraphs 107 and 108 of the Privacy and Personal Information discussion paper number 14, brought down by the Law Reform Commission in June 1980, undermines the family unit and the authority of parents, which is the Christian basis of our society, by proposing that "between 12 and 16 years, a child should be entitled to object to disclosure of information to a parent."
It is your petitioners sincere belief that:
(a) an adolescent between the ages of 12 and 16 is not at a mature enough stage of life to decide whether or not the disclosure of information to a parent will be in the best interests of the adolescent.
(b) as a record keeper has no responsibility for the child, and as his moral standards may be different to those of a parent, he should not be permitted to come between child and parent.
(c) a parent has a unique position which may enable him/her to perceive a situation that the record keeper does not. The parent must therefore be aware of the problem if remedial action is to be taken, and has the right to guide the child in the direction he/she feels fit.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Members of the House of Representatives will reject the recommendation of the Law Reform Commission and find some other means to protect children from the excessive abuse of some parents.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dobie.
Petition received.
Defence Service Home Loans
To the Honourable, the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That all members of the Women's Services 1939-45 War qualify as 'Australian Soldier' under the Defence Service

2510 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Petitions

HO~les Act for loans because on voluntarily joining the Aus- ~rahan ~orces they took the ?ath to resist His Majesty's enemIes maklOg themselves available for combat duty in War Zones, and according to Acts and Regulations of the period the Military women had enlisted for service anywhere, some Naval women to sail in any waters, with all servicewomen available for service in PapuaNew Guinea.
As those membe.rs of the.~oyal Australian Navy, the Aus-
tralian Imperial Force-and the Royal Australian Air Force of
1939-45 War who;-.~re l]:2k ~~nt to War Zone~ are granted
loans, refusal to grant ellgtbility to all Ex-serVicewomen of
1939-45 Waris unjust and unfair.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that you amend the

DefenceSetvlce Homes Act by repealing Sub-section 4 (2A)

(b) (c) (d) of the Principal Act as amended by No. 137 of

R1o9y7~8 l

and grant eligibility to all Australian Naval Service,

members of the the Australian

Women's Women's

Army Service, the Women's Auxiliary Australian Air Force,

the Australian Army Medical Women's Service, and the Vol-

untary Aid Detachment of 1939-45 War.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Harris.

Petition received.

(ii) long waiting periods in out-patients (iii) services, e.g. X-ray and Pathology will be reduced (iv) statfwill be reduced (v) possible abolition of teaching hospitals and centralis-
ation of training facilities for doctors and nurses (vi) closing down of small country hospitals
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will request the Government to re-examine its public hospital funding arrangements, the impact of these arrangements on lower income groups mentioned in (1.) above and increase funding to the States to ensure that the undesirable effects mentioned in (2.) above do not occur.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

Labelling ofCosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of Cosmetic Companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were subjected to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives wiIl:
Legisate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:

(1) That merchant seamen have in the past served in theatres of war; they have been decorated for valor following war action; they have been prisoners of war and should therefore be entitled to sin1i1ar pension rights and medical benefits as regular servicemen.
(2) That by being denied the entitlements, such as pensions and medical benefits, which other war veterans receive, they are thereby being discriminated against.
Your petitioners there for humbly pray that the Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act (1920) Section 100 (d) (iv) to take account of war-related service by merchant seamen during World War 2.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

(1) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.
(2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Public Hospital Funding
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That the Federal Government's shifting of responsibility for funding of public hospitals onto the State Governments has placed a disproportionate and onerous burden onto lower income groups, but particularly on large families; single income families; the chronically ill; those with recurrent illnesses and those on fixed incomes.
2. That included in the undesirable effects on the public hospital system in Queensland will be:
(i) long waiting times for non-urgent surgery

Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed mining leases against the advice of conservationists and a State Government sponsored Public Inquiry.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse req1lests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

Petitions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2511

Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of we the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we oppose any expansion of the facilities of Kingsford-Smith Airport which entails the building of a new runway as it would have the following detrimental effects.
(1) The loss of one mile of waterfront including Lady Robinson's Beach and a huge part of Botany Bay.
(2) The loss of up to 1,230 houses and a drop in value of remaining neighbouring properties.
(3) The creation of more noise pollution in the area.
(4) The creation of more traffic congestion on streets leading to and from the airport.
(5) The forced diversion of Cook's River andfurther damage to the ecology of the area.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government will not consider satisfying the airport needs of Sydney by extending Kingsford-Smith Airport and that any decisions related thereto are not taken before there is an opportunity for adequate consultation with any community particularlyaffected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les J oltnson.
Petition received.
Georges River: Pollution
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That the pollution problems caused by the proliferation of the Brazilian weed Salvinia molesta in the Georges River, New South Wales:
(a) poses a serious health risk to the community; (b) has caused severe damage to the environment; (e) poses a potential additional threat to the famous
Georges River oyster industry already affected by oil spills in Botany Bay.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Commonwealth will provide immediate financial assistance to the State and local government authorities combatting the problem and ensure that all Commonwealth instrumentalities along the Georges River are not contributing to the pollution problem.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MI' Les Johnson.
Petition received.
Botany Bay
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of certain citizens respectfully shows that:
(a) The continued despoilation of the natural environment of the Botany Bay region will result in the loss of a unique part of the National Estate.
(b) The oil spills from ships and from installations adjoining Botany Bay have threatened the viability of the valuable export orientated oyster industry in the region.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Federal Government supply the funds required to acquire additional land for parks in the region to augment the natural environment, and

take action to minimise the incidence of oil spills in Botany Bay.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Ml' Les Johnson.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education Fees
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) the financial situation of students enrolled at Australian post-secondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) The imposition of tuition fees for second degrees and post graduate degrees will deter many able persons from enr011ing in such courses and further preserve higher education for the rich.
(iii) The introduction of a loans scheme, subsequent review of the level of TEAS and the tightening of the eligibility criteria for TEAS will cause great financial hardship and will deter students from enrolling in tertiary institutions.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
1. Post-secondary tuition fees not be re-introduced for any courses or for any category of students.
2. The visa charges upon private overs,eas 'students be removed immediately.
3. The Government reverse its decision to introduce a loans scheme and instead increase and extend TEAS scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr J ull.
Petition received.
Georges River: poliution
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of tlie House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Australii!'respectfully showeth:
That we are gravely concerned by the state of the Georges River, the failure of authorities to ensure that the river flows pure and unimpeded, the hazard to health posed by the river and the fact that the river has become a drain rather than remaining a natural stream.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament appropriate funds to the New South Wales Government and relevant authorities so that effluent from the Glenfield Sewerage Treatment Works can be piped to Malabar and that measures can be put in train which will remove weed growth and allow the river to be cleaned up and made the beautiful waterway it once was.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrKerin.
Petition received.
Medical Records
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

2512 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Petitions

That we are gravely concerned by the invasion of privacy caused by Government agents seizing patients' medical records.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, should:

that annual budget allocations in the area of children's services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.

Legislate to protect the private and confidential nature of medical records from scrutiny except on the express and informed consent of the patient or an order from a presiding judge.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr McLean. Petition received.
Human Rights in Romania
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

Petition received.
Soviet Passenger Cruise Vessels
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Owing to an overwhelming and continuous demand by the Australian people for a cruise service within the economic scope of the working man and his family, we request the Government to lift the ban placed on Soviet Passenger Cruise Vessels entering Australian Ports.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

That the Romanian Government is committing genocide against the three million strong native born Hungarian population in Romania, as defined in Articles II and III of the United Nations Convention on the Crime of Genocide, which facts are well documented in the reports of the Amnesty International, the Minority Rights Group, the International League of Jurists, et cetera.
That the Article IV of the Convention states that: 'Persons committing genocide or any other acts enumerated in Article III shall be punished, whether they are constitutionally responsible rulers, public officials or private individuals.'
That the Article VIII of the Convention states: 'Any contracting party may call upon the competent organs of the United Nations to take such actions under the Charter of the United Nations as they consider appropriate for the prevention and suppression of acts of genocide or any of the other acts enumerated in Article III.'
As Australia is a Contracting Party to the Convention on Crime of Genocide, and that the Joint Committee for Foreign Affairs and Defence has already established precedents by having investigated Human Rights violations in other countries,
Your petitioners therefore pray:
(1) That the Joint Committee for Foreign Affairs and Defence to take up an investigation into the alleged genocide activities of the Romanian Government against its three million native born Hungarians in Romania; and
(2) That if such investigation should establish that Romania has been engaged in acts of genocide against its Hungarian minorities to call upon the competent organs of the United Nations to take such action under the Charter of the United Nations as they consider appropriate for the prevention and suppression of acts of genocide or any other acts enumerated in the United Nations Convention on Crime ofGenocide.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr McLean.
Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of childrens services, which has been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 bUdget. And further,

by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Trade Unions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that we are gravely disturbed by the actions of militant unions and the ACTU, the failure of the President of the ACTU to assist positively in settling the dispute which has caused massive losses to Qantas our National Airline, and we applaud the action of the Government in using RAAF planes to rescue Australians stranded abroad.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament and the Government should be of firm resolve not to permit such unions to hold the country to ransom and continue to take a forceful and resolute stand against such union militancy.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.
Vitamins and Minerals
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That this is a petition of protest to the proposed legislation to change the standards of vitamin and mineral remedies, which if implemented will make such remedies therapeutically insignificant. Remedies with therapeutic significance are proposed to be prescribed by medical practitioners only.
We as tax payers respectfully demand the right to eat and purchase the vitamins and minerals we choose without Government or medical intervention.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Spender.
Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services
'To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully showeth:
1. That we are gravely concerned at the lack of Children's services within the City of Northcote.

Petitions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2513

2. That we are dismayed at the refusal of the Department of Social Security (Child Care Division) to fund a Family Day Care Program within the City of Northcote.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will ensure adequate funds for Children's Services will be made available so that Family Day Care may be provided within the City of Northcote.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrHowe.
Petition received.
AirFares
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Australian Capital Territory respectfully showeth:
1. That we oppose the massive increase of 30.7 per cent in air fares from Canberra to other capital cities compared with the average increase of7.4 per cent.
2. That this will cause serious hardship for many Canberra families who will not be able to afford to see their relatives from other parts of Australia.
3. That the ordinary families of Canberra should not be singled out for such massive increases and should receive equal treatment with the rest of Australia.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Federal Government take immediate action to adjust air fares to and from Canberra in line with the average increase of 7.4 per cent or to compensate the citizens of Canberra for this massive increase in air fares.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Kelly.
Petition received.
Vehicle Testing Service: Phillip, Australian Capital Territory
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned electors of the Division of Canberra respectfully showeth that:
(1) Members of the public are seriously concerned at the drop of the high standard of vehicle testing, when this service is handed over to private enterprise.
It is well known that State testing of vehicles, where it occurs, is considerably inferior to that which takes place in the Australian Capital Territory.
(2) Considerable capital has been expended to further improve the service at Phillip. This taxpayers money should not be wasted.
(3) If vehicles are to be tested by private enterprise, the public will have to pay a fee.
If given the option, they would rather pay this fee to a government agency in the knowledge that the findings of the test would be completely un-biased, whereas through private enterprise, this may not always be the case.
(4) Southside population of Canberra are entitled to the service provided by the Phillip office. It would be difficult to give this service at Dickson due to the limitations of the building.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Kelly.
Petition received.

Rodeos: Australian Capital Territory
To the Honourable the Speaker and the Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of the Australian Capital Territory respectfully showeth:
That we are opposed to rodeos as we believe them to be cruel and to cause animals to suffer needlessly. We can see no useful purpose to humanity by rodeos nor do we feel that animals should be exploited in this manner.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that all rodeos be banned within the Australian Capital Territory.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Kelly.
Petition received.
Staging of American B-52 Bombers
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned in the Northern Territory respectfully showeth:
That the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a refuelling and Rest and Recreation base for American B-52 bombers:
Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of all Australians, ill that it established a stronger potential of Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the USA and another power.
Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of whether B-52's: (a) Carried nuclear weapons (b) were engaged in bombing missions against another
State. Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconceivably with United States foreign policies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy. Violates democratic procedures in committing the Australian nation to participation in future wars without due consultation and informed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the militarisation of the Indian Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region. Jeopardises the welfare of the Citizens of Darwin, in that noise pollution and the threat of accidental radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents. Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of Peace in the Pacific region and violates Australia's commitment to the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location in Australia, as a base or depot for American B-52 bombers. And that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrKent.
Petition received.
Two-airline Policy
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members iof the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the present two airline domestic policy of the Commonwealth Government.

2514 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Notices ofMotions

That this policy has resulted in expensive airfares and poor service and discourages tourists from the Eastern States visiting WA and vice versa.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Govern- .ment will look favourably on our petition and formulate an airline policy providing for greater competition so that prices and service are determined by free market forces.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr McLean.

WESTERN AUSTRALIA: FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS
Notice of Motion
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House requires the Government to include in its financial arrangements with Western Australia a provision to ensure that Western Australia receives no less in real terms than it did in 1980-81.

Petition received.

WESTERN AUSTRALIA: HOSPITAL

MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS

ARRANGEMENTS

Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime

Notice of Motion

Minister)-I inform the House that the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) left Australia on 21 May to attend the fortieth anniversary celebrations of the battles of continental Greece and Crete. He will also be visiting Britain for talks with British defence authorities as well as visiting Malaysia

Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House insists that the Government maintain the existing hospital arrangements with Western Australia insofar as these arrangements guarantee open and free access for all Western Australians to the public hospitals of the State.

and Singapore for discussions with government and defence leaders. The Minister for Adminis-

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

trative Services (Mr Newman) is acting as Minis-

ter for Defence until Mr Killen returns on 6 June.

COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF

LAW OF THE SEA

GOVERNMENT MEETING

Notice of Motion
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, [ shall move:
I. That this House reaffirms its support and notes the support of the Australian people for the basic objectives of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea and urges the United States Administration to complete without delay the review of its policies in order that the conference can finalise its work when the Tenth Session resumes in Geneva in August 1981.

Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I direct a question to the Prime Minister and refer him to the announcement that the right honourable gentleman proposes to send 12 Ministers and honourable members to some 40 countries to deliver invi-- tations to the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. In the light of the Lynch committee report recommending cut backs in expenditure on essential services provided to taxpayers, I ask: Why does the right honourable gentleman find it necessary to send these honour-

2. That this House conveys to the (J nited States Administration its view that Australia has vital economic and strategic interests which can only be protected by the expeditious conclusion of these negotiations.

able members, their wives and members of their families overseas at such enormous cost when the matter could be dealt with by sending the same messages to diplomats stationed in Canberra?

AUSTRALIAN UNIVERSITIES Notice of Motion

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Secretary General of the Commonwealth had some dis-

Mr SCHOLES (Corio)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
I. That this House expresses its concern that the Commonwealth Government has for the first time in Australia's history interfered with the autonomy and independence of Australian universities.

cussions with me last week and I understand that he also had discussions with the Leader of the Opposition which I hope were as constructive as the ones he had with me. Since 1973 at least it has been the practice of the host country for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting to

2. That the action of the Government in directing Deakin University on academic content and scope of courses offered by the University constitutes an unacceptable interference with the autonomy of Australian universities which has no parallel in democratic nations and that only under totalitarian regimes have universities been similarly directed by governments.

send an emissary to certain countries. It is not a question of delivering an invitation. It is a question of discussing the up-coming agenda, the im-
portant matters for discussion and matters that might be sensitive within the general practice of consensus which is so important to the Common-

3. That the House calls on the Government to withdraw this directive and thus remove the threat to academic freedom and Australian educational standards.

wealth. Therefore, it has become a practice to do this very thing so there can be the widest possible input into the agenda and into the framework of

Questions Without Notice

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2515

the Commonwealth Heads of Government well. Holding this Commonwealth Heads of

Meeting.

Government Meeting is something that this Com-

I should add also that this meeting is the second largest heads of government meeting held in any

monwealth Government will do well and it makes no apologies for it.

organised and regular way in any forum. The meeting of non-aligned heads of government is, I think, a larger meeting with a larger number of heads of government attending. But in many ways the Commonwealth meeting has some capacities that I think go beyond those of similar meetings. People from different groups, continents and races-from North and South-attend the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting and give it the capacity that people from one particu-

ROAD CONSTRUCTION
Mr JULL-Has the Minister for Transport seen reports of a statement by the Queensland Minister for Local Government, Main Roads and Police, Mr Hinze, claiming that the Commonwealth will make road construction a private enterprise function and that local councils will be prevented from tendering for road works? Is this the situation and, if not, what is the real situation?

lar world grouping, meeting alone, may well not Mr HUNTYes, I have seen the statements

have. Therefore, it gives the Commonwealth a made by the Minister for Local Government,

value which I believe is a very real one. It is the reMain Roads and Police in Queensland, Mr Hinze.

sponsibility of the host government-a responsiI have also seen a copy of a letter that has been

bility which would come to it maybe once every sent to a number of parliamentary members. I

50 or 60 years-to make sure that the Commonmust say that I am at a loss to know what Mr

wealth meeting is held in the best possible climate, Hinze is belly-aching about. The first truth of the

with the agenda properly worked through and matter is that, in accordance with the provisions

with the widest possible input from as many of the of the legislation that is before the House, the

Commonwealth members as possible. That is why Queensland road making authorities and also

senior members of this Parliament-Ministers local government authorities will have the right to

and private members-are undertaking a mission bid for any national road construction work that

which I and the Government regard as an importis put out to tender and contract by the State

ant one, and an important part of the process. It authorities. The other truth is that 90 per cent of

ought to be remembered that I will be in London road construction work in Queensland happens to

at the end of July and I will then be having further be in the local government main roads area and 10

discussions with the Secretary-General. The per cent of road construction work is in the

agenda for the Commonwealth Heads of Governnational roads area. So, it is quite wrong for him

ment Meeting will not be finalised at that point to suggest that the implementation of the Govern-

but it will start to take very real shape. The draft ment's policy will create chaos, unemployment

agenda probably will be sent out early in Sepand so on in Queensland.

tember. All of this is part of the preparation for a meeting which is relevant and important.

The real test of Mr Hinze's contention in this matter is whether Mr Hinze would bother to have

If anyone had doubted the relevance of the a home built or any work done in his own area of

Commonwealth to the problems of the world in business by day labour. I am certain that he would

the 1980s and beyond, quite plainly the Lusaka call for tenders from contractors to build his own

meeting should have put those doubts very much home. I believe that he, as a roads Minister, has a

to rest. It does the Commonwealth no service responsibility to ensure that the public funds that

whatsoever for people to suggest that Australia is are being expended on roads are expended to the

taking too much trouble with this particular meetbest possible advantage of the public. He is deal-

ing or is seeking to pay too much attention to it. It ing with taxpayers' funds-public funds. It is

is an important meeting which can contribute necessary to ensure that we get the greatest length

seriously to current problems and especially to of road possible from the funds which have been

North-South economic problems. The more input made available to carry out those works.

there is to it by the 40-odd members of the Commonwealth in the preparatory stages, the better it will be. In relation to the Review of Com-

AUSTRALIAN WHEAT BOARD: INTEREST SUBSIDY

monwealth Functions, it ought to be noted that Mr KERIN-My question is directed to the

that review did not cut expenditure across the Acting Minister for Primary Industry. When

board. In a very large measure it is a rationalispresenting the ministerial statement on the Re-

ation of Commonwealth functions and that view of Commonwealth Functions, the Prime

rationalisation will enable the Government to do Minister stated that the interest subsidy of the

better the things that governments ought to do Australian Wheat Board 'is to be reduced by one

2516 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

percentage point'. The Minister for Primary Industry has since claimed that the statement referred only to a one per cent increase in the rate charged by the Reserve Bank of Australia's Rural Credits Department. Did the Government instruct the bank to increase the rate? If so, when will the Government table the instructions, as required by section 11 of the Reserve Bank Act? If not-that is, if it was an autonomous Reserve Bank decision-why was it misrepresented as a razor gang decision? Why did the Prime Minister refer only to the Australian Wheat Board when several other statutory bodies, including the Australian Dairy Corporation, will be affected by the Rural Credits Department's interest rates? Finally, why did the Prime Minister use the future tense-he said 'is to be'-when the Rural Credits Department rate was raised by one per cent a month before he spoke and by 0.5 per cent a fortnight after he spoke?
Mr HOWARD-It has been a long-standing practice, because of the significant policy implications, particularly to Australian primary industry, of variations in the interest rate charged on Rural Credits Department advances, for there to be very close consultation between the Government, normally through the Treasurer of the day, and the Reserve Bank of Australia regarding the level of interest although, as the honourable member has correctly implied, the final decision on the level of Rural Credits Department advances is a matter for the Reserve Bank to determine. There has been no section 11 notice, letter or whatever one likes to call it written; nor indeed is that in contemplation. I have written a letter to the Governor of the Reserve Bank informing him formally of the decision that was the subject of the Prime Minister's announcement.
Over the past few months there have been changes in the rate of interest charged on Rural Credits Department advances. There was one in March and there was one, I think, on 15 May. Also there have been some fluctuations in the market rate of interest charged on borrowings by the Australian Wheat Board to the extent that it is borrowing on the commercial market. The intent of the Review of Commonwealth Functions committee's decision and the intent of the Prime Minister's announcement was to indicate a view on the part of the Government that the differential ought to be less by reason of a further rise. The question of any additional increase which would at some time be needed to give full effect to the intent of the Government's decision-a further increase of one per cent-is something that the Reserve Bank itself must determine, taking into account a variety of factors, some of which have

been canvassed in the honourable gentleman's question.
WELFARE HOUSING PROGRAMS
Mr BOURCHIER-I ask the Minister for Housing and Construction whether his attention has been drawn to recent claims that this year the States will pay the Commonwealth more money in interest and redemption payments arising from the previous welfare housing advances than they will receive from the Commonwealth to finance current welfare housing programs. If so, can the Minister advise the House whether these claims are accurate?
Mr MeVEIGH-My attention has been drawn to the statement. I am grateful to the honourable member for Bendigo for drawing to the attention of the House the scurrilous statements made by people who obviously flirt with the truth. Let me state the facts. Each year since 1945, the Commonwealth Government has made available to the States certain sums of money to assist them with welfare housing. The total sum of money made available over the 35 years of the agreement has been in excess of $5,000m. The Commonwealth Government, particularly in recent years, has been very generous with its advances on highly concessional interest rate terms and also by giving a significant part of its contribution through grants. The net result has been that in each year-if we take 1980-81 as an examplethe States have been able to repay to the Commonwealth the interest and redemption on the year's loan in addition to meeting all their own administrative expenses and the cost of upkeep and maintenance on the dwellings. Yet they still have-I stress this fact-a credit of $142m. That is a significant sum of money that has been made available by the Commonwealth Government through its generous advances and its grants system.
Under the agreement the States are required each year to pay back to the Commonwealth one fifty-third of the annual advances. When we look at that we note that each year the agreement is in existence obviously there is a requirement to pay back more funds. But there is no basis in logic or in justice to compare the repayments of interest and redemption by a State for a total lending period of 35 years with the aunual contribution of the Commonwealth Government. If those honourable members who sit opposite advance that claim quite obviously what they are suggesting in fact and in essence is that if one gets a loan from someone with a firm commitment to repay it, one does not have to repay it. I repeat that through the generosity of the Commonwealth

Questions Without Notice

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2517

Government much has been done to assist in the area of welfare housing. It is blatant idiocy or untruthfulness in the extreme even to infer that this year the States will be repaying more than they are receiving from the Commonwealth.

road works are to be constructed? If the departments of main roads are to compete with private contractors for road works, will the departments be free to compete for construction tenders for works other than road works?

Finally, the Government has given a firm commitment of $1,000m to the States, coupled with the surpluses that they receive each year-I instance this year the sum of $142m. I hope that in some States-I name New South Wales-that would act as a catalyst for them to do something about overcoming the problems of welfare . housing.

Mr HUNT-The departments of main roads, or the appropriate authority in each State, and local government will have the right to bid for works under the contract system for the construction of national roads. That provision will apply, of course, in Tasmania and in each of the States. There will not be any State preference; it will be an open tender arrangement. We anticipate, of course, that those local contractors in Tasmania

BROADCASTING AND TELEVISION ACT or in any other State would have an advantage

Mr DUFFY-I refer the Minister for Communications to proposed amendments to the

over those contractors who were tendering from a distant point.

Broadcasting and Television Act announced by In regard to the last part of the honourable

him on 9 April and ask whether he will inform the gentleman's question, I am not sure to which

House of any communication the Government other works he referred. The Bill refers

had with sections of the industry between that specifically to national toad construction works,

date and the meeting of the Government's back not to maintenance works. The Government

bench committee last Thursday. Did such comfirmly believes that by adopting the tender and

munication include any drafting instructions, contract principle, in the longer term we will see

detailed explanations, or draft copies of the Bill much better progress in respect of our national

being made available to the Federation of Ausroads program than we have seen in the past. I

tralian Commercial Television Stations, the Fedmight add in passing that this is not a new prin-

eration of Australian Radio Broadcasters, Major ciple. Quite a lot of work done by the various de-

Television of Australia, Regional Television of partments of main roads is, in fact, let out to

Australia, or any individual media interests?

tender. What we insist upon, since all national

Mr SINCLAIR-There still is no final draft of the Bill but, yes, there have been very detailed discussions with every section of the industry. The Bill and the way in which the legislative intent should best be translated for parliamentary approval have been discussed very widely and will continue to be so discussed. The Government is most anxious that in the way in which the Bill is ultimately introduced into the Parliament there should be to the maximum both an ability to meet the intentions of the Government and an assurance that what is intended meets with the general approval, as far as possible, of those who are

roads are eligible for 100 per cent Commonwealth government funding, is that the money we allocate to this purpose obtains the maximum length of road possible. We believe that the tender and contract system will ensure that. If the local governing bodies and the departments of main roads are efficient enough, there is no doubt that they will have every chance of winning in their bids. One needs to remember that local government, and, indeed, the departments of main roads, have an advantage that private contractors do not have-that is, they do not pay sales tax on the equipment that they purchase.

affected within the community including, of

UNEMPLOYMENT: TRAINING

course, all the stations which are represented

PROGRAMS

through the bodies mentioned in the honourable gentleman's question.

Mr HAWKE-I refer the Prime Minister to the statements made by the Minister for Employ-

ROAD WORKS

ment and Youth Affairs at a Press conference in Hobart on 16 May and reported on Australian

Mr BURR-My question is addressed to the Broadcasting Commission national radio that

Minister for Transport. I refer to the Governevening. At that conference the Minister admitted

ment's announced policy to offer all national that Australia's youth unemployment was high

highway construction to tender. Will the State decompared with other countries and that the Fed-

partments of main roads be free to tender in comeral Government 'may not be doing enough for

petition with private contractors? Will preference the young jobless and that existing training

be given to tenderers from the State in which the programs may not be good enough to help school

2518 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

leavers make the transition from school to work'. or anyone else can come forward with positive

Firstly, does the Prime Minister agree with this proposals to improve the opportunities for train-

assessment by his Minister of the Government's ing of young Australians or of other Australians in

failure to deal adequately with the problem of need of new or improved job skills, those sugges-

youth unemployment? Secondly, does he regard tions will be examined in all seriousness. The

this assessment as a serious indictment of policies honourable gentleman asked a serious question

which have had now more than five years to work and deserves a serious and proper answer in re-

and yet proved singularly unsuccessful? Finally, is lation to it. Our approach to the young unem-

it now the Government's intention to rectify this ployed has been one of evolution, the develop-

totally unacceptable situation and adopt the rement of programs over a period aiming

cent recommendation of the Schools Commission specifically, when we can, at the groups finding

for the triennium 1982-1984 that 'an assessment least satisfaction and least opportunity in the

of the existing pattern of youth training and suppresent system.

port programs be undertaken with the view of

developing a comprehensive youth policy'?

To the extent that my colleague indicated in his

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I think the honourable gentleman was picking up a part of a Schools Commission report that came out either late in 1980 or very early this year--

remarks that we have an unsatisfactory situation-we are not satisfied with it because young Australians are unemployed and there are people at school who do not get adequate opportunities-obviously we want to improve it. I

Mr Hawke-I was talking about your Minister, can only suggest that honourable members wait a

first of all.

little while until my colleague the Minister for

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I thought that the honourable gentleman was referring to a Schools Commission report. I think it is worth drawing attention to the fact that that Schools Commission report emphasised the very serious matter that many Australian schools, if not all Australian secondary schools, were giving inadequate attention to large groups of young Australians. The Schools Commission made it plain that the schools were providing an adequate education for those with academic talents who might want to go on to a college or a university but that many other young Australians were going through school with a sense of failure and frustration, probably compounded by difficulty in getting work after leaving school. They had a sense of failure and frustration at school because courses and curricula related to that particular person's talents and inclinations were not available. Quite plainly that was a very serious indictment by the Schools Commission of many Australian secondary schools.

Education makes a statement on education matters. That will show the shape of some of the initiatives that the Government believes should be carried out. The honourable member also suggested that the general programs to improve employment opportunities in Australia have not been successful. That, of course, is where I part company with him. I believe Australia has demonstrated very plainly that under Australia's policies private enterprise over the last two years has provided more jobs than it has provided for a very long while. If one compares Australia's economy with the United States, Germany, Britain and a number of other countries, one will find that Australia's economy is growing and employment opportunities are growing whereas in many places around the world those opportunities actually are shrinking. Over the last two years Australia's private enterprise has provided 250,000 additional jobs. That is much more than could ever have been provided by anyone's make-work schemes which, of course, would have been provided at

As a result of that, the Minister for Education vast additional cost.

and the Minister for 1~)11ployment and Youth

Affairs have had extensive discussions with State The Government will be pressing forward with

governments about ways to improve the opporthose economic policies which have been demon-

tunities open to young Australians who are now strated to be successful and which a number of

lacking those opportunities. It is not just a quesother countries are now starting to emulate. The

tion of jobs, it is also, for many young Australians, Government also will press forward with seeking

a question of adequate training. We earlier began to provide more opportunities for young Aus-

the school-to-work transition training programs tralians who find themselves in difficulty either at

which are starting to make an impact. As my colschool or after they leave school. As part of that

league has indicated, the Government is not examination, I remind the House that we also

satisfied with the progress that so far has been indicated that we want to examine the allowances

made. It has an open mind in relation to our trainavailable to low income families to make sure that

ing programs. If the honourable member for Wills people staying in full time training longer will not

Questions Without Notice

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2519

unduly affect the well-being of low income Australian families. The basis for action in that case, of course, is that over a long period the secondary allowance scheme will help low income parents put their children through the last two years of secondary schooling. That allowance was increased very significantly at the time of the last Budget. We are not necessarily satisfied that those arrangements for low income families are adequate. So the allowances available to people in full time education or training are also under review.
TAXATION: PETROLEUM PRODUCTS Mr IAN CAMERON-I direct my question to the Treasurer. Is the report in today's Press correct that the Australian Industries Development Association has put a submission to the Department of the Treasury suggesting that the Government tax petroleum products at up to a 15 per cent a year increase for the next five years, even above the current Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries price? If so, what is the Government's present position on increasing the tax on petroleum products used in Australia above OPEC's price for crude oil?
Mr HOWARD-As the honourable member knows, industry bodies and others in the community put a lot of submissions to the Government about revenue and other matters. I understand that a submission dealing with that broad subject has been presented to my Department. I have not seen the submission. I do not think it will surprise the honourable gentleman for me to say that I will not respond affirmatively or negatively to specific areas of speculation on revenue matters.
SPONSORED TRIPS FOR MEMBERS Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Prime Minister whether the reports are correct which appeared yesterday and today to the effect that two Government members were to be beneficiaries of an overseas trip sponsored by a self-interested media group and that according to one of the Government members-the honourable member for Bowman-'selection for the trip had come through Mr Sinclair's office'. If these reports are correct, is it usual for a senior Minister's office to be used to channel invitations of this nature in circumstances where it could be concluded that the offerer might believe he, she or they stood to gain some subsequent government advantage from the offer being accepted? Are the circumstances surrounding this matter consistent with the declared policy of the Government? Is it the Government's intention to allow this practice to continue in

future? Finally, will the Prime Minister instruct the two Government members concerned not to accept the offer, especially in view of the potential blatant conflict of interest involved and as spelled out in rules 8 (b) and 8 (c) of the code of conduct laid down in the report on public duty and private interest?
Mr SPEAKER-At the outset, I believed that the question would be out of order but I allowed it to proceed in case there were elements of it which were in order. Only one element of the question is in order and that relates to the part of the question addressed to the Prime Minister concerning the actions of the Minister for Communications. I inform the House that it is out of order to ask any Minister a question about the attitude, behaviour or actions of a member of the Parliament.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-As a result of your ruling, Mr Speaker, am I permitted to answer the whole question or only part of it?
Mr SPEAKER-The Prime Minister has asked whether it is permissible for him to answer the whole question. The answer to that is no. However, if there is anything that he needs to say in order to make his answer in relation to the actions of one of his Ministers meaningful, it is relevant to the question and may be said.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-What I will say will all be relevant to that central point. I think I should draw the attention of the House to the fact that there are different kinds of sponsored trips. There are many trips sponsored by governments. There have been leader grants to the United States of America. There have been visits to Japan at the request and as a guest of the Japanese Government. Many honourable members have participated over the years in both of them. I do not think anyone would have any doubt that a trip which is openly sponsored by another government-I emphasise the words 'openly sponsored by another government'-so long as it is within the judgment of a member of parliament, could be accepted. It has happened both ways on a number of occasions. I think we then start to get into a category of sponsored trips which can have some doubt cast over them. It has been customary for members of all parties, over many years, to participate in Qantas Airways Ltd inaugural flights or the launching of a ship. They are. commercial in their nature. I do not think anyone would want to cast any doubt in relation to them.
I think this invitation was one that was cast in the public domain. Nobody was seeking to do it in any secret way. Quite plainly members' travel is a matter that members themselves must decide. I

2520 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

think that this instance and the publicity that has facts are as related, which I very much doubt, His

related to it have made it quite plain that the Royal Highness himself would have been dissooner this Parliament discusses in detail the turbed to believe that such unusual lengths had

Bowen report and applies it to the members of this Parliament the better it will be. That is under discussion at the moment with members of the Parliament. I draw attention to the fact that the Bowen report has been applied in relation to Ministers and the Commonwealth Public Service. Of course, commercially sponsored trips by Ministers would be outlawed under the Bowen report. But I emphasise again that members of parliament are in a somewhat different position. I believe that they need to make their own judgments about these matters for themselves against the background of experience in the Parliament generally and also against the background of their own common sense.

been gone to for his alleged covenience.
COMMUNICATION FACILITIES IN TASMANIA
Mr GROOM-I have two questions for the Minister for Communications.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman may ask one.
Mr GROOM-They are both related matters. The first concerns the non-existent radio services on the west coast of Tasmania. The second concerns Access 80 at Dover, which is in the electorate of my colleague the honourable member for Franklin. When will we see some action to solve these serious Tasmanian problems?

PUCKAPUNYAL ARMY BASE

Mr SINCLAIR-With respect to the first

Mr MILTON-In the absence of the Minister for Defence, I direct my question to the Prime Minister. Is it a fact that prior to the recent visit of Prince Charles to the Army base at Puckapunyal a special toilet block was built for his use and that the cost was $60,000? Is it also a fact that there was an existing toilet situated only 150 yards away from the new toilet and that the new facility was dismantled immediately after the Prince had left the base? If the facts are correct, would not the Prime Minister agree that the erection of this facility represents a poor reflection on the physical endurance of the Prince
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. He is not entitled to make those comments in seeking information.
Mr MILTON-If the facts are correct, would not the Prime Minister agree that, particularly in

question, the honourable gentleman has certainly been most assiduous on behalf of his constituents in trying to press for some extension of radio communications into that very mountainous area. I know that-there have been extensive discussions to try to overcome those problems. I am not sure of the exact state of their progress, and I will advise the honourable gentleman in due course when I have checked. I can assure him that there is a recognition of the difficulties of the people there, and I hope that an early resolution of the problem can be secured. Of course, once the satellite is available the problems of people who live on the west coast of Tasmania, and in many other isolated and remote areas of Australia, will be alleviated as a result of the ability to place an earth station and a transmitter on site to overcome the present transmission difficulties that occur in some areas of this country.

view of the present demonstration in King's Hall by the women's refuge group, this represents a poor reflection on the financial priorities of the Government?

With respect to Access 80 and Dover, the position is slightly different. Many communities around Australia would like an extension of their present local call access. The whole concept of

Mr Good luck-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. You will recall that I was ruled out of order for even mentioning the Prince of Wales in respect of an expedition trip down the Franklin River.

Access 80 was to provide an opportunity for everyone to have access to a main business centre. As I understand the position in Dover, many people would like access to another business centre, but that does not deny the fact that, within

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman's recollection of events is faulty.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I doubt very much whether the facts allegedly related in the question are accurate. But let me ascertain the position. I will advise the House or ask my col-

the definition provided by Telecom, access is already available to a business centre. In those circumstances there seems little prospect that the Access 80 extension suggested by the honourable gentleman's question is likely to be realised.
SPONSORED TRIPS FOR MEMBERS-

league the Acting Minister for Defence to advise Mr HAYDEN-I ask a question of the Prime the House at the earliest opportunity. Also I Minister, and I ask it by virtue of the second para-
would only want to say that I think that if the graph (b) of Standing Order 144, which provides

Questions Without Notice

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2521

that questions may seek an explanation regarding the policy of the Government and its applications. 1 ask the question particularly in relation to past policy concerning the matter of propriety of conduct by members. Does the Prime Minister recall the letter I wrote to him on 9 February 1978 in which I pointed out the concern of my colleague the honourable member for Newcastle about the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Road Safety and the offer of a trip to Japan which had been extended by the Japan Automobile Association? I said:

Mr MALCOLM FRASERThank you, Mr Speaker, and I thank the Leader of the Opposition for reminding me of that occasion. It might well indicate the kind of view that I hold in relation to these matters. I also emphasise again that it is a question of members ultimately making up their own minds about what they do. I do not believe that the Executive-the Governmentshould seek to direct members of parliament in these matters, and I believe that members are elected to this place in many instances to exercise their independent judgment.

Mr Jones is concerned about the propriety of a Parliamentary Committee being sponsored in this way by organisations which might well be seen by the public, whether rightly or wrongly is not important, as being self-interested parties in the subject matter being inquired into by that Committee.

Mr Hayden-Did you tell David that? Mr MALCOLM FRASER-A conversation between myself and a member of parliament is a matter between the two of us.

1 also pointed out in the letter that the evidence suggested that the invitation was in response to action initiated, perhaps, by a member of the Committee. Does the Prime Minister recall replying to me on 20 February 1978 and concluding his letter in these terms: 'I also, however, expressed my view to Mr Katter that this invitation should not be accepted'. That is a view which I applauded then and still applaud. Will he apply that practice on this occasion, as the circumstances are entirely similar?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The question is out of order.

Mr Hayden-Does he go with your support? Answer that one.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable gentleman has asked his 'out of order' question which, Mr Speaker, with your indulgence I am answering. I think he is having a fair enough go. I emphasise again that this instance serves to remind us all that we should get ahead and process the Bowen report in relation to members of this Parliament because then there will be publicly known guidelines which can held in the guidance of honourable members in making their decisions or the Opposition in relation to its criticism.

Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, that is sheer nonsense. I raise a point of order against your ruling.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-Mr Speaker, can I help the honourable gentleman. I think that if a question such as this is asked and then is ruled out of order, it leaves something hanging in the air which I for one, in this instance anyway, would sooner answer, ifl may be allowed to do so.
Mr SPEAKER-I must inform the House that my task is to apply the Standing Orders. No Minister is responsible to this Parliament for the actions of any member of the Parliament, unless it be the Minister for Administrative Services in some way relating to remuneration or allowances or expenses paid. Accordingly, I allowed the question to be asked in full in case it raised some issue which brought it into order. [ fully accept the point made by the Prime Minister that, having allowed the question to be asked, something is left hanging in the air, so to speak. I will permit the Prime Minister to answer. J indicate that there is no way in which [ can judge whether a question is out of order except by hearing the question, and in that respect the Standing Orders need to be upheld. As a matter of indulgence, I will permit the Prime Minister to reply.

UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE
Mr TAMBLING-Has the attention of the Minister for Education been drawn to media reports stating that the University of Adelaide Council will refuse to administer the recently announced student loans scheme and that that University is unwilling to charge fees for second and higher degrees? Is this an unprecedented stance by a governing body of a university or college of advanced education? What action will the Minister take to ensure that an effective loans scheme works to the advantage of students in institutions that follow such discriminatory action? Will government grants to tertiary institutions that refuse to charge appropriate fees for second and higher degrees be reduced?
Mr FIFE-I am aware of the reported views of the Council of the University of Adelaide. I am surprised, to say the least, that the University Council would have made the reported statements without first being fully aware of all the conditions and details of the Government decisions. Of course, the Government has announced its intention to reintroduce fees in a limited way. I refer, of course, to the decision to reintroduce fees for second and higher degrees.

2522 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

Within that area there are certain exemptionsfor example, for recognised double degrees and also for holders of Commonwealth and university post-graduate awards. So far as the published comments from the University of Adelaide are concerned, I will have discussions in the near future with representatives of the ViceChancellors Committee. I hope that all universities will co-operate with the Commonwealth in

need for some 30 colleges to be integrated in one form or another. The TEC has listed these 30 colleges which it believes should be integrated either one with the other or with other institutions. Of course, the Government has taken the decision to which the honourable member for Newcastle has referred and, in that context, I want the honourable member to know-indeed, the House and the wider community to know-that in the first in-

this regard. Indeed, I believe that the proposed stance there will be consultation between the Ter-

student loans scheme will prove to be of great tiary Education Commission and the cobenefit to a large number of students throughout ordinating bodies within the States.

Australia. J hope that the University of Adelaide would not take any action that would perhaps deny the benefit of this scheme to its students. So far as the honourable member's question concerned action that the Government might take if the University failed to co-operate, J am not prepared at this stage to comment on what actions we might take to ensure that students are not disadvantaged. I can give the honourable member and the House an assurance that the Government will pursue the implementation of this loans scheme as rapidly as possible so that it will be in place to operate from the beginning of 1982. Whatever decisions are taken will be decisions to ensure that no student is disadvantaged by the actions or views of a university.

Mr Charles J ones-When? Mr FIFE-In the very near future. Following that, there will be consultation between myself and State Ministers. I emphasise to the House that it is the Government's view, as it is the Tertiary Education Commission's view, that rationalisation is necessary. Rationalisation will take place but the details of the implementation of the decision will first be discussed between the coordinating bodies at Commonwealth and State levels, and then between myself and State Ministers.
REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION

NEWCASTLE COLLEGE OF ADVANCED EDUCATION
Mr CHARLES JONES-I direct my question to the Minister for Education. Having in mind that the Newcastle-Hunter region is the sixth largest centre of population in Australia with

Department of the Parliamentary Library Mr SPEAKER-I understand the honourable member for Fremantle wishes to ask a detailed question.
Mr Dawkins-Swan. Don't confuse me with him.

enormous growth based on coal extraction, aluminium smelters and other industrial development, can the Minister give some explanation of the reasons why the multipurpose Newcastle College of Advanced Education is to be integrated with the University of Newcastle? Why should this integration take place when out of a total enrolment of 2,748 students there are 505 effective full time students in areas other than teacher education? On these figures, how can the Minister substantiate that this College of Advanced Education is a single-purpose college? Finally, will the Minister give details of the cost benefits that will accrue from the integration of this low-cost CAE with the higher cost university of Newcastle without a substantial reduction in staff?
Mr FIFE-For some time now, the Tertiary Education Commission has drawn attention to the need for rationalisation within the Australian university and college sector. In its most recent re-

Mr SPEAKER-I apologise to the honourable member for Swan. I was so accustomed to his father for so many years being the honourable member for Fremantle. He must forgive me for my mistake. I call the honourable member for Swan.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan)-I seek information in relation to the operation of the Department of the Parliamentary Library.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will provide the question to the Clerk. If it is in order it will be printed and, in due course, I will provide a reply which will be printed in Hansard.
PUBLIC DUTY AND PRIVATE INTEREST
Suspension of Standing Orders Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (3.17)-1 move:

port, for the 1982-1984 triennium, the Tertiary That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as Education Commission drew attention to the would prevent me from moving-

Public Duty and Private Interest

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2523

That this House is of the opinion that, in view of Rules 8 (h) and 8 (c) of paragraph 4.9 of the report 'Public Duty and Private Interest', which declares-
8. 'An officeholder should not:
(b) solicit or accept any benefit, advantage or promise of future advantage whether for himself, his immediate family or any business concern or trust with which he is associated from persons who are in, or seek to be in, any contractual or special relationship with government;
(c) except as may be permitted under the rules applicable to his office, accept any gift, hospitality or concessional travel offered in connection with the discharge of the duties of his office . . .
The impression should be avoided that any person can improperly influence the office holder or unduly enjoy his favours
and the clear potential for the conclusion to be drawn that the honourable member for Bowman and Senator Collard--
Mr SPEAKER~Order! The Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat and the Leader of the House will resume his seat. The Leader of the Opposition received the call and indicated that he proposed to move the suspension of so much of the Standing Orders as would prevent a certain course of action. In the course of making his statement, he seemed to go beyond the proposition for the suspension of Standing Orders, and incorporated in it a statement.
Mr HAYDEN~1 am reading out my motion; there are about 15 more words.
Mr SPEAKER~1 think that point was going to be made by the Leader of the House. I will allow the Leader of the Opposition to proceed.
Mr HAYDEN~I repeat a part of the motion:
. . . and the clear potential for the conclusion to be drawn that the honourable member for Bowman and Senator Collard could be seen as transgressing those provisions by accepting free overseas travel from an unidentified business consortium, they should reject this offer forthwith.
Mr Speaker, I have moved for the suspension of Standing Orders~~
Mr Sinclair~I indicate to the Leader of the Opposition that the Government will not resist the suspension of Standing Orders and it will give him leave to move his motion forthwith.
Mr SPEAKER~The Leader of the Opposition should, therefore, ask for leave to move a motion suspending so much of the Standing Orders as would prevent him taking the course of action which he has indicated. Is leave granted? There being no objection, leave is granted.
Mr HAYDEN~I so move for the suspension of Standing Orders. I am grateful to the Government for allowing this discussion to proceed.

Whilst it is enormously important, it will not require a great deal of development. The facts, I believe, stand for themselves. Reports which have been published in the last two days, initiated by Miss Cromie in the Australian Financial Review yesterday and followed up today by other newspapers and the Australian Financial Review, again by Miss Cromie, make it clear that the honourable member for Bowman (Mr Jull) and Senator Collard, described as key members of the Government's back bench committee on communications, had received invitations, which presumably they have accepted, to attend a conference in the United States of America which will discuss cable television. It is well known that a number of consortiums in Australia and overseas consortiums which have been to Australia recently have been pressingly putting~~
Mr SPEAKER~Order! It is necessary for the motion to be in writing. Does the honourable member have a motion in writing?
Mr HAYDEN~Yes.
Mr SPEAKER~The Leader of the Opposition may continue.
Mr HAYDEN~The point I was making is that a number of consortiums, some domestic and at least one and probably more with foreign affiliations, have been active in this country in relation to the development of cable television. It is clear that generally in the communications area, with the nature of developments, there are some handsome plums to be picked up~that is, if legislation can be drafted in a certain way or if government reaches certain conclusions which result in the drafting of legislation in a certain way. Some parties could stand to gain handsomely. I want to make it clear that in no way do I assert that there is any evidence that this is in fact the motive behind this invitation or that the people who have issued it are of such character as to seek quite immorally to influence the role of government.
MI' SPEAKER~I apologise for interrupting the Leader of the Opposition but I must do so. The Leader of the House gave him leave to move a motion for the suspension of Standing Orders. That is the motion to which the honourable gentleman is speaking. He should be establishing grounds for the suspension rather than speaking to the motion.
Mr Sinclair~I intended to show that we would not only allow the Leader of the Opposition to move the motion for the suspension of Standing Orders but also accede to the motion for the suspension of Standing Orders so that the substantive motion could be put and debated.

2524 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Public Duty and Private interest

Mr SPEAKER-I will put the motion for the suspension of Standing Orders. The question is: That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the Leader of the Opposition moving the motion of which he has given notice to the House.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition may now move his motion in substantive terms.
Motion
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (3.23)-1 move:
That this House is of the opinion, that in view of Rules 8 (b) and 8 (c) of paragraph 4.9 of the report 'Public Duty and Private Interest', viz~
An officeholder should not:
(b) solicit or accept any benefit, advantage or promise of future advantage for himself, his immediate family or any business concern or trust with which he is associated from persons who are in, or seek to be in, any contractual or special relationship with government;
(c) except as may be permitted under the rules applicable to his office, accept any gift, hospitality or concessionaI travel offered in connection with the discharge of the duties of his office,
and the clear potential for the conclusion to be drawn that the honourable member for Bowman and Senator Collard could be seen as transgressing those provisions by accepting free overseas travel from an unidentified business consortium, they should reject this offer forthwith.
I am sure there is no need to go over the episodic nature of what I want to present to the House as it has developed so far. The point 1 was making is simply that there is a matter of very high principle involved in relation to the propriety of the conduct of members of parliament. It is hackneyed, J know, to repeat the old axiom that justice must not only be done but seen to be done. Similarly, just as hackneyed but no less important is it as principle to declare that not only should there be proper conduct by members of parliament but also it should be seen as proper conduct by members of parliament. We should take every reasonable and proper step to put as much distance between ourselves and any sets of circumstances which may appear to compromise--even if, in fact, they fail-our integrity and independence as members of parliament.
For that reason the report 'Public Duty and Private Interest' was drawn up. I see many defects in it but it is better than nothing. It is stronger in its proposals than anything the Government is prepared to adopt. It is not our fault that this report has not been fully canvassed in this House. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) said

that he wanted a full debate on it. We would welcome that opportunity. But I remind honourable members that it is more than 18 months since the report was brought into the House. I outlined in the wording of the motion, which 1 will not repeat, the concern felt by members of that committee--J might mention that they are quite conservative members-in relation to the potential for a member of parliament, or other people, such as office holders or Ministers, to be compromised by certain circumstances and that, therefore, a code of conduct ought to be followed.
When introducing the report in the Parliament on 22 November 1979 the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) said, among other things:
The Government has accepted virtually the whole of the Committee's recommendations in regard to Ministers, public servants and other otficials.
This would include llS. In that statement 'virtually' means 'effectively' and 'totally'. Recommendation 8 (c) of the report declares that people such as members of parliament should not:
. . . except as may be permitted under the rules applicable to his office, accept any gift, hospitality or concessional travel offered in connection with the discharge of the duties of his office.
There is no other way to interpret the acceptance of sllch an invitation as I have mentioned-the conditions of which are familiar to honourable members - but as concessional travel which is associated with the discharge of the duties of office of those two members, Senator Collard and the honourable member for Bowman. They are both members of the Government's committee on communications. It has been said by the honourable member for Bowman, at least in newspaper reports, and no effort has been made by the Government to repudiate these statements, that the ofTer to him came through the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair). I refer to a report in yesterday's Australian Financial Review which states:
His selcction---
That is, Mr J ull's selection-
For the trip had come through Mr Sinclair's office, he said.
Not only do members have to disengage from this quite undesirable practice but also the Minister is responsible for conduct which is highly questionable in these circumstances on the face of evidence which is publicly available. The Government should take the first opportunity available to repudiate these statements if they are not correct. At least the Minister should repudiate them. He will have the opportunity to do so directly. But the key point at which I am getting is that these sorts of invitations are inappropriate invitations for members of parliament to accept. It seems to

Public Duty and Private Interest

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2525

me that there is a vast difference between an invitation at an official level offered regularly by a government such as the Japanese Government to members of this Parliament, which I understand is reciprocated by the Australian Government, where it is clear that the objectivity of members of parliament is not in any way sullied.

Parliamentary Committee to travel overseas to further its investigations then the cost of any such travel ought to be exclusively supported by Parliament.
The Prime Minister's response came on 20 February. I repeat it. The Prime Minister stated:
I . . . expressed my view to Mr Katter that this invitation should not be accepted.

The Opposition also received an invitation from Mr Rosenhain of Myer Emporium Ltd in the following terms:
I am quite prepared that the same terms and conditions be offered to members of the Federal Labor Party to travel to the same convention for the same length of time, e.g. departing Australia 27 May, returning to Australia in time for Government sitting 9th June.
I have arranged for a response to go today rejecting that invitation. Two wrongs will not make a right. Both the honourable member for Bowman and Senator Collard are quite wrong in their behaviour if they accept these invitations. Sufficient official trips are available to members of parliament. As well there is an overseas travel entitlement for each parliamentary term which would more than adequately meet the travel needs or travel lust of members of this Parliament without allowing themselves to be compromised in the way in which the 'honourable member for Bowman and Senator Collard seemed determined to be.
I repeat, more leisurely, the communications between myself and the Prime Minister on a similar matter in 1978. On that occasion my colleague the honourable member for Newcastle (Mr Charles Jones), as a member of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Road Safety, contacted me about a letter received by the Chairman of the Committee, the honourable member for Kennedy (Mr Katter). I quote from this letter at some greater length. It stated:
It seems to me that what the letter boils down to is a proposal that a Parliamentary Committee should be sponsored by, and thereby become a beneficiary of, the Japan Automobile Association Inc. in making a trip to Japan. If my information is correct, it might seem that action may have been initiated by a member of the Committee--
The honourable member for Kennedy-
to encourage this offer of sponsorship.
That is a quite improper action in my view. The letter continues:
Mr Jones is concerned about the propriety of a Parliamentary Committee being sponsored in this way by organisations which might well be seen by the public, whether rightly or wrongly is not important, as being self-interested parties in the subject matter being inquired into by that Committee.
I share his concern and I know that those of my colleagues with whom I have discussed this matter share my concern. I should think that the principle is that if it is necessary for a

There can be no quibbling about the directness and the firmness of the Prime Minister's expression of view to the honourable member for Kennedy nor can there be any gainsaying that it was influential, because the honourable member for Kennedy desisted from any further purpose in this respect. The trip was not undertaken. I suggest that if it had been, there would have been enormous compromising of the members of the Committee who were participating in that way. Exactly the same set of circumstances apply in this case. We are surely not in such a mendicant position that we have to go around cap in hand soliciting for trips overseas or holding our breaths trusting that some wealthy and self-interested-I say this without any reservation-sponsor comes forward to promote us on a trip overseas. That immediately compromises our impartiality in any matters before us related to the self-interest of those people.
There is another aspect: Whilst I have the greatest respect for Mr Rosenhain of Myer Emporium Ltd, to the extent that I have been able to gauge his character on the few occasions I have met him, the fact is that he is a member of a consortium which has a vast interest in communications in an area which is directly a concern of the communications committee of the Government and, therefore, one which implicated very much the attention of the honourable member for Bowman and Senator Collard. Again, there is the aspect that the other members of the consortium are unknown to use. There is a very high degree of anonymity about that association. If we put all these scores together, there is the potential for people outside the Parliament who harbour reservations from time to time about just how independent members of Parliament might or might not be, to draw the most seedy and undesirable conclusions and then to broadbrush the lot of us as a result of those conclusions. The conclusions may not be justified but on the basis of superficial evidence there is a case to justify them and to draw the worst possible conclusions. At least, many of those people will believe this and so the suspicions will develop. I repeat: When it is all washed up, we all suffer to some extent as a result of that sort of thing happening. There is no need for any member of this Parliament to become a beggar or a mendicant, looking about for free overseas trips

2526 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Public Duty and Private Interest

sponsored by self-interested parties, hoping that one will turn up or, if one does fall his way, to grab it with both hands and refuse to give it up.
The recommendations in the report of the Bowen Committee of Inquiry concerning Public Duty and Private Interest make abundantly clear the proper standard of conduct in these matters. The standard of conduct which has been adopted in this instance by the honourable member for Bowman and Senator Collard is quite improper.
Finally, the behaviour of the Minister for Communications in acting as a sort of channel, as it were-a post office-in passing on these invitations, if the reports are correct, to the benefactors of this largesse is quite improper too. I believe that there can be no quibbling by members of this House about how they vote on this motion. After some preamble, the motion requires that the honourable member for Bowman and Senator Collard should immediately withdraw from being sponsored to engage in this undertaking-this trip. If honourable members vote against that motion, they vote against consistently proper standards of conduct being applied in matters such as this-proper standards of conduct which applied in the case of the honourable member for Kennedy when on one occasion he was soliciting for a free trip overseas.
Mr KATTER (Kennedy)-If the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) had not said that, Mr Speaker, I probably would not have been interested in this debate. What actually happened and the purpose of my taking part-
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Kennedy will resume his seat. I made an assumption that the honourable gcntleman was going to seek leave to make a personal explanation. He is speaking to the motion. Therefore, before I call him to speak, I must ask for a seconder to the motion.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith)
(3.36)-Mr Speaker, r second the motion and I
will make my remarks now. I will be very brief because I understand that there are time contraints. Let me deal with the matter on the basis of what has already been elicited at Question Time. I would think that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) is very much against any members of the Parliament, including the Senator mentioned and the honourable member for Bowman (Mr Jull), taking part in the trip that has been mentioned. I refer to the Bowen Committee of Inquiry concerning Public Duty and Private Interest which has been mentioned earlier today. The Committee's report clearly indicates that the terms of reference of that inquiry concerned what

procedures should be followed to determine whether there has been any breach of the high standards which are properly required of those in public office.
If we start by talking about the standards required of those in public office, those standards apply to every member in this Parliament. It just begs the question to argue about whether members of Parliament can accept offers made through a Minister or directly without being tainted by the fact that there were some pecuniary advancements for the member or members concerned. I refer to the Code of Conduct and the Committee's report which states:
The impression should be avoided that any person can improperly influence an office holder . . .
That would apply to a member of Parliament-
or unduly enjoy his favour.
I think it is very clear when we are talking about the Government at the present time that we have to be very stern about the fact that the Bowen Committee was set up way back in February 1978. It reported as far back as two years ago. Nothing has been done about that report by this Parliament. There has been no discussion or no implementation of the Code of Conduct. Is it any wonder that the honourable senator and the honourable member concerned might feel that they can avail themselves of a generous offer overseas because no rules have been laid down?
Ml' SPEAKER-I ask the honourable gentleman to excuse me for just a second. I should indicate to the House that when the Leader of the Opposition moved his motion he included in it a reference to a statement. There was some confusion, I think, on the part of some members of the House as to what the actual terms of the motion were. I propose to read the motion in the form which the Leader of the Opposition has given. The motion stated:
That this House is of the opinion, that in view of Rules 8 (b) and 8 (c) of paragraph 4.9 of the report 'Public Duty and Private Interest', and the clear potential for the conclusions to be drawn that the honourable member for Bowman and Senator Collard be seen as transgressing those provisions by accepting free overseas travel from an unidentified business consortium, they should reject this offer forthwith.
The particular items Rule 8 (b) and 8 (c) read:
An officeholder should not:
(b) solicit or accept any benefit, advantage or promise of future advantage whether for himself, his immediate family or any business concern or trust with which he is associated with persons who are in, or seek to be in, any contractual or special relationship with government;

Public Duty and Private Interest

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2527

(c) except as may be permitted under the rules applicable to his office, accept any gift, hospitality or concessional travel offered in connection with the discharge of the duties of his office.
The impression should be avoided that any person can improperly influence the officeholder and unduly enjoy his favour.
r hope that clarifies the matter for the House. I
call the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and indicate to him that I will subtract the period I have spent in explanation from the time allowed to him to speak.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-Thank you, Mr Speaker. I was making the point that the Bowen Committee reported on this and other matters as far back as July 1979. It is virtually a censure of the Government to find two years later that there has been no implementation or intelligent discussion of that report. If we had implemented the code of conduct recommended by the Bowen Committee, whether by statute or under Standing Orders, it would be very clear that no member of parliament could avail himself of offers such as those made to an honourable member in this House and a senator in the other place.
Mr Donald Cameron-You could not even accept a tea cosy under those rules.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-As the honourable member has pointed out, he could not accept any gift at all. There are rules and regulations governing the sorts of gifts that Ministers may accept. Gifts to Ministers create the impression that there is a way to buy favours. We cannot run a democracy if that is the case. We are talking about the implementation of cable television. Any of us who have had an interest in the communications field in the past, as many of us have, know that it is the most profitable aspect of television. It is highly centralised. Ownership is controlled. It will make enormous profits for a select group of people. In the time of the Labor Government enormous influences were brought to bear. People wanted cable television implemented in Australia because it would benefit certain proprietary interests, not the general public. There is great advantage in having cable television. It gives all sorts of benefits to those owning the cable and deciding what comes through it.
The honourable member and senator concerned in this matter will not find out anything new. If they want to know about cable television they will find that people involved in the telecom-. munications system in Australia have enough input into this area. They know what it means, how it is implemented, who owns it elsewhere in the world and why these multinationals want to bring it to Australia and own and control it. This

is not in accordance with a number of principles which we hold on this side of the House. We should consider communications from the point of view of public ownership, public control and public benefit, not private ownership, exploitation and profit. If the two gentlemen concerned accept this offer, saying that they will give us information that we cannot get ourselves, they will leave themselves wide open to the belief that they are beholden to those who paid their way. It would be a stupid thing for them to do. It would determine whether they held their own seats and what public opinion of them would be.
Not one of us in the Parliament can escape the fact that if we accept a trip from anybody, other than a trip provided by the Parliament, it will be deemed by public opinion that we owe something to those offering the trip. Of course we would. It is un businesslike of the Myer Emporium Ltd or anyone else to suggest that this is an intelligent thing to do. The Myer Emporium is interested mainly in domestic and retail sales. Communications come within the national network in respect of which a fair amount of public money has already been expended in setting up the base frame. It is important that nobody should intrude into this area by offering a fringe benefit in order to gain profits for shareholders or some select group. What we think should have been done has been made very clear by my leader.
The Parliament went to a lot of trouble to set up the Bowen Committee. It set out its terms of reference in 1978. The Committee reported in 1979. Nothing has been done since. There is a responsibility on the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the whole Cabinet to implement quickly in the Parliament the codes of conduct recommended by the Bowen Committee, whether by statute or Standing Orders. This would remove the necessity to move a motion in this House urging two members of parliament, in their own interests and in the interests of the dignity and stature of the Parliament, not to accept an offer of private travel. Anybody in his right mind would know that such offers should not even be considered. The offer has been made and the members concerned are obviously interested in going. It makes it so much worse that we have to take the time of the Parliament to move a motion suggesting that they do not go. If they go their seats should be forfeited. They say that they will come back with clean hands and that they will have learnt something they could not have learnt in Australia. If they want to go, let them get some intelligent advice from the communications research group in Australia.

2528 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Public Duty and Private Interest

It is dangerous for the private sector to offer I think we all know that whatever the definition

trips to Ministers or back bench members of parof public duty and private interest, people at all

liament so that they may take an interest and inlevels in this place accept some form of hospitality

form themselves. On many occasions local or concessional travel. Let me illustrate two areas.

government throughout this country has been the Very few members in this place have not been to

subject of litigation on the basis of conspiracy, some of the areas of developing resources in

fraud or the suggestion of private commissions. It Australia. In those developing areas, particularly

is considered that if something is offered to a perin the remoter parts of Australia, it is often not

son, perhaps he will be under an obligation to possible to travel by ordinary vehicle. It would be

treat an application favourably. Mr Speaker, you extraordinary if honourable members had not

will know that if anybody offers a person a trip, travelled by whatever farm or company vehicle

even in a taxi, to look at a property it is deemed to was made available for the purpose. Similarly,

be an infringement of the Local Government Act very few members of parliament would not at

in most areas. It is as serious as that, even at a some stage have accepted a meal from one or

lower level of government. It is beyond compreother of the people involved in many of the di-

hension that trips overseas can be sponsored by verse activities associated with the business of

the private commercial sector with a view to gainAustralia. There has to be a definition of the rules

ing a benefit for that sector.

applicable to the office of a member of parlia-

I urge the Prime Minister, when he next answers questions in the Parliament, to say that he will do something about the recommendations of the Bowen Committee. It is his task to do so.

ment. I see this as a necessary part of the determination that the Parliament will be required to undertake with respect to the recommendations of the Bowen Committee.

The Committee reported two years ago. It is imAt this stage, however, let me assert again that

portant that we now implement the code of conthere has been no acceptance by the Parliament of

duct it recommended. As my leader said, if we had any of those rules relating to private members.

implemented it there would be no question of Therefore, it is for the private member himself to

these gentlemen undertaking such a trip.

determine whether and to what degree he will

Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for accept concessional travel, hospitality and gifts. Communications) (3.46)-The report of the To the degree to which he accepts them, of Bowen Committee of Inquiry concerning Public course, it is, without any doubt, obligatory on him,

Duty and Private Interest needs to be looked at, if he fee~s that in any way they compromise him

first of all, in relation to the motion that has been on matters that come up for consideration in this

moved by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr place, to declare his interest. Those laws do not re-

Hayden) and seconded by the Deputy Leader of late to the Bowen Committee proposals. At this

the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen). In particular, stage they have not been adopted. I received a letthe two sections to which you, Mr Speaker, ter on 1 May 1981 from Mr K. A. Rosenhain, the

adverted in explaining the motion need to be Corporate Managing Director of the Myer

examined. I think we also need to have an underEmporium Ltd. It read:

standing of the recommendations of the Bowen There are many people including some Members of Parlia-

Committee report that the Government has acment, who have no appreciation of exactly what Cable Tele-

cepted and those parts of it yet to be considered. There is no doubt that with respect to those

vision is or can be. As far as I can see this condition will not change significantly unless some corrective action is taken.

people we customarily know as office holdersMinisters and public servants-the recommendations of the Bowen Committee report have

Given that the deliberations of the Broadcasting Tribunal will be news for the months before, during and after the hearings, it would seem that at least those Members of Parliament involved with communications should understand Cable

been adopted. Other sections of the report applyTelevision.

ing to the private members in this place at this stage have not been adopted. However, a code of conduct has been recommended. It is to that code that the motion moved by the Leader of the Opposition addressed itself. The Leader of the Opposition drew attention to section 8(c) in paragraph 4.9. It states:

I interpolate that the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) a few moments ago addressed himself to the f~ct that there would be no advantage in people finding out about cable television. Let me .assure him that the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal at the moment is conducting a public hearing into cable television and sub-

8. An officeholder should not (c) except as may be permitted under the rules applicable
to his office, accept any gift, hospitality or concessional travel offered in connection with the discharge of the

scription television in order that the community can be better informed on the matter and so that we can take decisions in this place on what steps

duties of his office.

are necessary for the advancement of those two

Public Duty and Private Interest

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2529

communication developments in Australia. There is a necessity for members of this place to know something more about cable television and subscription television than, J suggest, many now do. The letter continues:
If you agree, therefore, I would like to propose that provisions be made, from private enterprise, to send from three to five members of the Back Bench Committee for Communications as a study team to the 4-day Cable Television Convention from May 29 through June 1in Los Angeles, California.
Again, if you agree, would you please nominate those members of the committee you feel should comprise the study team.
I am sure the results of their deliberations will be beneficial to both the Parliament and the people of Australia.

constituents and to this Parliament. In those circumstances I find it very hard to accept the motion that has been advanced by the Leader of the Opposition. He is suggesting that the Bowen Committee report, particularly with respect to the two sections that he read out, is in some way in conflict with accepting overseas travel. If we are to accept that as a proposition, it would mean that a distinction must be drawn between trips of this nature and other trips that have been referred to in this place such as are offered by airlines. A number of members from both sides of this Parliament and from both Houses have accepted invitations to travel on inaugural journeys.

May I please hear from you.
Yours faithfully, K. A. ROSENHAIN
A response was sent on 14 May 1981 in which I stated:
My thanks for your letter of the 1st May in which you suggest that those Members of Parliament particularly involved with communications should have an opportunity to enhance their understanding and appreciation of cable television.
In this context you propose that provision be made from private enterprise to send from three to five members of the Back Bench Government Members Committee for Communications as a study team to the 4-day Cable Television Convention from 29th May to 1st June in Los Angeles, California.
The Government appreciates the generosity of your offer which I have discussed with the Chairman of the Committee, Mr David Jull. I am pleased to advise that some members of the Committee would be happy to accept your invitation, although it would be their personal decision to determine what assistance they would accept towards meeting the expenses of the trip.
It would be appreciated if you could liaise direct with Mr Jull to make final arrangements.
Mr Hayden-We might just note that it is inconsistent with the Prime Minister's ruling in 1978.
Mr SINCLAIR-Can I continue then--
Mr Hayden-Why have you changed the rules?
Mr SPEAKER-Order!
Mr Hayden-It is inconsistent with the Prime Minister's ruling in 1978.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will remain silent. He has spoken in the debate. He should not continue to interject.
Mr SINCLAIR-The point to which I seek to draw particular attention is that it is up to individual members to determine what assistance they accept towards meeting the expenses of a trip, whether they should go and the degree to which they find an invitation is in accordance with their own understanding of their obligations to their

As the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) indicated in his response at Question Time, an examination certainly needs to be made of the provisions contained in the report of the Bowen Committee in order that we can set down rules which are to be applicable to a member's office. At this time no rules are applicable to a member's office. Therefore, the suggestion that any member of this place might accept an invitation cannot be in breach of the rules mentioned by the Leader of the Opposition in his motion. Indeed, it is my understanding that Mr Rosenhain sent a similar invitation to the Leader of the Opposition. Whether the members of the Opposition accept that invitation, of course, is a matter for them in exactly the same way as it was a matter for the honourable member for Bowman and Senator Collard.
Mr Hayden-We rejected it. I said that. We rejected it as being inappropriate and improper.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition must remain silent.
Mr SINCLAIR~ The point is that, under the provisions of the Bowen Committee report, there is no obligation on any member of this place, other than Ministers who have already accepted the dictates of the Bowen Committee report. Until rules are prescribed for members other than those office-holders, it is not possible to say that the motion moved by the Leader of the Opposition is in fact correct. Therefore, I believe it is entirely a matter for an individual member to decide. It is a matter for the honourable member for Bowman and Senator Collard to determine to what degree they should accept an invitation and what hospitality they should accept in relation to it. In those circumstances, I do not believe it is appropriate for the Government to accept the motion moved by the Leader of the Opposition.
Mr KATTER (Kennedy) (3.S6)-For one or two reasons, J take advantage of the opportunity to address the House on this matter. The first

2530 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Public Duty and Private Interest

point I wish to make relates to a comment made Mr KATTER-I have had parliamentary trips

by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden). I to which we are all entitled. I do not doubt that

think just about everybody in the House agreed most honourable members have had them.

with his opening comments when he referred to Honourable members opposite have been on

the need for this matter to be aired and discussed. study tours. No doubt they have studied things

Having said that, let me make it perfectly clear and brought them back. I bet they did! If I were as

that both the honourable member for Bowman mean as the Leader of the Opposition, T would

eMr Jull) and Senator Collard are very well refer to one or two of the study trips overseas. We

known to me. I am convinced that they could not know what they would be doing-leaving the

give a damn in hell whether they go overseas. country. Let me talk about the matter before the

They simply saw an advantage perhaps to gain House. I am glad that the honourable member for

knowledge that would be valuable to the back Newcastle (Mr Charles Jones) is here because I

bench committee to which they belong. They gave consider him a most valued colleague. Is the Op-

some thought to the matter. I make that matter position spokesman on transport matters in the

clear.

House? He is not but I wish that he were in the

Again I refer to the fact that the Leader of the Opposition came forward to debate a matter that everyone felt could be aired to the advantage of the Parliament. Then came out that little mean streak that he cannot avoid, that little bit of meanness that seems to be hidden away in him. On this occasion, his meanness was aimed at me. I will accommodate him any time he likes. He said that the honourable member for Kennedy no doubt solicited an invitation to go to Japan. Let me tell the House that the honourable member for Kennedy, who has been here for 15 years, has not had a trip of any nature-with about three exceptions.

House. He and the honourable member for Newcastle well know the circumstances of this invitation to Japan. I cannot remember who the invitation even came from. So much for the claim that I solicited it! It was suggested that we spend five days in Japan, going to five different plants and looking at five experimental safety vehicles with the object of saving 10 lives a day in this nation. I am glad that the honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen) is here. He made a most valuable contribution to road safety when he chaired the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Road Safety. He knows how important it is. Let me say that we did the wrong thing by not going.

Opposition members interjecting--

Let me say also that the Prime Minister (Mr

Mr KATTER-I wonder why honourable members opposite were not out with the other

Malcolm Fraser) is impeccable in his behaviour when it comes to these perky trips.

juveniles in Kings Hall in the last few hours. They Mr Scott-He is what?

are giggling hyenas. The kids probably would not have them. I should like to return to the subject with which I want to deal. I reiterate that I have had three trips. I made one trip to the United

Mr KATTER-He is impeccable. He will nevercondone--
Opposition members interjecting-

Nations which was an extremely important Mr KATTER-Opposition members can yell

assignment, although perhaps honourable their heads off for weeks. He is impeccable when

members opposite do not consider it such. it comes to any sort of perk or any sort of advan-

Another trip was to Zimbabwe. If there is any tage for individual politicians. There are one or

doubt about how enjoyable that trip was honourtwo new members of the Opposition who, when-

able members opposite should ask the Opposition ever they are stuck for words-regrettably that is

spokesman on health matters. He can tell the not very often-start throwing mud. They have

House what a wonderful five weeks that was. The been mud slingers from the word go. Usually it

third trip was back to Zimbabwe for two days takes a little time for new members of the Oppo-

with the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in sition to grope in the gutter and throw slime

his aircraft for the celebrations, which were pretty across to this side of the House.

good, let me tell the House. But I must correct myself. I did have another trip overseas, one when I was Minister. I got on a punt and I went out through the Heads to meet HMAS Melbourne to welcome back Vietnam troops. That was overseas; it was over the Harbour at any rate. I am speaking from a position of advantage, as a person who has not had a trip, with those exceptions.

I wish to get back to the subject which we are debating. I have spoken for longer than I wished but I will conclude. The invitation was discussed by all members of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Road Safety. The honourable member for Newcastle decided that he would discuss the invitation with his troops. They were completely against accepting it. I then

Mr Kerin~What about parliamentary trips? wrote to the Prime Minister. He wrote back to me

Public Duty and Private Interest

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2531

and said that it was not wise to accept it and he did not think it was advisable at all for us to go to Japan. That was the end of it. The Leader of the Opposition said that I solicited an invitation. I could not even tell him whence it came. I deny that entirely. I think the Leader of the Opposition has a little streak of meanness in him which must come out from time to time. So long as he does not make me his target, I do not care how mean he gets.
Mr JULL (Bowman) (4.3)-Prior to my entering--
Mr Hayden-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. Two speakers in succession from the Government side have received the call in this debate. Would it not be appropriate for there to be a speaker from this side of the House?
Mr SPEAKER-Nobody from the Opposition stood.
Mr JULL-Prior to my entering this Parliament, 1 had a career in radio and television which spanned some 131 years. During that time J covered a multitude of areas of experience, ranging from journalism to the management of a metropolitan television station. During the period I was employed by a television station, 1 undertook a number of study tours. In fact, I visited the British Broadcasting Corporation twice. J also visited Independent Television, the National Broadcasting Corporation, the Columbia Broadcasting System and the Tokyo Broadcasting System. It was of interest and of great value to me to be able to learn during those visits of the tremendous advances that were being made in the electronic media. In fact, I have a working knowledge of cable television.
It is true that earlier this year Senator Collard and I were approached by a representative of the Myer organisation who suggested that it would be advantageous for us to go to the cable television conference which will be staged next weekend in Los Angeles and which will be attended by some 8,000 delegates from around the world. It is true
that Senator Collard and r approached the Minis-
ter for Communications (Mr Sinclair) and discussed it with him. It is also true that we had some doubts as to whether this trip would be viewed as some sort of pay-off. An invitation was duly extended, as the Minister has rightly pointed out. Because of the incredible explosion that will occur in this country in terms of communications during the next decade, Senator Collard and I decided on balance that it would be of very great advantage-not necessarily to our committee, although it would be, and not necessarily to the

Government, although I am sure it would be-to this Parliament if we were to attend.
One has only to consider the standard of debate that goes on in this House every time a communications Bill comes into the place to realise that an appalling lack of knowledge exists in this area in this House. Indeed, some of the classic speeches have been made in the Senate by the Opposition's spokesman on communications, Senator Button. Indeed, it would be of great advantage if Senator Button in fact attended this conference because he certainly has very little knowledge of the way cable television operates at this stage. The idea of going on this journey was for us to learn about and to communicate what is happening with regard to the tremendous international telecommunications explosion which is now occurring. In fact, we looked at the possibility of examining the developments that are occurring with satellites. Australia, obviously, is entering a period in which it will launch its own satellite. We will then have a communications system which will be of great benefit to each and every Australian, especially Australians in outback areas. At no time did J ever feel that my position would be compromised. Certainly it would not be compromised to any greater extent than it was during the 131 years that T worked in radio and television. It was not compromised during my time in that job when the opportunity for overseas travel came up. Certainly, I would not think my position would be compromised any more than that of a number of journalists throughout this country who take inaugural flights on a very regular basis.
Mr Cohen-You are treading on thin ice now.
Mr JULLMy position would not be compromised any more than that of anybody else in this House who accepted an invitation to go on an inaugural flight. The honourable member for Robertson said that we are treading on very thin ice. Frankly, this is what I am worried about.
Mr Cohen-Never attack the Press.
Mr JULL-Never attack the Press; that is right. Frankly, I am worried about that. Byopening up this whole area, obviously the Press would have a very real opportunity to examine every trip that is offered to a member of parliament. We all know that the Government of Poland offers members of certain political parties opportunities to study in that country. Invitations come from governments of places such as the Yemen and from Iron Curtain countries.
Mr Leo McLeay-What about Taiwan?

2532 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Public Duty and Private Interest

Mr JULL-Or Taiwan or any other extremist the next 10 years will have the opportunity to de-

governments which one might like to name. I supvelop one of the most magnificent communi-

pose that that is a matter for balance of jUdgment. cations system in the world. There was an oppor-

The balance of judgment should be, in fact, tunity for us to have an input into that line of

whether to take advantage of the opportunity of policy. But, on balance, purely because I do not

going to these places to learn about them and want to cause any particular embarrassment and

come back and discuss what we have seen and because 1 do not want to cause any problems for

what we have learned. Some people might think any member of this House, I have decided to with-

that sometimes those governments will try to draw from that trip.

place some obligation on us. Indeed, some years ago I travelled to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics with the honourable member for Griffith (Mr Humphreys). I think the honourable member and I have a very real appreciation of what happens when a foreign government does try to pour the acid on its official guests. I think we
handled that particularly well. I do not think there was ever one ounce of doubt that we would accept that sort of compromise or be influenced by the nature of what was given to us as a fait accompli. No women were involved; I think I should clear that up. But it is a fact that all of us are placed in this position. We are treading on very thin ice. Maybe this whole area should be opened up for debate and we should be given guidelines on where we should go.

Mr Katter-That is a shame.
Mr JULL----I think it is a shame, too. But, on balance, let us hope that this does not blow open the whole system of the educational process for parliamentarians because week after week we get nothing but lambasting from the Press on the ignorance of politicians, on the laziness of politicians and on the failure of our politicians. It would be nice if one day some member of the Press Gallery could do a constructive feature on exactly what is involved in being a member of this place. Indeed, if we do not have the opportunity to improve our education in the matters in which we deal I think it is going to be a very sorry day for this House, and most particularly for this Parliament. So on balance, I intend to advise the people who are providing the air ticket for this trip that J

will not be going tomorrow night. J think the

Last night I spoke for some time to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). I said to the Prime Minister at that time: 'Frankly, if this is going to be an embarrassment, I do not mind pulling out'. I cannot think of anything less exciting than sitting in an aeroplane for 17 hours and then going straight to a convention for four days. Whoever described this trip as a junket obviously knows very little about it. It would be obvious to the very meanest intelligence that when one goes on a trip such as this, one goes to work. We do not necessarily go to be under palm trees and be fed grapes and wine by some half-naked woman. That seems to be the implication of certain members of the Press Gallery. I do not think that sort of accusation, which is being conveyed to the public of Australia through the Press, should be levelled at members of the Parliament, whether they be members of the Government or members of the Opposition. Most of us who have been on a trip such as this realise that it is just a plain hard slog and plain hard work.

shame is that the Parliament will not have the value of the knowledge that will be gleaned from that world-wide conference which will be held this weekend.
Dr CASS (Maribyrnong) (4.12)-1 am prompted to join in the debate because of the remarks made by the honourable member for Bowman (Mr lull). I do not want particularly to defend or criticise members of the Press. I do not necessarily want to defend everything that people on this side of the House say in relation to the media and so on. I just think that the honourable member misunderstood the point of our criticism and comments in this matter. It is not a question of whether the Australian Labor Party is for or against the development of cable television. Of course we are in favour of all these things which will be of help and benefit to the community in the future and, clearly, communications is one such thing. Cable television is clearly a vehicle for far better communication between people. The question at issue is: Who is going to own it, who is

going to run it? That is where the doubt about the

The decision that I have made could make it wisdom of the honourable member's trip comes

very difficult for other members of the in. It is not that the honourable member is going

Parliament. I trust that the Leader of the Oppooff on a junket to lie under palm trees, and God

sition in raising this motion knows exactly What he knows what else he envisages. In my opinion that

has done for each and everyone of us this afteris not what the Press thought when it criticised the

noon. There was an opportunity for us to go and honourable member. It was raising the fundamen-

to learn about cable television. Australia during tal question of the propriety of someone going at

Public Duty and Private Interest

26 ~ay 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2533

the expense of a firm or a consortium which has a vested interest in getting its hands on the control of this particular area.
It was concerned about the propriety of the honourable member, as a member of the Government side of the Parliament-the side of Parliament which will determine policy-availing himself of this laudable opportunity to learn. If the conference is so important why could not the Government pay the honourable member's fare. The cost is only peanuts compared with all the money that the Government is spending on lots of other things. Why not at the same time send some honourable members from this side so that we can have a balanced and knowledgeable debate on this issue? The Press has criticised the honourable member for seemingly accepting an offer from a private consortium that has a very strong interest in gaining control of this area. How can the Government then claim to be taking part in the decision making process in a dispassionate fashion when clearly the honourable member, in a sense, is in the consortium's pocket from the point of view of the financial commitment that has been made to send him to the conference? That is the issue at stake.
When the honourable member criticised the spokesman of the Labor Party in the Senate for his attitude on this matter he again misunderstood what our member was trying to say. The Labor spokesman and this Party are not arguing against the use of technology in the way the honourable member is implying. We are arguing against a device that would have the power to concentrate the control of information in the hands of so few people. We are arguing against this power being put in the hands of private consortia such as the group that is seeking to send the honourable member off on this trip. These are the reasons why the Leader of the Opposition has raised this matter. We laud the Press for raising the issue. We are glad to see that the honourable member has at least seen sense and decided to withdraw.
~rllayden-~rSpeaker--
~r SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition has already spoken and I cannot call him.
~r lIayden-I want to indicate that after an hour of debate the honourable member for Bowman (~r Jull) is convinced that he should not go. He has stated that. He has been converted. I cannot see any point in proceeding with the motion.
~r SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman seek leave to withdraw the motion?
~r lIayden-Yes, in the circumstances. ~r SPEAKER-Is leave granted?

~r lIayden-I understand that Senator Collard has also withdrawn.
~r SPEAKER-There being no objection, the Leader of the Opposition may formally withdraw the motion.
~r lIayden-I formally do so. ~otion-by leave-withdrawn.
PERSONAL EXPLANATIONS ~r SPEAKER-The ~inister for the Capital Territory has indicated to me that he wishes to make a personal explanation. Does the honourable gentleman claim to have been misrepresented? Mr 1I0DG~AN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-Yes, ~r Speaker. Last night in the House of Assembly ~r Paul Whalan, an Australian Labor Party member, made a statement to the effect that the Government was planning to sell a number of facilities in the Australian Capital Territory, including the merry-go-round in Civic, the Erindale Centre, the Albert Hall, the Civic Olympic pool, the Birrigai camp next to the Tidbinbilla Fauna Reserve and the East Basin Pavillion. The honourable member referred to a document but he did not publicly identify that document. At the moment I do not quite know what he is referring to. 1 say quite categorically as Minister that there is no proposal to sell the merry-go-round or any of the other facilities referred to. There is no recommendation being brought forward by me or by my Department that the merry-go-round or any of the other facilities should be sold. 1 add for the record that we do not intend to put Lake Burley Griffin on the market for sale either. ~r TUCKEY (O'Connor)-~r Speaker-- ~r SPEAKER-Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
~rTUCKEY-Ido.
~r SPEAKER-If the honourable member wishes to make a personal explanation he may proceed.
~r TUCKEY-Thank you, ~r Speaker. On Thursday 14 ~ay during the adjournment debate the honourable member for Fremantle (~r Dawkins) at page 2482 of Hansard stated:
I will get to the honourable member for O'Connor in a moment. He is living evidence of the extent to which the Liberal Party in Western Australia has fallen into the hands of crooks and gangsters. This is one of the reasons-
When 1rose to speak I asked whether the honourable member for Fraser (~r Fry) had consulted the specialist character assassins of his own party.

2534 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Personal Explanations

Apparently the honourable member for Fremanannual report and financial statements of the

tle seemed to identify with those words because by Australian Tobacco Board for the year ended 31

way of interjection he said:

December 1980.

Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. The honourable member for O'Connor--
The Deputy Speaker called the House to order. The honourable member then said:
Still owes the Shire of Carnarvon $180,000-. --

SENATE STANDING COMMITTEE ON FINANCE AND GOVERNMENT OPERATIONS
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-For the information of honourable members. I present

The Deputy Speaker again called the House to the text of a statement tabled in the Senate by the

order. The honourable member for Fremantle Minister for Finance concerning the report of the

continued:

Senate Standing Committee on Finance and

That he has misappropriated.

Government Operations on the Advance to the

I say that this is incorrect. I thought it might be Minister for Finance.

worth pointing out how tall stories from little

AUSTRALIA'S DEVELOPMENT

acorns grow. On 16 May 1979 the Shire of Car-

ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS

narvon decided by resolution to send its entitlement of two delegates to the annual conference of the Country Shire Councils Association of Western Australia. As I would be attending as the president and consequently the chairman of that

Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs)-For the information of honourable members. I present the 1979-80 annual review of Australia's development assistance programs.

conference, it was decided that my air fare PARLIAMENTARY DISALLOWANCE OF

totalling $176 should also be paid. Section

DELEGATED LEGISLATION

513 (1) (G) (I) of the Western Australian Local Government Act prescribes that a council may pay reasonable expenses necessarily incurred by not more than two delegates of the council and one other member appointed by the council as an observer. The auditor consequently decided that

Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations)-For the information of honourable members. I present the text of a statement by the Attorney-General concerning parliamentary disallowance of delegated legislation.

the council should not have paid my fare to act as

THIRD UNITED NATIONS

president. I have been advised accordingly. Both CONFERENCE ON THE LAW OF THE

the council and I opposed this decision and the

SEA: AUSTRALIAN DELEGATION

council supports my refusal to pay as a matter of principle. I think the honourable member for Fremantle might realise the principle behind it. I could afford the cost of this travel. However, obviously it should not be a prerequisite to attaining the presidency of a body such as the Country Shire Councils Association that one should have the personal means to be able to finance one's attendance at such conferences.
Finally, I point out that just last week, on Wednesday, 20 May, I was entertained in Carnarvon by the Shire of Carnarvon at its special invitation and in the company of some 60 guests. A presentation was made to me at that time, and five speakers rose to their feet-they included a

Ministerial Statement
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs)-I table two reports of the Australian Delegation to the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea. They are the the reports of the Ninth Session of the Conference held in New York from 3 March to 4 April 1980 and of the Resumed Ninth Session which was held in Geneva from 28 July to 29 August 1980. With your leave, Mr Speaker, and the leave of the House, I would like to say a few words about the reports and about the Law of the Sea Conference itself.
Leave granted.

prominent member of the Australian Labor Party Mr STREET-Ever since the first substantive

branch in Carnarvon-all of who spoke in my session of the Conference in Caracas in Venezuela

honour. It appears the people of Carnarvon in 1974, the Australian delegation has produced

consequently know a little more about me than detailed reports of developments at the Confer-

the honourable member for Fremantle.

ence. These reports contain an account of the

AUSTRALIAN TOBACCO BOARD

negotiations and have annexed to them copies of the most significant statements that were made

Mr SINCLAIR (New England Minister for during that particular session as well as copies of

Communications) - Pursuant to section 26 of the the negotiating texts produced by the Conference.

Tobacco Marketing Act 1965, I present the Since the Fourth Session of the Conference in

Conference on the Law of the Sea

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2535

1976, the Delegation's reports have been It is self-evident and needs no emphasising by

published in bound volumes and have been tabled me that, as an island continent with extensive off-

in this Parliament. The result is that we now have shore areas and a heavy dependence on inter-

available to us a detailed history of the Law of the national trade, Australia has a vital interest in the

Sea Conference, as seen through the eyes of the issues before the Law of the Sea Conference. It is

Australian Delegation. As far as we can ascertain, an objective of the Australian Government. that

no other delegation has prepared such comprethe International Law of the Sea be cleared 6f the

hensive reports and few governments have tabled doubts and uncertainties that exist today and that

the reports of their delegation to the Law of the some new concepts around which a wide measure

Sea Conference in their Parliaments. Honourable of agreement has grown up should be recognised.

members may be interested to know that the reTo this end, successive governments of Australia,

ports are also widely read in sectors of the comboth on this side of the House and on the other,

munity interested in the Law of the Sea, especially have taken the view that our very substantial

in Australian universities and in fishing and coninterest in the Law of the Sea would best be pro-

servationist bodies. They are also studied closely tected by the early adoption of a comprehensive

by State governments and by the mining industry, and widely-accepted Convention. Australian del-

both of which have had representatives attached egations have worked hard to ensure that OUf

to the Australian Delegation at the last few interests are met in the texts that have been pre-

sessions of the Conference. Furthermore, the repared by the Conference. I am pleased to report

ports are provided to a number of foreign governto honourable members that these efforts have

ments. I understand that they are found to be of largely been successful.

considerable use, particularly by our neighbours in the South Pacific region.

Before the start of the Tenth Session of the Law of the Sea Conference, which was held in New

In short, the reports of the Australian delegations to the Law of the Sea Conference represent what I believe is a successful attempt by successive Australian governments to make information, on a complex subject of great significance to Australia, comprehensible and accessible to the Australian community. I commend them to the attention of honourable members. The Law of the Sea Conference is perhaps the largest, certainly the longest running, diplomatic conference that has been convened since the founding of the United Nations. It is an ambitious attempt by the international community to try to bring order and certainty to an area covering seven-tenths of the earth's surface-an area where legal doubts and uncertainty currently exist. The draft Convention, which is now being considered by the Conference, has been painstakingly put together over the last six or so years. It contains over 350 articles on every aspect of the Law of the Sea. There are articles defining the limits of national jurisdiction over the territorial sea, exclusive economic zone and continental shelf; there are articles providing for freedom of passage through straits used for international navigation and through archipelagos; there are articles on the protection and preservation of the marine environment and on the conduct of marine scientific research; and of considerable significance for the future, the Draft

York from 9 March to 24 April this year, there was reason to hope that it might be possible to conclude the negotiations on the outstanding issues, so that the way would be cleared for a Law of the Sea Convention to be opened for signature at a special meeting of the Conference in Caracas, perhaps later this year. As honourable members may be aware, however, the new United States Administration decided to review its policies towards the Law of the Sea Conference and indicated that it would not be able to participate in further substantive negotiations until that review was completed. Because the Conference is proceeding on the basis that the provisions of the new Law of the Sea Convention should, if possible, be adopted by consensus, one of the consequences of the American decision was that it was not possible to conclude the negotiations at the Tenth Session. As I indicated in response to a question in this House on 30 April, the Government has taken available opportunities to explain to the United States Government that, while we fully understand its need to review its policies on the Law of the Sea, we hope that the review will be completed quickly so that a Convention, in which Australia has vital interests, can be adopted as soon as possible. Indeed, I spoke in these terms to Secretary of State Haig during my visit to Washington in March.

Convention proposes a regime to govern the reThe next session of the Law of the Sea Confer-

covery of the mineral riches of the deep seabed beence will be held in Geneva in August this year. I

yond national jurisdiction, which the United understand that it is unlikely that the United

Nations has agreed should be regarded as 'the States review will be completed by that date. The

common heritage of mankind'.

Government is hopeful, nevertheless, that it will

2536 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Conference on the Law of the Sea

prove possible to make more progress at that Session than at the last, so that the great advances that have been made in recent years in drawing up the Draft Convention can, as I said here on 30 April, be translated into a document which governments can ratify. I can assure honourable members that the Government will do its best to keep them fully informed of developments on a matter of such importance to Australia.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) -by leave-The statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) is important. He referred to the long history of the Law of the Sea negotiations which have gone on for six years to eight years. Tremendous efforts have been made by over 150 countries to bring the negotiations to a successful conclusion. Yet, we find ourselves in this position, without any consultation, of the United States effectively stalling the completion of the Convention on the very eve of its success. We have to be very critical of this situation because the reason given was that the new Reagan Administration virtually wanted time to consider its position. In the process of so doing, the Administration also sacked all its negotiators. The point that ought to be emphasised is that these negotiations have been going on, as Tsaid, for six years, seven years or eight years.
Today I gave notice of a motion which I hope we will pass. It related to the Law of the Sea and to the fact that we will want this House to say that the Australian people want the Convention adopted. We would like this to be done when the Tenth Session resumes in Geneva in August 1981. We want to do that to convey to the United States the views of the Australian nation. I add that a motion in similar terms was passed unanimously by the Canadian Parliament. I think that we can say on this matter that we have a bipartisan issue and that we want to see it carried into effect on the basis of Australia's fundamental interests. It is important. The Government should applaud our views on this matter. Australia has a lot of economic and strategic interest hanging on the successful conclusion of these negotiations. For a start, the territorial sea will cover 12 miles and not three miles, as is now the case. In addition, there will be a 200-mile economic zone which will give us effective, if limited, sovereignty over an additional million square miles of territory off the Australian coast which undoubtedly is rich in mineral, hydrocarbon and marine resources. It will guarantee freedom of passage for our merchant fleet and navy through international straits and archipelagic waters and it will provide for internationally regulated and ordered exploitation of the resources of the high seas and deep sea bed which

will be not only to our advantage but also to the advantage of underdeveloped and poorer countries. There will also be protection and preservation of the marine environment.
The Opposition can think of nothing more important than that element. But, in the process of expressing our views, I advert to the fact that the Government has given away a lot of its national interest by legislating domestically in an area which I think might well tie the hands of our negotiators in the international conference if they are asked whether their own Government has passed legislation pursuant to its sovereignty virtually to give title for the offshore areas to the States. We are not here to berate the States but, if we are at a negotiating table, at least we ought to be consistent in our views. If, in the national interest, the Law of the Sea Convention is adopted speedily, for the reasons I have mentioned, how ridiculous we would look because the territorial sea for the first three miles would belong to the respective States and the next nine miles would belong to the Australian national government. That is how inconsistent our legislation is. In regard to the protection of the marine environment against dumping, there will be no legislation to restrict dumping outside the three-mile limit but if we adopt the Law of the Sea Convention we will not have that constraint. It is important that we clearly make the point now that, unless something is done urgently, we will face continual delay. There is some suspicion that the Reagan Administration deliberately decided not to go ahead with the adoption of the Convention because of certain financial interests in the United States which were concerned about a restriction on seabed mining.
Mr Jacobi-Oil companies.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN Oil companies. If that is the position, it is reprehensible conduct. We have to say so forcefully because, if 150 countries of the world can agree, why is it that the major superpower can say that it has to have another look at it? It does not help its own interests from the point of view of its leadership in the world and it will not engender support from many of the nations that have spent so much time trying to rationalise the many problems associated with these measures. We regard the whole of the Law of the Sea Convention as extremely important. Many of the world's resources are connected with the sea and difficult questions concerning the balancing of interests between national and international considerations must be resolved. We pay tribute to our own representatives who have played such a splendid part but we ask again: How tenuous is their situation if we have a divided national position and not a united international

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2537

standing? In other words, we are saying internationally that we want the Law of the Sea Convention to give clear sovereignty to our Australian nation; yet, as I have said, in the process we have become prone to fragmenting the many parts of this Convention. A number of countries have three-mile territorial seas, a number have 12-mile territorial seas and a number vary considerably. The territorial seas of one country vary between three miles and 12 miles. One can see immediately that, if we are to talk about international control and the effective rationalisation of resources and their development, we should at least have a clear, unanimous decision such as we would have had if the United States had agreed to the most recent Convention. I say in the strongest terms possible, that, if the United States cannot see its way clear to agree to this Convention at the next sitting, it will be deemed to be one that should not be pursued any further. To delay it further would create the suspicion that it was not wanted in the first place. I think that would be quite a tragedy for the world and it would create serious difficulties for Australia and all other nations involved.
SINAI PEACEKEEPING FORCE: AUSTRALIAN PARTICIPATION
Ministerial Statement
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs)-by leave-The purpose of this statement is not to announce a decision by the Government on Australian participation in the proposed force-Australia has still not yet formally been invited to participate in the force---but to set before the House the facts and information additional to that available when I last spoke on this subject on 14 May, and to indicate the issues which the Government will take into account in reaching a decision. Honourable members will be aware that the focus of Middle East peace negotiations over the last three and a half years has been the process begun by President Sadat when he visited 1erusalem and addressed the Knesset in November 1977. President Sadat's unprecedented and dramatic visit to lerusalem led to negotiations between Egypt and Israel, with the United States also involved, which culminated in the Camp David Accords in September 1978 and the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty of March 1979.
Essentially the Camp David Accords and the peace treaty can be divided into two parts. The first dealt with the Israeli occupied territories of the West Bank and Gaza and set out a procedure for implementing 'full autonomy' for the inhabitants of those two areas after the establishment of an elected self-governing authority. The Government regrets that progress on this aspect of the

peace process has been disappointingly slow. Nevertheless this aspect of the peace process, while proving extremely difficult to implement, has helped to isolate the issues involved and has contributed to a greater understanding, by those outside the Middle East as well as those directly involved, of those issues. It must be emphasised that the undertakings concerning the return of occupied territory in the Sinai must be met if progress on these complex issues is to be made. The Government, for its part, believes that successfully carrying out the accords as they relate to the Sinai could be crucial in influencing those sections of the Arab world which have strong reservations about whether the complex problems of the Middle East can be resolved by means other than conflict.
Undoubtedly the major achievement of the peace process has been the bilateral peace treaty between Egypt and Israel. This has proved that Israel and an Arab country, despite 30 years of bitterness and war, can negotiate a substantive peace agreement involving basic concessions on both sides. There is no doubt that as a result both Israel and Egypt have received substantial benefit. Israel's security interests have been enhanced substantially while Egypt has regained a good part of the Sinai and is now able to concentrate on domestic economic reconstruction. This is a significant achievement and must not be put at risk. Progress on the second part of the accords, the bilateral aspects of the peace treaty, has been good. Diplomatic relations have been established, Ambassadors exchanged and civil aviation, commercial, telecommunications and other links have been established. In addition, and most importantly from the Egyptian perspective, Israel has withdrawn from approximately two-thirds of the Sinai. Egypt now controls all of the Sinai west of an interim line running from EI Arish in the north down to Ras Muhammed on the southern tip of the Sinai. Annex I of the peace treaty stipulates that Israel will complete its withdrawal from the Sinai 'not later than three years from the date of exchange of the instruments of ratification of this treaty'. Hence by the end of April 1982 Israel is scheduled to have withdrawn completely from the Sinai. It is quite clear from the text of the treaty that Egypt, Israel and the United States envisaged that United Nations forces would supervise both the Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai and the implementation of the security arrangements agreed on in the treaty. Article VI of Annex I stipulates the role and functions of such United Nations forces.
Since the signing of the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty in March 1979, the United Nations has

2538 REPRESENTATlVES 26 May 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

been unable to give any mandate which would enable UN forces to operate in a peacekeeping role in the Sinai. The United Nations Emergency Force-- UNEF-which was carrying out peacekeeping operations in the Sinai ceased operations in July 1979 when the Soviet Union indicated that it would veto an extension of its mandate. Honourable members will be aware that an Australian helicopter unit was based at lsmailia as part of UNEF. The United Nations Truce Supervisory Organisation-UNTSO-to which a number of Australian officers are seconded, still has about a dozen or so observers in the Sinai but could not be expected to assume the tasks of a Sinai peacekeeping force without a drastic revision of its mandate and a substantial increase in its numbers in the Sinai. Again it is clear that the Soviet Union, which has consistently opposed the Camp David Accords and the peace treaty, would not agree to an extension of UNTSO's mandate. In recent months there have been informal discussions in the United Nations about the possibility of obtaining a United Nations peacekeeping force to oversee the final Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai and to implement the peacekeeping functions as envisaged by the treaty.
On 21 April the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, His Excellency Kamal Hassan Ali, requested the President of the Security Council to initiate, as a matter or urgency, consultations with members of the Security Council. The purpose was to explore the role of the United Nations, and specifically whether the Security Council would monitor and supervise the withdrawal of Israeli forces from Egyptian territories, and participate in the reciprocal security arrangements through the establishment of the force and observers, provided for under the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty. On 18 May in a letter to the Egyptian Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Japanese President of the Security Council, Mr Nisibori, replied to the effect that following consultations with individual members of the Security Council, including the Soviet Union, the members of the Security Council were unable, for various reasons, to reach the necessary agreement to facilitate the withdrawal of the Israeli forces and to participate in the security arrangements provided for in the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty. I seek leave of the House to incorporate in Hansard the letter from the Egyptian Minister for Foreign Affairs, Kamal Hassan Ali, to the President of the Security Council and the President's reply to the Egyptian Minister.
Leave granted.

The letters read as follows-

Following are the texts of the Egyptian letter of 21 April to the Irish president of the Security Council and of the reply dated 18 May from the Japanese president of the council:

Begins: Excellency,

18 May 1981

With reference to the letter dated 21 April 1981 from your excellency addressed to the president of the Security Council for the month of April, I should like to inform your excellency
that the individual consultations I have undertaken lead to the conclusion that the members of the Security Council are unable, for various reasons, to reach the necessary agreement on
the proposal contained therein.

Accept, Excellency, the assurances of my highest consideration.

MASAHIRO NISIBORI President of the Security Council His Excellency Mr Kamal Hassan Ali Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Arab Republic ofEgypt Cairo (Egypt)
21 April 1981
Excellency,

Upon instructions from my government. I have the honour to bring to your attention a matter which is directly related to the maintenance of peace and security in the Middle East region.

Ever since the inception of the United Nations, the organization has been called upon to ensure the maintenance of peace and security in the Middle East. At this time, when serious attempts are being made to bring the Middle East closer to a comprehensive peace, it is legitimate to expect that the United Nations, particularly. the Security Council whose primary responsibility is the maintenance of international peace and security, should continue its established practice in undertaking its constructive role to ensure the durability, and consolidation of peace and securi ty in the Middle East.

The Security Council was seized with the situation in the Middle East since armed hostilities erupted, on November 22, 1967 the Council unanimously adopted resolution 242, a resolution which is considered the universally agreed basis for a just and comprehensive settlement to the Middle East problem. Security Council Resolution 242 (1967) required that the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East should include the application of both the following
principles:

Quote: (1) withdrawal of Israel's armed forces from territories occupied in the recent conflict.

(2) termination of all claims or states of belligerency and respect for and acknowledgement of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and political independence of every state in the area and their right to live in peace within secure andrecognised boundaries free from threats of acts of force.
unquote . . .

The resolution further prescribed, as security arrangements:

. . . guaranteeing the territorial inviolability and political independence of every state in the area through measures including the establishment of demilitarized zones . . .

In accordance with this resolution, the Secretary-General appointed a special representative to promote agreement and assist efforts to achieve a peaceful and acceptable settlement. Towards this end, the special representative submitted, on

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2539

February 8th 1971 an aide memoire, to Egypt and Israel. The aide memoire called upon Egypt and Israel to enter into a peace agreement as a first step towards a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East problem. Such an approach was endorsed by the general assembly with increased majorities when it adopted resolutions 2799 (XXVI) and 2941 (XXVII).
In this context, Egypt and Israel concluded a peace treaty on March 26th 1979 and registered it with the Secretary General on 15 May 1979 in accordance with article 102 of the charter. Consistent with the underlying principles and basic provisions of security council resolution 242 (1967) the treaty stipulated that Israel will withdraw its armed forces behind the international boundary between Egypt and Israel by April 1982. Within this context and to ensure the durability and further consolidation of peace and security, Egypt and Israel agreed to reciprocal security arrangements and a request that the United Nations provide forces and observers.
In the light of the above, the government of the Arab Republic of Egypt views it timely for the Security Council to consider, on an urgent basis, the modalities for carrying out the required responsibilities for ensuring peace and security in the Middle East.
Towards this end, my government has instructed me to approach your excellency, with a view to consulting the members of the Security Council in order to ascertain the role of the United Nations, and specifically whether the security council, would undertake to facilitate the withdrawal of the Israeli forces from Egyptian territories' and to participate in the reciprocal security arrangement herein referred to through the establishment of the force and observers provided for in the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty.
In this connection, it may be important to confirm that Egypt's request emanates from its solemn commitment to the principles of the charter of the United Nations, from a deep conviction that the presence of the United Nations is the most appropriate formula for ensuring the maintenance of peace and security, and that this request falls within its sovereign rights in liberating its territories and pursuing a policy aimed at establishing a just, comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East.
As we have been conducting informal consultations with Security Council members for several weeks, I would appreciate receiving at the earliest possible date, the results of your excellency's consultations.
Accept, Excellency, the assurances of my highest consideration.
(Signed) KAMAL HASSAN ALI Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Arab Republic of Egypt His Excellency MrNoelDorr President of the Security Council Unite! Nations, N.Y. 10017
Mr STREET-I deeply regret that the letter of the President of the Security Council effectively rules out, for the immediate future at least, any United Nations involvement in the withdrawal of Israeli forces from the Sinai under the terms stipulated by the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty. United Nations involvement in this crucial area is therefore not an option. The House will be aware that Security Council Resolution 242, which was agreed on after the 1967 Middle East war, called

for an Israeli withdrawal from occupied territories. Egypt has expressed the hope that a nonUnited Nations multinational force will only be of a temporary nature and that the way should be kept open for its replacement by a United Nations force at a later stage. Against the possibility that the United Nations would not agree to fulfil the role envisaged for it, President Carter in letters dated 26 March 1979 to both President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin undertook, and I am quoting directly, 'to ensure the establishment and maintenance of an acceptable alternative multinational force'. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard the letters from President Carter to President Sadat and Prime Minister Begin.
Leave granted.
The letters read as follows-
THE WHITE HOUSE Washington 26 March, 1979
Dear Mr President: I wish to confirm to you that subject to United States Con-
stitutional processes:
In the event of an actual or threatened violation of the Treaty of Peace between Egypt and Israel, the United States will, on request of one or both of the Parties, consult with the Parties with respect thereto and will take such other action as it may deem appropriate and helpful to achieve compliance with the Treaty.
The United States will conduct aerial monitoring as requested by the Parties pursuant to Annex I of the Treaty.
The United States believes the Treaty provision for permanent stationing of United Nations personnel in the designated limited force zone can and should be implemented by the United Nations Security Council. The United States will exert its utmost efforts to obtain the requisite action by the Security Council. If the Security Council fails to establish and maintain the arrangements called for in the Treaty, the President will be prepared to take those steps necessary to ensure the establishment and maintenance of an acceptable alternative multinational force.
Sincerely, JIMMY CARTER His Excellency Mohamed Anwar EI-Sadat, President of the Arab Republic of Egypt
THE WHITE HOUSE Washington 26 March, 1979
Dear Mr Prime Minister: I wish to confirm to you that subject to United States Con-
stitutional processes:
In the event of an actual or threatened violation of the Treaty of Peace between Israel and Egypt, the United States will on request of one or both of the Parties, consult with the Parties with respect thereto and will take such other action as it may deem appropriate and helpful to achieve compliance with the Treaty.
The United States will conduct aerial monitoring as requested by the Parties pursuant to Annex I of the Treaty.

2540 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

The United States believes the Treaty provision for permanent stationing of United Nations personnel in the designated limited force zone can and should be implemented by the United Nations Security Council. The United States will exert utmost efforts to obtain the requisite action by the Security Council. If the Security Council fails to establish and maintain the arrangements called for in the Treaty, the President will be prepared to take those steps necessary to ensure the establishment and maintenance of an acceptable alternative multinational force.

His Excellency Menachem Begin, Prime Minister of the State ofIsrael

Sincerely, JIMMY CARTER

Mr STREET-It has been suggested that the formation of such a force is not a part of the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty accords. Nothing could be further from the truth. President Carter's letter is and remains an essential docu~ ment accompanying the peace treaty ratified by both Egypt and Israel. The failure of the United Nations to fulfil the role envisaged for it in the peace treaty represents the basis for the current endeavours by Egypt, Israel and the United States to fulfil their obligations to the peace treaty through the establishment of an alternative multinational peacekeeping force.

In the absence of any effective United Nations peacekeeping force the United States concluded an agreement in September 1979 with both Egypt and Israel on interim arrangements in which the already existing Sinai Field Mission, which is an American establishment, staffed by American civilians, would continue its monitoring functions in the Sinai. The Israelis whilst agreeing to these arrangements made it clear that they were acceptable only in the interim period while they still had a substantial force stationed in eastern Sinai. It is essential that the Parliament understands that Israel regards the establishment of an effective peacekeeping force as an integral part of the Treaty, indeed as an essential prerequisite for their final withdrawal from the Sinai.

Put bluntly, in the absence of United Nations involvement, failure to form an effective multinational force would risk provoking a refusal by Israel to withdrawal from the final third of the Sinai. The consequences of such a refusal cannot be overemphasised. It would be a very severe, if not catastrophic, blow to the Camp David peace process and the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty. Beyond this, and in the absence of any progress on the crucial Palestinian issue, it could imperil future prospects for attaining a comprehensive, negotiated peace in the Middle East. Further, It would seriously dent the faith of two nations which, after decades of conflict and death, have deliberately chosen the path of peace through

negotiation and compromise as an alternative to mutually ruinous conflict.
The fundamental reason why Israel agreed to withdraw from the Sinai was that a satisfactory set of arrangements to guarantee its security had been agreed upon. These arrangements quietened Israel's legitimate fears about its security and gave it the confidence to take the decision to withdraw. With an effective peacekeeping force in place in the Sinai, Israel's southern flank will be secure. It is the Government's hope that in these circumstances the Israelis would move with greater confidence to negotiate on outstanding issues affecting the future status of the West Bank and Gaza, including the right of the Palestinian people to a homeland.
Since President Sadat's visit to Jerusalem in November 1977 he has pursued bold and imaginative policies in the cause of a negotiated settlement with Israel. Any failure to implement fully the provisions of the peace treaty could react adversely on Egypt's ability to carry out its commitments. Moreover, the uncertain and volatile situation in Lebanon reinforces the urgency of dissipating, by peaceful means, the atmosphere of suspicion and conflict which has dominated the Middle East for so long.
Amongst the factors which will be taken into consideration by the Government if and when a formal approach is made to Australia to participate in a multinational peacekeeping force in the Sinai are: First, that Australia's overall interests are served by maintaining the momentum for the peaceful resolution of conflict in the Middle East. Secondly, the Government will need to consider the means available to maintain the momentum for peace. As I stated earlier, the inevitability of a Soviet veto has once again effectively removed United Nations involvement from consideration. Thirdly, is the proposed multinational peacekeeping force in accordance with the Camp David Accords and the spirit of United Nations Resolution 242, both of which enjoy the unreserved bipartisan support of this Parliament? Fourthly, can the Government support the formation of such a force? Finally, if Australia is formally invited to participate in such a force, are the conditions of participation such as to warrant consideration of Australia's involvement?
Australia has established a record of participation in international peacekeeping operations, both within and outside the United Nations context, which the people of Australia can be justly proud of. By their very nature peacekeeping operations involve risks. The safety of any Australian force associated with the proposed peacekeeping.

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2541

operation in the Sinai, as well as the possible force on which final agreement has not yet been

effects on our overall interests in the Middle East, reached. Negotiations are still continuing, and

would weigh heavily in any deliberations by the whilst I understand that Egypt, israel and the

Government. The factors outlined above accuUnited States are close to agreement, the final de-

rately reflect the present level and current state of tails of the force are still to be concluded. I ask the

the Government's thinking. I emphasise again, as House to keep this in mind.

I did in my statement on 14 May, that any communications between Australia and the parties concerned can be described as being only exploratory at this stage. Even as I address the House today negotiations proceed between Egypt, Israel and the United States about the membership, structure and detailed functions of such a force.

On 19 May the Secretary of State replied to my letter and dealt with some of the general concerns and provided answers to some of the specific questions I had raised. Additionally, Australian officials both here and overseas have sought, and are continuing to seek further information concerning the proposed Sinai force. It is apparent

In my statement to the House on 14 May, I said from the Secretary of State's letter to me, that the

that the Government believes that such an exUnited States Administration shares the Govern-

ploratory approach is both justified and prudent ment's view on a wide range of issues related to

in the present circumstances. It was in accordance the force. Like us, it believes it to be important

with this exploratory approach that in response to that a sufficient range of countries participate to

an earlier message from the United States Secensure that the force is not narrowly based politi-

retary of State I wrote to Mr Haig, on 27 April. In cally or geographically. The United States be-

my letter I pointed out that the Australian lieves that Third World participation is import-

Government's preference remained for a United ant. We understand that a number of countries

Nations peacekeeping force. I referred to allefrom Asia and Latin America are currently being

gations in the media in this country and the approached to consider participation and we

United States that the proposed multinational expect states from other parts of the world, in-

force would have a role beyond the Sinai itself. I cluding Europe, to be invited in due course.

also referred to speculation about the future use of air bases located in that part of the Sinai which Egypt is scheduled, under the terms of the peace treaty, to recover in 1982. I stated that it was important to dispel such suggestions.

Secretary of State Haig has clearly stated that the only role of the proposed force is that of peacekeeping in the Sinai. He assured me that any contribution of the United States contingent is for the specific purpose of peacekeeping. Further-

I noted that before the Australian Government more, the peace treaty states that the airfields in

could make any commitment to participate in the the Sinai will be transferred to Egypt for civilian

force it would have to be assured that other paruse upon Israeli evacuation, and that these facili-

ticipants would give the force a broad geographities will be under full Egyptian sovereignty and

cal and political balance. Moreover, I pointed out control. The mandate for the proposed force will

that Australia's relations with the Arab world will be Article VI of Annex 1 of the peace treaty. The

have to be taken into account. Whilst almost all of Government understands that details concerning

these governments have opposed the Camp David the command and control arrangements, as well

peace process they have not been opposed to all as the composition of the force including its civ-

aspects equally. I said that the Government would ilian elements are still being negotiated. The

welcome advice about the command structure of Government will require further information on

the force, its controlling authority and the this aspect. This would include details concerning,

proposed relationship between that authority and for example, mechanisms for resolving disputes

the force. I sought information about the financbetween the parties, and other aspects of

ing of the force and asked for advice about the co-ordination.

proposed duration of any commitment, mentioning that it would obviously be difficult for the Australian Government to consider an openended commitment. Finally, I mentioned that because the force would be operating on Egyptian and Israeli territor:Y, any formal approach to Australia should be extended by those two countries.

The parties are presently negotiating the establishment of a peacekeeping force of a size sufficient to carry out the functions agreed by Egypt and Israel. Precise details are being worked out at this time. As we understand current thinking, the force is likely to consist of about two thousand men. [n addition to infantry battalions, it is envisaged there would be a need for support el-

As I stated earlier, it has become apparent from ements including logistics and communications

the information we have obtained that there are a units. One or more of these elements might be

number of aspects of the proposed multinational provided by one of the countries contributing to

2542 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

the infantry battalions, or they could come from different states altogether. As was envisaged in the peace treaty, it is anticipated that units of the force will be located in the north in the Rafah area and at Sharm Al Shaykh. The contingents would man check points and observation posts and operate patrols in Zone C as defined in the peace treaty. The observers would perform verification functions in Zones A, Band D.
The financial arrangements are yet to be finalised, although the hope has been expressed that those contributing states that are in a position to do so will contribute their services, or some part of them, free of charge. The duration of participation by contributing countries remains unclear. It is not expected, however, that national contingents will be required to serve indefinitely although there is likely to be a requirement that an acceptable force be maintained in the Sinai so long as either party believes it to be necessary. Current planning is based on the hope that various contingents would agree to serve for a specific duration.
As I mentioned earlier, the reaction of other Arab countries will also be important to us. Their major disagreement has been over the mechanism for solving the Palestinian issue which they regard as the core of the Middle East issue. They have not taken exception to, nor do they dispute, Egypt's right to regain its territory from Israel. This, I believe, is a major distinction when considering likely Arab reaction to possible Australian involvement in a multinational Sinai peacekeeping force.
In setting out the above details I have sought to give as full an account as possible of the current state of play concerning the proposed peacekeeping force. I emphasise again, that at this stage Australia has not been invited to participate and I have already referred to the negotiations which are still proceeding between Egypt, Israel and the United States. It is clear, nevertheless, that Australian participation would be welcomed by those countries and that it may only be a matter of time before a formal invitation is extended to Australia.
I believe it would be appropriate to make a further brief mention of Australia's interests in the Middle East. In my statement on 14 May I explained that whilst Australia has limited influence in that area our interest in the maintenance of stability in that region is not limited. The Government believes that this interest is best served by the process of agreement through negotiation and compromise rather than recourse to war. For many years Australia has had important

links with the Middle East. These links included our dependence for many years on the Suez Canal as a major trade route to the Mediterranean and Europe. Thousands of Australians fought in Egypt, Libya, Palestine and Syria in two world wars in the cause of peace and, over the last 25 years thousands of migrants from Arab countries have settled in Australia in search of peace. In more recent times this country has contributed with distinction to peacekeeping operations under United Nations auspices in this region. An opportunity now exists for Parliament to express its views on whether Australia has a possible further role in the same cause. In this context I quote from the speech of the Leader of the Opposition (Mf Hayden) on 21 September 1978, Hansard page 1308, in which he said, inter alia:
Camp David has been a first step but a critically important One. President Carter's initiative in convening the meeting, and his political skill and courage in keeping it going, have created the essential momentum for the next steps, which may well be even more difficult. Our hope is that all the parties, and others who must necessarily become involved now, will maintain the momentum.
Further in his speech he stated:
The Prime Minister's statement on this matter is a carefully considered one, as is proper in such a complex. sensitive and important matter. [ commend him for that and assure him. this House and the nation that on this great matter genuine concern for the achievement of lasting peace in the Middle East is a matter of bipartisan commitment.
In conclusion, 1 hope that, on such an important issue, the debate will be a well informed and rational one. The Government is hopeful that it will be possible to maintain a bipartisan approach towards the Camp David Accords, the EgyptIsraeli peace treaty and the need to maintain the momentum for peace in the Middle East. I present the following paper:
Sinai Peacekeeping Force-Australian ParticipationMinisterial Statement, 26 May 1981.
Motion (by MI' Hodgman) proposed:
That the House lake note of the paper.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (4.59)-The Opposition notes the remarks made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street). We wish to place on record the fact that we are of the opinion that a statement would not have been made at this stage if we had not raised this matter in recent weeks in this Parliament seeking information as to what transpired by way of negotiations between the Government and the United States. The Minister referred to the remarks made by my colleague, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) which are deemed to be, and were, supportive in 1978. We wish to make it very clear that the remarks made in 1978 were made in the context of what the Camp David Accords might

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2543

have been expected to achieve. Obviously, the framework for the achievement of any solution in that area was with the United Nations Security Council acceptance of the Camp David Accords, and the approval of any force in that area by the United Nations Security Council, not only in accordance with the Accords but also in accordance with the treaty and the framework attached thereto. We can place on record that none of that has been achieved. It is a bit improper to suggest, by quoting the Leader of the Opposition's remarks out of context, that we can now say: 'There should be a bipartisan attitude in this matter'.
I want to deal at length with some of the matters. In fact, let me advert to remarks made at the time of the signing of the Camp David Accords. No Arab head of state supported the Camp David Accords or spoke out in support of Sadat. We also have the position, in accordance with the framework, that the factors to be taken into account, says the parties, are in accordance with Security Council resolutions 242 and 338 in all their parts. Those resolutions, as all honourable members know, relate to the fact that the question of peace and stability in the Middle East is to be under the control of the United Nations, and the United Nations Security Council in particular. In fact, the representative of the United Nations was to report periodically as to the progress of the peace negotiations and the peace implementations. Further, the Minister adverted to the Palestinian problem. Let me refer again to the framework for the Camp David Accords. It is stated:
Egypt, Israel, Jordan and the representatives of the Palestinian people should participate in negotiations on the resolution of the Palestinian problem in all its aspects.
Is it not a fact that the Minister's statement raises many more questions of a very serious nature than it purports to answer? Let me deal with them. I refer to the question of the United Nations participation in the Middle East. When I raised the matter in this House and subsequently in statements outside the House, I referred to the importance of the fact that the Camp David Accords of 1978 and the peace treaty of 1979 clearly specified that the United Nations was to playa role. Even more than that, Article VI, paragraph 8 of Annex I of the peace treaty unequivocally stipulated that the United Nations force could not include permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, that is, it could not include troops from either of the super-powers-in other words, troops from the United States of America and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics were barred. I believe it is abundantly clear that adequate efforts have not yet been made to secure a United Nations force and that there is still a great deal of

room for positive diplomacy in which Australia should actively participate.
The Minister made reference to such efforts. Let us have a look at the facts. The Minister said that there had been informal discussions in recent months. We must ask why only in recent months? It is over two years since these agreements were concluded. In terms of concrete moves in the United Nations, the position is even worse. Let me emphasise this point. The best that the Minister could do was to refer to approaches made on 21 April, a few weeks ago, and on 18 May, a few days ago. Those are the only approaches made to the United Nations. This is incredible!
Are we really being told that formal approaches were made only in the last couple of weeks to have the United Nations participate in the major role which was clearly envisaged for it some two years ago? I am aware of the earlier efforts of the United Nations Emergency ForceUNEF-and the United Nations Truce Supervisory Organisation-UNTSO. I am also aware of the role which has been played in southern Lebanon by the United Nations International Force in Lebanon-UNIFIL.
When we talk about Lebanon, let us place on record that it is only a matter of miles away from this area with which we are concerned. There is the greatest hostility there. The Lebanese community in Australia is divided on the basis of war taking place around Beirut, the problems of the Syrians and their missiles and the question of the Israeli's suggesting that they will take immediate action against the missiles. This is all taking place a matter of a few miles away from the area we are talking about. The point I am making is that the international community, including Australia, should make every effort to secure United ~ations participation in the present phase, if that IS at all possible.
Let us have a look at the Camp David Accords of 1978 and this suggestion of President Carter's letters being part of the 1979 treaty. If we look closely at the Camp David Accords we realise several things. In the Minister's speech he quoted President Carter as undertaking:
. . . to ensure the establishment and maintenance of an acceptable alternative multinational force.
That was done by way of a letter of 26 March 1979. The Minister might also have quoted the preceding sentence which committed the United States to:
. . . exert utmost efforts to obtain the requisite action by the Security Council.

2544 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

I believe that there is room to do this. Australia should independently be exerting efforts in that direction.
What is more important is the question of the relationship of the letter to the treaty and the Accords. I do not think the Minister is well advised in this matter. He said that the establishment of an American led force is 'part of the peace treaty and accords'. It is not. It is very clear, if we look at the Accords and the treaty, that it is prohibited.
Firstly, I make the point that, whilst the letter was written on the same day the peace treaty was concluded, it is in no way a formal part of the treaty. Secondly, and more importantly, we cannot have an ancillary document to an international treaty which contradicts the treaty and still claim that it is part of the treaty. Let me repeat that Article VI paragraph 8 of Annex 1 of the treaty provides for the forces to be drawn from countries other than either of the super-powers.
Further, and equally importantly, Annex 1 continues:
The parties have agreed as follows:-
With respect to the provisions of paragraph 8 Article VI of Annex 1 if no agreement is reached between the parties they will accept or support a United States proposal concerning the composition of the United Nations force and observers.
But the letter contradicts the treaty on both points. It not only envisages a non-United Nations force but also a force led by the United Statesone of the super-powers. Everywhere we look-in the 1978 Camp David Accords, in the 1979 peace treaty and in Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338-the reference is always to a United Nations force.
Thirdly, the Minister claims that President Carter's letters are essential documents accompanying the Egypt-Israel peace treaty. This is not the case. There is no evidence for that claim; indeed, there is evidence to the contrary. The treaty states that the papers which are attached to the treaty are protocol, annexes and maps. It in no way refers to letters-in particular, the Carter letters to President Sadat and Mr Begin. Those letters are clearly not part of the treaty. Therefore, there can be no reliance placed on them by this or any other government as a legal basis for supporting a non-United Nations force.
The key point in the Minister's statement comes at page 14 of his advance text. The Government's case in making a decision to contribute to forces to Sinai will have to rest on this point, but the point is false. The Minister says that

the mandate for the proposed force will be Article VI of Annex I of the 1979 Egypt-Israel peace treaty. In fact, there is no mandate in that article for anything but a United Nations force.
One can read and re-read Article VI and read and re-read the peace treaty and the Camp David Accords. In Article VI, which the Minister claims to contain a mandate for a non-United Nations force, there is no mention of anything but a United Nations force. There are nine paragraphs in Article VI. In those nine paragraphs there are no fewer than nine references to a United Nations force. There is no reference whatsoever to any other force but a United Nations force. There is not one sub-clause which does not refer specifically to such a force. How then can the Minister claim that Article VI of Annex 1 of the treaty is a mandate for the proposed force? In fact, there is no mandate. If there is no mandate the Minister should admit it. It is irresponsible to claim a mandate where it does not exist. It is misleading to claim a mandate when none exists. It is misleading this House and the Australian people to claim a mandate where none exists.
I refer to the attitude of the Arab world and west European countries. The Minister said in his statement:
The Government, for its 'part, believes that successfully carrying out the Accords as they relate to the Sinai, could be crucial in influencing those sections of the Arab world which have strong reservations about whether the complex problems of the Middle East can be resolved by means other than conflict.
I do not think that is a fair statement. Firstly, it implies that those sections of the Arab world which have strong reservations about the Camp David Accords believe that armed conflict is the only solution. That is just not true. That it is not true is amply and dramatically illustrated by the fact that the Western European allies of the United States are searching at this very moment, and have been for the last 15 months, for an alternative to the Camp David Accords because they believe that the Accords do not provide a realistic answer. To put it at its lowest, there are very serious questions not only in the majority of the Arab states but also in the capitals of Western Europe about whether the Camp David Accords any longer provide a realistic solution.
As to the attitude of the Australian Labor Party, after the conclusion of the Camp David Accords the Australian Labor Party conference welcomed the signing of the treaties as an important step in the search for a just, comprehensive and lasting peace. We emphasise the importance of United Nations Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338, which referred to the role of the United Nations. Further, we emphasised that

Sinai Peacekeeping Force

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATJVES 2545

both the Israelis and the Palestinians are entitled to independent states and homes of their own. The Labor Party welcomes steps towards peace in the Middle East, but we must be sure before we commit Australian troops that we are really involving ourselves in a process which will be constructive and not one that could easily heighten tension between the super-powers and the countries of the region and possibly drag Australia into the maelstrom of fighting in the Middle East.
The Minister claimed that the Government has made no decision. It is quite clear from his statement that, as was the case with Vietnam, this Government is anxious to get involved. Let me point out to the Minister the sort of public reaction any decision to send Australian troops to the Middle East is likely to receive. Editorial writers and commentators in at least six of the largest newspapers have spoken directly or indirectly against this venture, and I suggest that they are espousing the views of the Australian people, irrespective of their politics. They are conservative newspapers and commentators who in the past have supported the overseas adventures of conservative governments. This time they are showing that, unlike the Government, they have learned from past mistakes. These leaders and shapers of public opinion include the Age, which has pointed out:
. . . all of Egypt's fellow Arab nations are opposed to the Camp David pact and that many of the Europeans see the Accords as bankrupt and inadequate to the task of moving towards comprehensive peace.
The Canberra Times stated:
There is no good reason why Australian forces should go all the way to the Middle East just to prove that this country is an ally of the United States.
It added:
Australia ought not to encourage Washington to think that it may be able to assemble under its own sponsorship an international force which is independent of the UN. Australian policy should work independently for the UN force which the Egypt-Israel treaty envisaged.
In the Sydney Morning Herald, Mr Guy Harriott said:
I think we should not touch the Sinai force with a forty foot pole. It is simply too much of a risk.
Mr Harriott added:
South East Asia is within Australia's sphere of direct interest; the Middle East is not . . . I thought that argument had been settled in the early 1950s when Menzies was reluctantly forced to concede that Australia's strategic concern was no longer primarily with the Middle East and the Suez Canel, but with our own region.
Many similar comments have been made elsewhere. I have quoted those today because they are sound and sensible expressions of view, and to warn the Minister of the cristicism he will face

and the storm that will burst about him if his Government decides to send Australian troops to the Sinai. The Minister's statement shows that the Government is set on that course. In the 1960s and 1970s the rice fields and jungles of Vietnam proved to be a political and military quagmire for the United States and Australia. Why should we venture back into that quagmire? In the J980s this Government again seems ready to risk the same sorts of difficulties.
The Minister indicated in his speech some of the factors that will be taken into consideration by the Government if a formal approach is made, and 1 should like to consider those for a moment. Firstly, he said that Australia's overall interests should be served by maintaining the momentum for the peaceful resolution of the conflict in the Middle East. The Labor Party agrees, but we believe that we must be extremely careful about the vehicle we choose before we become involved. The Minister went on to refer to the Camp David Accords and United Nations Resolution 242. ] have already pointed out that those documents refer only to a United Nations force. The Minister asked: Can the Government support the formation of such a force? (Extension of time granted). I suggest that on an issue of such importance to the country, and given our tragic history of involvement with the United States in Vietnam, a more appropriate question would be this: Can the Government and the Opposition support the formation of such a force? Let us consider Namibia. Already we have committed a peacekeeping force of some 300 in what we hope will be the resolution of the dispute between South Africa and the South West African People's Organisation. The Government has not yet explained how we will discharge both obligations, and again I come to the point that both forces will be far from our shores and, apparently, under somebody else's command. At the same time, we are pulling out our forces at Butterworth and apparently rationalising our military commitments in the immediate region.
Tn conclusion, I have made it clear that the Labor Party has a sincere and fundamental commitment to peace in the Middle East on the basis of involvement of the United Nations, as envisaged in the Camp David Accords, and with due regard to thc principles laid down in United Nations Security Council Resolutions 242 and 238. I have also made it clear that the proposal being considered by the Government cannot be said, from the point of view of either international law or political reality, to be in any sense a proposal which involves the United Nations. The Opposition believes that in these circumstances the

2546 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Personal Explanation

proposal is fraught with danger and may well contribute to the escalation of tension in the Middle East rather than to a real solution of the problems of that tortured region.
Debate (on motion by Mr Ruddock) adjourned.

territorial compromise. We are going to leave an entirely different map of the country that it will be impossible to ignore. I don't see any way any government will be able to dismantle the settlements of Judea and Samaria.
Therein lies the nature of so many of the difficulties with which we are confronted and the reason for many of the reservations which have been ex-

PERSONAL EXPLANATION Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.

pressed not only by the Opposition but also, I believe, by every editorialist who has written on this subject and, from what I can see, the informed commentators too. It is a shame.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)- Does the Leader of the Opposition claim to have been misrepresented?

REPORT OF STANDING COMMITTEE ON ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS: GOVERNMENT RESPONSE

Mr HAYDEN-Yes. The Minister for Foreign

Ministerial Statement

Affairs (Mr Street) in his statement to the ParliaMr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for

ment some minutes ago quoted extracts from a Health)-by leave-Mr Deputy Speaker:

speech I made in this Parliament in September The standard of health of Aboriginals is far lower than that

1978-nearly two years ago-at page 1308 of of the majority of Australians and would not be tolerated if it Hansard. They were comments of a somewhat existed in the Australian community as a whole.

hopeful expectation on the basis of the outline of This is the main finding of the House of Represen-

the Camp David Accords as we understood them tatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs

and, more particularly, in terms of the actual in its report on Aboriginal health. The same mess-

Accords as we were made aware of them. 1 shall age comes through in two other reports now be-

not go over the ground that has been well develfore the Government: The National Trachoma

oped by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, the and Eye Health Program and the Government's

honourable member for Kingsford-Smith (Mf own program effectiveness review on aboriginal

Lionel Bowen). I shall refer merely to Article 6, health. Both show that the health of Aboriginal

which exclusively develops a series of points. Australians is unacceptably low. The Govern-

Essentially, they boil down to the joint commitment agrees with this assessment and reaffirms its

ment between Israel and Egypt that the disenobjective of raising the health status of Aborigi-

gagement, the settlement, will be based on United nals to that of the rest of the community. The

Nations involvement, United Nations forces. At hard fact is that while we have channelled many

that time we certainly were not made aware of millions of dollars into Aboriginal health and

any unilaterally provided letter by the United health-related programs, and in spite of all our

States of America. However, in that respect the effortsand despite some improvements which

point should go on the record that the Camp have occurred-the level of Aboriginal health is

David Accords are between Israel and Egypt and still unacceptable.

do not concern the United States, which was only a witness. A letter from a non-party to an agreement can scarcely be regarded as forming part of that agreement in the legal sense. I do not wish to dwell on that any further.

Whilst there have been some improvement in the health status of Aboriginals, health services alone cannot provide the solution for all the problems nor are they the responsibility of anyone government. The problems will have to be over-

The final point I wish to make is that I am concome by a co-operative and co-ordinated effort in-

cerned about the condition of the Camp David volving many arms of the Commonwealth and

Accords. I believe that they are sagging badly and State governments as well as Aboriginals them-

are in danger of imminent collapse because of the selves and their representative organisations. It is

poisoned atmosphere in relation to the West Bank important that we look at what we are doing and

and Gaza, which has been contributed to by the ensure that we are not just providing services and

policies of the Begin Government. Since the signnothing more. We must evaluate existing

ing of the Camp David Accords 39 settlements programs to ensure that they are directed

have been established in the area. I conclude by towards, and actually do result in, an improve-

quoting the words of Agriculture Minister Ariel ment in Aboriginal health and social well-being.

Sharon, which appeared in the Washington Post To this end, Commonwealth support for Aborigi-

on 28 September:

nal health programs will be made conditional

You just can't do anything about it any more. That is why it upon a set of specific goals and objectives which is impossible any more to talk about the Jordanian option or include Commonwealth Aboriginal affairs policy,

Committee on Aboriginal Affairs

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2547

being drawn up for each program, against which its attainment can be measured.
The Government has received timely offers of assistance from professional health organisations. The Royal Australasian College of Physicians, whose members have undertaken much of the original research on respiratory, cardiovascular, renal, metabolic and paediatric problems among the Aboriginal population, considers that Aboriginal health is a major social issue in which its involvement could be increased. The Australian Medical Association has also expressed its concern and offered assistance. The Government appreciates the interest shown by these and other professional bodies and intends to pursue the offers, particularly in relation to evaluating health services to Aboriginals.
The Reports
There have been numerous reports on Aboriginal health. They have all painted much the same
picture. r turn now to the background of the three
reports which the Government has considered. The House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs received references on Aboriginal health from the House of Representatives on 1 December 1976 and 10 March 1977. On 16 March 1978 the then Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, Mr 18.n Viner, gave the Committee its terms of reference. I seek leave to have them incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted
The document read as follows-
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs Terms of Reference-Aboriginal Health
(1) Examine the health problems of Aboriginals with particular attention to-
(a) the prevalence of different types of disease suffered by Aboriginals and Aboriginal communities;
(b) the relationship between Aboriginal health and environmental, social and cultural factors;
(c) the effectiveness of existing health care programs for Aboriginals generally, and the adequacy of Western European-type health services to cope with the health problems of Aboriginals; and
(d) alternative methods of health care delivery that take account of Aboriginals' lifestyles, including camp situations.
(2) That the Committee consider ways and means by which-
(a) persons with appropriate qualifications can be encouraged to assist Aboriginals achieve a better standard of health, and
(b) Aboriginals including traditional healers can participate in the development and delivery of health care services to their own communities, and in any modification of existing services.
(3) That the Committee recommend possible courses of action.

Mr MacKELLAR-I thank the House. Having ~aken evidence through submissions, public hearmgs and community visits, the parliamentary Committee presented its report on 20 March 1979. The trachoma report was prepared by the Royal Australian College of Ophthalmologists. It describes the most extensive screening, diagnosis and treatment coverage of eye disease ever undertaken in this country. The field teams involved in the National Trachoma and Eye Health Program also detected and arranged treatment for a variety of other illnesses. The report was presented to the Parliament by me on 1 April 1980. A program effectiveness review was conducted by Commonwealth officials during 1980 to determine, as far as possible, the health status of Aboriginals and the eiTectiveness of current Aboriginal health programs and of other programs which affect Aboriginal health. The review team drew information about the programs from Commonwealth departments and took into account the findings of the two reports I have already mentioned as well as other related reports. The officials also visited Aboriginal communities and consulted with people directly involved in community-based health care programs. The officials' report was completed during 1980.

Main Findings of the Reports

These three reports are obviously interrelated and

it is appropriate for the Government to consider

them together in its response to the parliamentary

Committee's report. They contain common fun-

damental concerns and recommendations but

differ felt it

considerably necessary to

in detail. We give careful

ahtatevnetitohnerteofotrhe~

major themes of each and the various proposals

advanced. The reports all confirm three things:

The unsatisfactory health status of Aboriginals; the urgent need to improve the environ-
mental conditions affecting Aboriginals' health;
and the importance of increasing Aboriginal involvement in the design, control and delivery of health care services.

Environmental Improvements
Each report referred to the need to increase efforts to improve the environmental conditions in which many Aboriginals live. Much of the ill health experienced by Aboriginals is directly associated with a substandard physical environment. The parliamentary Committee recommended that 'the highest priority be given and immediate action taken to provide clean and adequate water supplies to all Aboriginal communities'. The trachoma report found in rural Australia that when thtl hygiene or Aboriginals

2548 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Committee on Aboriginal Affairs

approached that of non-Aboriginals so did the prevalence rate of the diseases measured. So for those people living in unhygienic conditions it recommended that appropriately designed and equipped houses be provided and that houses should contain a water supply to cater for all necessary uses and should also have efficient water-based sewerage systems and garbage disposal facilities. The officials' report also recommended that greater priority be given to the provision of housing, water supply, sanitation and electricity.
The disruption of Aboriginals' traditional lifestyle has given rise to a number of widespread health problems, especially where Aboriginals have been obliged to live on reserves or settlements, camps, or in rural or urban areas, under conditions of poverty. The problems include poor water supplies, dangerous sanitary conditions, overcrowding and limited access to nutritious food. The spread of illness and disease has been facilitated, especially respiratory, ear and skin i~ fections, and intestinal parasite illnesses. The disruption of their society and lifestyles and its effects have also produced despair, chronic disadvantage and alcohol abuse. This situation is not amenable to short term solutions. Government programs over many years have sought to improve services and facilities in such ways as will encourage Aboriginals to assume responsibility for decisions about their lifestyles and their futures. The effort must be maintained and expanded while the problems remain as serious as they are.
Once preventive measures begin to take effect, succeeding generations will not be saddled to the same extent with the wide spectrum of diseaseseye, ear, respiratory, gastro-intestinal, skin, et cetera-that are less frequent in the nonAboriginal population. Of course, in the meantime, health services play an important role by alleviating distress and improving the quality oflife. It is our intention that all children, including Aboriginal children, will have a much better start to life than has been the case for so many in the past and which is so important in the long term for improved health status.
Aboriginals themselves have stressed the prime importance of adequate housing. That priority has been, and continues to be, reflected in the programs of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs. For example, since 1975-76, the Government has provided $298.2m for Aboriginal housing, including hostels. During the last full financial year, 1979-80, 1,632 houses were built or purchased for Aboriginals and 205 home loans provided throughout the States and the Northern

Territory with Commonwealth funds totalling $59.9m. The last Budget provided in excess of $72m for Aboriginal housing and accommodation. These substantial increases in funds for Aboriginal housing show how determined we are to respond to Aboriginals' own priorities.
The figures give the lie to uninformed claims that funds have been cut. The Government has considerably expanded funds for Aboriginal housing and accommodation even while these reports have been under consideration. Those increased funds are flowing into this priority area of need. We have not delayed action; we have accelerated it. Much remains to be done and we do not deny that. But the Government's achievements in Aboriginal housing are substantial and are growing each year. In fact, in some States, the time is now within sight when the housing backlog will have been overtaken.
Increasing attention is also being given, within the Department of Aboriginal Affairs allocation, to programs administered under the general heading of community management and services for municipal-type services to Aboriginal community organisations, reserves and settlements. Here our role has been essentially a topping-up of State and local government activities. However, the Commonwealth expects the States and the Northern Territory also to honour their responsibilities towards their Aboriginal citizens. Aboriginal people, like other citizens living in a particular State or Territory, are entitled to expect basic municipal services to be provided by State or local government. The Commonwealth has done much to help overcome past neglect, but it is not, and should not be regarded as, the only source of funds for providing services to Aboriginal people. Whilst we expect the State and Territory governments to take up this challenge, we understand that a special effort will be needed. That is what the Government had in mind in committing an extra $50m over five years for environmental health improvement.
I mentioned earlier that the efforts which have been made have not always been as effective as we would have liked. The Government is looking to shared funding arrangements under this program in a joint Commonwealth-State effort to eradicate at least the worst of the environmental conditions under which many Aboriginal communities in rural and remote areas live. Finding, storing and distributing clean water supplies and installing waste disposal systems are costly exercises. We must get our priorities correct and make sure that Aboriginal communities' priorities are fully known. The technology used must suit the community environment. Good planning here may

Committee on Aboriginal Affairs

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2549

take time, but it will pay off. It will be necessary to therefore are not effective in tackling their serious

co-ordinate planning for the environmental imhealth problems. Because non-Aboriginals share

provements which are needed so that we can dethe culture and outlook of most health personnel

termine which projects should be funded under and have a lifelong familiarity with the insti-

this program in terms of national as well as comtutions and values of mainstream society, we find

munity priorities. The Commonwealth intends to it difficult to understand the alienation of many

discuss these matters with relevant State MinisAboriginals. This is particularly true of our health

ters and with Aboriginal representatives. I expect system, which is strongly based on scientific re-

that there will be a range of subsequent dissearch, institutional care and professional struc-

cussions involving officers. The Department of tures. I have not yet mentioned the daily reality

Aboriginal Affairs has a regular program of conand the historical experience of disadvantage, the

sultation and co-ordination with State authorities evidence of which Aboriginals see all around

and with Aboriginal organisations leading up to them. What they see compounds the problems

the preparation of its program for each financial and makes our task in Aboriginal health a

year. At that Department's request, some prouniquely demanding one. We must do everything

posals have already been identified for additional possible to strengthen Aboriginal responsibility

environmental health projects in the normal and participation.

Budget process for 1981-82. Again, we have not

waited or delayed action. The job is under way The Government therefore wishes to see, and

and we want to accelerate its progress, in cowill actively work towards, a marked increase in

operation with State and local authorities and the degree of Aboriginal involvement in the con-

with their financial support.

trol, management, design, delivery and evaluation

In considering projects for inclusion under the
new program, we will be looking to concentrate
the additional funds on those larger-scale water
supply and waste disposal projects which have the
highest priority of need but which are difficult for the Commonwealth or the States to accommodate
in their normal ongoing budgets. Special needs
arise in the increasing number of small outstation communities in traditional areas. It is not appro-
priate in these cases to provide permanent major
capital works which would disrupt the preferred lifestyle. We are much encouraged by reports
received that the health and well-being of Abor-
iginals at outstations is, on the whole, an improvement on the health of those people in the past. Nevertheless, the Government believes there

of health care programs affecting Aboriginal
people. The Department of Aboriginal Affairs has
been involved in supporting Aboriginal health care services through two channels: Assistance to
the States to provide an adapted general service
more appropriate to Aboriginal needs and more
accessible by Aboriginals; and the funding of Aboriginal organisations to provide health services
run and controlled by Aboriginals for Aboriginals.
More recently, my own Department has also assisted some established Aboriginal medical ser-
vices by payment of health program grants de-
signed to meet salary costs of clinical staff. These services have tried to close the gap between the
general medical services and the health needs of Aboriginals.

should be adequate water supply and waste
disposal to supplement the provision of basic services by members of outstation communities.
With major works being undertaken through the
Environmental Health Program, relatively minor works which are also of high priority will be able
to be accommodated within ongoing programs,
where increased emphasis is already being placed
on such measures.

Whilst we want to encourage the development
of programs which serve the whole community, rather than segregated services, our fundamental
objective is the improvement of Aboriginal
health, using the most effective means available. We will need to monitor carefully the impact of
the Government's proposals on the effectiveness
of the various means of service provision. There is
not only a need for Aboriginals to be better

Aboriginal Involvement in the Planning and Delivery of Services

informed about the availability of health services, to understand the services, to feel confident in ap-
proaching them and to feel at ease in using them,

We know that conventional health services but also a very real need to improve the under-

have real difficulties in winning the confidence of standing and empathy of non-Aboriginal staff

Aboriginal people. That confidence and familiwho supply the health services and control the fa-

arity are essential to effective and early use of cilities. Finally, the services must modify and

health services. The reports before us all confirm adapt themselves to Aboriginal values and

that services which Aboriginals perceive as reneeds-we must not make the assumption that

mote or impersonal have not been acceptable and only Aboriginals must change.

2550 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Committee on Aboriginal Affairs

The parliamentary Committee recommended that 'Aboriginal cultural beliefs and practices which affect their health and their use of health services. . be fully taken into account in the design and implementation of health care programs'. The Government supports this view. The people best equipped to advise on relevant cultural beliefs and practices and the appropriate adaptation of health services are Aboriginals themselves. They are also best equipped to undertake important bridging roles in health service delivery. Their responsibilities in the health care services which they use must be rapidly expanded.
In supporting Aboriginal health programs, the Commonwealth will require greatly increased Aboriginal involvement in the design, control, management, delivery and evaluation of services. There is a need for the States and the Northern Territory to provide greater opportunities for Aboriginals to play significant and expanded roles. To achieve this goal, increasing numbers of Aboriginals will have to. be trained for, and employed at, all levels. Aboriginals must also take a real and decisive part in policy and program decision making. The way each State government meets this goal may be different. We are firmly committed, however, to ensuring that the goal is met, and we will be taking these questions up with State Ministers. In the same spirit, I should like to mention that some State colleagues with responsibilities in Aboriginal affairs have, in the past, expressed their concern that, in administering programs on behalf of the Commonwealth, they may not have enough flexibility. For example, they may wish to reallocate funds to reflect changing circumstances. The Commonwealth would be prepared to examine this problem with any of the States which wish to redirect priorities towards mutually-acceptable policy goals, and especially Aboriginal involvement.
It is unacceptable that, at the present time, there are no qualified medical practitioners of Aboriginal descent, and insufficient numbers of Aboriginal people qualified for other professional and para-professional roles. We propose to have discussions on a number of fronts to make sure Aboriginals have greater opportunities in these areas. It is vital that Aboriginal doctors, nurses, administrators, nurses' aides and other health care staff should be available. We acknowledge that the necessary education and training will take time. In the short term, however, we can also look at redefining existing practical responsibilities of Aboriginals presently employed in health care. Both the States and the Aboriginal medical services need to be involved in the provision of opportunities through the National Employment

and Training System and other programs. Nor should the role of traditional healers, who are intimately involved in services in traditional communities, be overlooked. Opportunities must be found to make use of their particular skills, which can be built on or adapted according to circumstances. We shall continue to give strong support to the employment of Aboriginal health workers, who have important preventive and primary care roles to perform, now and in the foreseeable future.
Availability and Awareness of Choices Most of us would take it for granted that we can choose the kind of health care we think appropriate. The parliamentary report makes it clear that more needs to be done to make a range of choices known and available to Aboriginal people. One difference between Aboriginals and other groups in Australia is that Aboriginal people are not fully aware of the range of health care options available. The parliamentary Committee recommended that 'Aboriginal communities be given the opportunity to determine the type of health service that will best suit their needs and available resources.' We endorse this view and commend it to State governments. The Government will propose to the States and the Northern Territory discussions between officials, and with Aboriginal people, on this matter of choice. These discussions will be looking for a cooperative basis for increasing Aboriginal awareness of the health service options and expanding the opportunities for Aboriginal communities to influence the types of services provided to them. This is a fundamental commitment and one which is supported by each of the reports on Aboriginal health to which I have referred. In fact, the Commonwealth and Victoria and Aboriginal organisations are now co-operating in a State government working party which has these very objectives. There is also scope for improving the relationship between general practitioners and Aboriginals, and increasing the use of primary care services by Aboriginals.
I mentioned before Commonwealth grants to Aboriginal medical services. These organisations provide primary health care services which are acceptable and accessible. Some of them have also begun to provide preventive services and ancillary programs in response to community needs, expressed through the close involvement of many Aboriginals in the services. The Aboriginal medical services are a fine example of Aboriginal initiative and of readiness to assume responsibility to improve their own health status. The Government endorses their valuable role in this field and

Committee on Aboriginal Affairs

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2551

commends also professional co~operation between Aboriginal medical services and State services so that their work is complementary. The Aboriginal and Islander Medical Service in Darwin, which is funded jointly by the Commonwealth and Northern Territory governments and works in closely with existing health services, is a good example of what can be achieved through co-operation. The Government will be prepared to consider provision of assistance to similarly innovative approaches elsewhere.
We shall, of course, continue our existing support to Aboriginal medical services. We shall also consider, together with the States and Aboriginal people, the expansion of complementary community-based services where they offer the most effective form of health care, and work towards an expanded range of options for primary IT '!dical care. Aboriginals must be involved to the fUllest possible extent in selecting the most appropriate health care options. This policy is consistent, the Government believes, with a cardinal principle of the Government's health policy, that people should have freedom of choice in an integrated and comprehensive system. That is something the Government wishes to see for all Australians, not the least of whom are the Aboriginal people.
The officials' report had proposed that future funding arrangements should be focused away from State programs to Aboriginal medical services. The proposal envisaged this being done at a predetermined rate or by reference to a set formula. The Government looked carefully at the proposal. We considered these issues when we were drawing up the new arrangements for general health care funding and administration. Conscious of the fact that many Aboriginals are dependent, to some extent, upon the States' general health care systems, we took the view that we should direct more effort into encouraging the States to involve Aboriginals in the planning and provision of all health services to their people. In the case of Aboriginal medical services, of course, this is already a settled matter.
Aboriginal Advisory Body The Commonwealth, for its part, in demonstrating that Aboriginal involvement is so central to Government policy and so crucial to improving Aboriginal health, will seek ways of ensuring that it received the best possible advice from Aboriginals in relation to Aboriginal health matters. We acknowledge the advice that has been provided

from time to time by the National Aboriginal and Islander Health Organisation, a federation of Aboriginal medical services. However, we also wish to have a more formal arrangement for advice on the whole range of health and health-related problems and needs, including medical needs. We shall therefore discuss, with the National Aboriginal Conference, arrangements to ensure that the Government receives appropriate and comprehensive advice about Aboriginal health, through the Conference. It would be fitting for the National Aboriginal Conference, as an allAboriginal elected body, charged with that responsibility of transmitting the views and advice of Aboriginals to the Government, to undertake this special task.
The parliamentary report recommended that a new unit be established in the Department of Aboriginal Affairs. It was proposed that a group of experts on middle level technology should be set up to advise on, amongst other things, the most practical means of providing communal and household facilities in Aboriginal communities. The Department of Aboriginal Affairs is essentially a policy co-ordination and funding body. It does not have specific functional expertise but rather draws on the resources of other departments or agencies when professional advice is needed. The same is true at the State and local levels. Where necessary, private consultants may be engaged. The Government considers, therefore, that it would not be appropriate or necessary for the proposed special group to be located within the Department of Aboriginal Affairs.
A second proposal was for an evaluation team to have responsibility for maintaining a check on the effectiveness of Aboriginal healtha care services and programs, and for the provision of standardised statistics on Aboriginal health. The Department of Aboriginal Affairs has in its central office structure an evaluation branch, which conducts evaluations as an entity distinct from the rest of the Department. That branch will be able to participate, as it has in the past, in evaluation of programs and projects, in close consultation with Aboriginal people. The Department of Aboriginal Affairs will continue to draw on resources already available, including those in other specialist departments as the need arises in undertaking evaluations against defined objectives. It will be seen, therefore, that the objective of the Standing Committee is capable of achievement under present arrangements.

2552 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

.Committee on Aboriginal Affairs

Aboriginal Health Statistics

some $2m, has shown us how much improvement

The officials' report recommended that a national system of Aboriginal health statistics be developed along the lines proposed by Dr L. R. Smith. It recommended that the Department of
Health allocate, as a matter of priority, the necessary resources for the system's implementation. The lack of a uniform, national data collection system, to provide an accurate measure of Aboriginal health status, is a deficiency which cannot be allowed to continue. In order to assess the effectiveness of Aboriginal health programs, including those which will take into account the

can be made, given a concentrated effort. The three reports highlighted prevalent illnesses to
which this approach would be suitable. A further
group of illnesses, because of their chronic nature-for example diabetes-would need to be
the subject of long-term care programs. The Government will investigate the need for ad-
ditional funds for national programs which will have a special focus on prevalent illnesses. We wish to have the advice of Aboriginal people and of the States in determining the needs, appropriate programs and priorities.

measures I have outlined, it is essential that we

measure Aboriginal health status on a uniform

Conclusion

basis. As a matter of priority, I propose to im-
plement a uniform system of national Aboriginal health statistics through the Department of Health. Such a system is absolutely essential for monitoring and evaluation of effectiveness. There have been discussions with State and Northern Territory authorities on this matter in recent years and the co-operation of the States and the Territory will lead to its speedy achievement.

The matters I have touched on represent the
Government's general reactions to the many points made in the three reports. We are determined to play our part in bringing about a substantial improvement in the health of all Aborigi-
nal Australians. As I said earlier, our long-term
objective is to raise the level of their health to that of the Australian community generally. This aim
requires the co-operation of the State and North-

ern Territory governments, with which much of

the responsibility lies. Of equal importance is the

Special National Programs

co-operation of the Aboriginal people themselves.

Finally, mention must be made of the valuable work done by the National Trachoma and Eye Health Program, undertaken by the Royal Australian College of Ophthalmologists. The report highlights many adverse conditions suffered by Aboriginals which both Commonwealth and State governments must rectify. It also graphically illustrates the relationship between environmental

Action must be taken now to provide the training
needed for Aboriginals to assume wider professional and semi-professional responsibilities in health services and also to expand the roles and
skills of existing health workers. This is in addition to the contribution which Aboriginals can and now should make to the planning, administration
and evaluation of such services.

and other conditions suffered by Aboriginals and their health status. The Government supports the recommendations from the report for the continuation of the work commenced by the tra-
choma program and recognises that, without follow-up through both therapeutic and preventive intervention, much of the effort to date may
be lost. We are, therefore, taking steps to ensure that the improvements in Aboriginal eye health achieved by the trachoma program are consolidated by means of effective follow-up and regular reporting.

We will be reporting to the Government in mid-1982. Therefore we propose immediately to open discussions with the States and Aboriginal
organisations to explore ways of getting on with the job. While not denying the achievements to date, much still remains to be done. We are ready
to play our part. I present a statement showing in
detail the Government's responses to the House of Representatives Standing Committee's report on Aboriginal health. I seek leave to have it incorporated in Hansard.

Commonwealth officials and representatives of
the College have met with Northern Territory and Western Australian authorities and the College is hopeful that a re-screening and minor surgery program will be commenced in the Northern Territory shortly. Similar meetings are proposed with other State authorities. This program, supported by the Commonwealth to the extent of

Leave granted.
The document read as jollows-
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES STANDING COMMITTEE ON ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS,
RBPORT;- ABORIGINAL HEALTH Government response to the Committee's Recommendations Canberra, May 1981

Committee on Aboriginal Affairs

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2553

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES STANDING COMMITTEE ON ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS Report: 'Aboriginal Health'

Recommendations

Response/ comment

The Physical Environment1. 'The highest priority be given and immediate action
taken to provide clean and adequate water supplies to all Aboriginal communities.

Endorsed. In addition to the ongoing programs of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs which provide housing, water, sanitation and other community services, the Prime Minis-
ter announced in his election policy speech a commitment to provide an additional $50m over 5 years to meet highest priority needs for water supplies, sanitation and other environmental improvements.

2. 'A determined effort be undertaken to eliminate as soon as possible the unhygienic sanitary pan system in Aboriginal
communities. '

Endorsed. There is a need to provide sewerage systems where these do not exist, and to ensure that the system provided
matches the needs of the Aboriginal community.

3. 'An advisory group within the Department of Aboriginal
Affairs comprising experts in middle level technology be established, and in consultation with relevant departments and the Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies to research vari-
ous options for the provision of community and household facilities; consult with Aboriginal communities to assess their needs; advise them on the most appropriate facilities that best
suit their needs; monitor implementation of its advice to communities; facilitate employment of technical advisors by Aboriginal communities; and report to the Minister for Aborigi-
nal Affairs.'

Professional advice on appropriate technology is available to
Aboriginal communities and organisations from relevant Government departments and, where appropriate, private consultants. As far as possible, these arrangements are decentralised, to ensure their responsiveness to communi-
ties. The Department of Aboriginal Affairs does not itself provide professional expertise and would therefore be an inappropriate location for an advisory body on technology.

4. 'Priority for Aboriginals living in towns and moving into towns away from the fringes, be given to the provision of funds for meeting and upgrading their housing needs.'

Housing accommodation or shelter is a high priority for Aboriginals, not only for those moving into or living in towns.
Existing policy affirms the importance of Aboriginal involvement in decisions regarding the number, location, design and arrangement of housing projects. Priority is cur-
rently given to the provision of housing for Aboriginals living on reserves.

5. 'The Department of Aboriginal Affairs consult relevant
Commonwealth and State departments, local authorities and Aboriginal communities and organisations to define responsibility for safe water, public hygiene services, housing stan-
dards and inspection of premises in Aboriginal settlements
and communities, particularly fringe camps.'

Endorsed. Such consultations will be part of developing a program for the expenditure of the additional funds com-
mitted by the Commonwealth for improvement of the physical environment of Aboriginal communities, as referred to in the comment in recommendation I above.

Cultural Factors6. 'Aboriginal cultural beliefs and practices which affect
their health and their use of health services such as their fear of hospitalisation, their attitudes to pain and surgery, the role
of traditional healers and the differing needs and roles of Aboriginal men and women be fully taken into account in the de-
sign and implementation of health care programs.'

Endorsed. Current policy supports the adaptation of services
and programs to meet adequately the cultural beliefs and lifestyles of Aboriginals. The Government believes that the Standing Committee has correctly identified the major cul-
tural factors affecting Aboriginal health. These will be specifically drawn to the notice of States and the Territory in the course of discussions on Aboriginal health program funding arrangements.

On Health Care Programs-
7. 'Savings to the State-funded health services which result from the Commonwealth-funded State Aboriginal preventive health programs be directed to the further development of
preventive programs.'

The Committee's concern that State authorities should accept
some financial responsibility for improving the health of Aboriginals is endorsed. The States have already been informed that the Commonwealth expects State Govern-
ments to provide at least a pro-rata share of general revenues for Aboriginals in their own programs and those supported by the Commonwealth, and to apply the 'priority of need' principle in all such programs. In the negotiations referred to in comments on recommendations 5 and 6, the
matter of joint Commonwealth/State funding will be thoroughly discussed.

2554 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Committee on Aboriginal Affairs

Recommendations

Response / comment

8. 'An independent evaluation team responsible to the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs be established to evaluate the effectiveness of all Aboriginal health care services and programs in accordance with the World Health Organisation's definition of health and the principles of self determination, and to establish suitable criteria so that standardised information can be collated and that funds be provided for the purpose where programs are funded by the Government. '
9. 'The full range of choice of the various types of programs delivering health care to Aboriginals be maintained and, where appropriate, support increased.'
10. 'Aboriginal communities be given the opportunity to determine the type of health service that will best suit their needs and available resources and that a Task Force be established to place the full range of alternative health care services before them.'
11. 'An inquiry be held into the implementation of the policy of self-determination as it affects community development. '
12. 'Aboriginals be involved to the fullest possible extent in all stages of the provision of health care services and that the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs assess the number of Aboriginals required, the time it will take to train them to assume responsibility for the health of their own people and, to this end, develop, in consultation with relevant Ministers, suitable training programs.'

It is agreed that there is a need to standardise criteria for evaluation and to collate information. The Government supports reviews and assessments of Aboriginal health programs, and expects that their conclusions will be used in the modification of existing services and the development of new Aboriginal health services.
The idea of conducting evaluations against the World Health Organisation's definition of health and the principle of selfmanagement is acceptable to the Government as a broad principle. The Government has reservations, however, about the usefulness of evaluations which are conducted without more specific terms of reference or criteria. These only provide evaluation criteria that are very broad and di fficult to relate to the very large number of projects which may comprise 'all Aboriginal health care services and programs'.
A structure already exists within the Department of Aboriginal Afrairs to develop and co-ordinate assessments and program reviews. The Department has within its Central Office an Evaluation Branch which conducts evaluations as an entity distinct from the rest of the Department. The Committee's objective-the establishment of an independent evaluation team-is, therefore, capable of achievement under present arrangements. Aboriginals are to be involved in any evaluation.
Endorsed. The degree of increased support will of course depend on available resources and on competing priorities in Aboriginal programs generally.
The Government is committed to expansion of Aboriginals' involvement in all aspects of health services affecting them, including in the design, control, management, delivery and evaluation of health services for Aboriginal people. The Government supports the development or expansion of Aboriginal responsibility in relation to State Aboriginal health programs. The recent initiatives of the South Australian and New South Wales Governments in these aspects are examples. In the context of these developments, there is no need for a 'Task Force' approach. Nor does the Government see a centralised body as necessarily the best means of ensuring what the Standing Committee has in mind.
Not endorsed. The Government's policies aim at Aboriginal self-management and self-sufficiency. The Department of Aboriginal Affairs assesses, on a continual review basis, the impact of the Government's policies and programs in Aboriginal affairs on community development.
The principle that Aboriginals should be involved to the fullest possible extent ,in the provision of health care services for them is strongly supported. The Government also supports the provision of suitable training, whether academic or on-the-job, to ensure the greatest possible Aboriginal participation in health care for Aboriginal people. The Commonwealth has funded training programs for Aboriginal health workers in State Health authorities and stands ready to discuss new initiatives.
The Government is particularly concerned to see the development of Aboriginal health professionals-doctors, dentists, nurses and para-professionals. Special measures may be needed to encourage Aboriginal students to go on to such training and Commonwealth Departments will take what steps appear appropriate.
Beyond the measures needed to train and employ suitably qualified Aboriginal people as health professionals, there is also a need to employ Aboriginal people in administrative and clerical positions, at all levels in Commonwealth and State authorities which have responsibilities in relation to Aboriginal health. The Commonwealth Government has taken several steps to ensure these objectives are met and will commend a similar approach to the States.

Committee on Aboriginal Affairs

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2555

Recommendations
13. 'Training hospitals for nurses, university medical faculties and other tertiary institutions introduce into their curricula, both at undergraduate and graduate level, a component which deals with Aboriginal health.'
14. 'Comprehensive orientation courses be conducted for all non-Aboriginal staff recruited to serve in Aboriginal communities before commencing duty, that they receive regular inservice training, and that a formal diploma or certificate be provided by a tertiary institution for professionals actively involved in providing health care to Aboriginals.'
15. 'Governments introduce special allowances and entitlements which recognise the unusual working conditions and the geographical, social and professional isolation experienced by personnel working in predominantly Aboriginal communities in remote areas.'

Response/comment
Endorsed. Whilst some hospitals and medical faculties already provide courses or segments on Aboriginal health, there needs to be a concerted effort to ensure that Aboriginal health and related matters are adequately dealt with in medical training institutions. These proposals will be taken up and actively pursued with the Tertiary Education Commission and with appropriate medical learned societies.
Orientation and inservice training courses are already provided by most State and some Aboriginal organizations, but there is a need for more comprehensive and more regular training courses for non-Aboriginal staff. The proposal for a formal diploma or certificate course will be pursued in the discussions envisaged in relation to Recommendation 13.
Health personnel already receive the general standard allowances paid in recognition of isolation and residence in a tropical climate, but they do not receive, in their conditions of service, acknowledgement of the special difficulties they experience. Consultation with the States, Northern Territory and non-government organisations will be necessary.

Mr MaeKELLAR-I present the following paper:
Report of Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs: Government Response, Ministerial Statement, 26 May 1981.
Motion (by Mr MeVeigh) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Motion (by Mr MeVeigh)-by leave-agreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the honourable member for Melbourne Ports speaking for a period not exceeding 28 minutes.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (5.50)-It has taken the Government over two years to respond to the recommendations of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs contained in the report on Aboriginal health which was tabled in this Parliament on 20 March 1979. It is interesting to note that the reference was given to the Committee by the then Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, Senator Chaney. As the report was directed to that Minister, I would have expected that a reply to the House would have been forthcoming from him. It is interesting to note that one of the implications that flows from the statement by the Government is that it now clearly sees problems of Aboriginal health not so much as the responsibility of the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs (Senator Peter Baume) but rather the responsibility of the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar). That is not a view shared by the Opposition. For that reason, I am the principal spokesman for the Opposition on this matter rather than the shadow Minister for Health, the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett).
In the course of events following the tabling of the House of Representatives Committee report, two other reports have been made. A trachoma

report was presented on 1 April 1980 and in late 1979 the Government established its own Program Effectiveness Review Task Force to report on Aboriginal health. The Government has been sitting on the recommendations contained in the effectiveness review report since early last year. I believe that it says something about this Government's view of open government that because the program effectiveness review recommendations do not comply with the Government's predetermined attitudes under Fraser federalism, the document is not before the Parliament today. It is really extraordinary to contemplate that the Government will take a House of
Representatives committee report containing a large number of recommendations and refer it for review. There is nothing wrong with that. A great deal of work was done by the effectiveness review committee but having regard to the importance of this matter, on what basis is it the case that the conclusions of that review committee are not directly available to the parties and not even available to the members of the House of Representatives Committee that produced the report?
I wrote to the Minister seeking the comments of the review committee. They were not available to me, as they were not available, I suspect, to any other member of the Committee. In order to get my copy, I had to obtain it, as 1 suspect other members did, through a Government department leak. Why should a government which is genuinely concerned about Aboriginal health want to take that kind of secret attitude towards a further report which could only widen the nature of the debate, only make more information available to the House and only lead to put other recommendations which ought to be taken into account by the House in its concern to reach conclusions on this very important matter. For many Aboriginals

2556 REPRESENTATlVES 26 May 1981

Committee on Aboriginal Affairs

in the c;ommunity, this is not just a matter of Commonwealth-State relations or of supporting or opposing this Government. For many Aboriginals the kinds of recommendations in all the reports are very much a matter of life or death.
I believe the reason that the House of Representatives has to debate the Ministerial statement today without the benefit of the recommendations of the Program Effectiveness Review Committee is that the recommendations of the Minister involve a very considerable and important shift in the nature of traditional Commonwealth responsibility towards Aboriginal citizens. The House of Representatives committee in its recommendations saw Aboriginal health programs, their innovation and support as being a primary responsibility of the Commonwealth. Of course, in the report comments were made about State and local government. If one looks at the full thrust of those recommendations, one will see that at no stage did any member of that Committee consider that both innovation and support, were not prime responsibilities of the Commonwealth. That is as it ought to be. That stems from the result of the 1967 referendum and from the view put very succinctly, I believe, to the Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs. Having regard to the fact that this submission was put to the Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs one would be entitled to believe that that view also constituted the Government's view. I seek leave to incorporate that submission in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
DEPARTMENT OF ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS
Submission to Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders [Queensland Reserves
and Communities Self-management1Act
(a) whether the constitutional conception underlying the legislation and the principle and structure of the legislation are consistent with the proper responsibilities of the Commonwealth;
As a result of the referendum held in 1967, the Australian Constitution (section Sl[xxvi]) now provides that the Parliament of the Commonwealth may pass laws 'in respect of people of any race for whom it is deemed necessary to make laws'. The States have concurrent power to legislate in this area but by virtue of section 109, Commonwealth legislation prevails over any inconsistent State legislation.
The Commonwealth Government's policy in respect of Aboriginal affairs calls for the creation of opportunities by which the Aboriginal community may exercise control over its own affairs. In pursuit of this policy, the Department of Aboriginal Affairs has been encouraging the development of autonomous local Aboriginal community organisations which receive grant

funds to enable them to carry out programs which will express and enhance their independence. Such assistance is a positive response to Aboriginal aspirations and without it the Aboriginal community and its individual members would remain dependent upon Government assistance indefinitely and have no opportunity to redevelop the necessary self-confidence to enable them to take their place as equals within the Australian community.
Mr HOLDING-Certainly that view of constitutional responsibility is, as I have already said, the view of the Opposition. Having regard to the importance of this matter, I also seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard a letter of concern written on 8 Apri11981 by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) expressing his concern about Aboriginal health.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)-Is leave granted?
Mr McVeigh-Mr Deputy Speaker, leave is granted, but common courtesy usually dictates that such documents be shown to us in plenty of time to allow us to peruse them.
Leave granted.
The letter read as follows-
8 April 1981
The Rt Hon. J. M. Fraser, CH, MP Prime Minister, Parliament House, Canberra, ACT 2600
My dear Prime Minister,
You will recall establishing the Program Effectiveness Review Task Force to examine various reports on Aboriginal health and health services.
Recent representations made to the Opposition have demonstrated that the Government has not met its promised commitments to Aboriginal health services, especially in respect of community-controlled, self-managed services, which are completely in accordance with the Government's stated policy of 'self-determination' for the Aboriginal people of Australia.
It is apparent that, due to the Government's 'New Federalism' policy and a desire to sharply reduce Commonwealth spending that the Commonwealth's responsibilities (following the 1967 Referendum) are in danger of being abrogated in favour of the States.
I now seek your unqualified assurance that it is not . your Government's intention to shift responsibility for Aboriginal health funding wholly or partially to the States.
I seek this assurance in view of two recent developments, namely:
1. Strong pressures on Aboriginal health services to accept Health Program Grants (RP.G.) from the Commonwealth Department of Health Community Health Division (in lieu of continued funding from the Department of Aboriginal Affairs); and
2. The establishment of the Aboriginal Development Commission (which of course, has been given responsibility for Aboriginal enterprises run for profit, but has no charter to provide funds for non-profi~ public services).

Committee on Aboriginal Affairs

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2557

My attention has been drawn to the letter from the Director General of Health to Aboriginal Health services (dated 17 October 1978, ref78j11247) which stated quite c1earlythat:
1. the acceptance of HPG's would prevent the continuance of bulk billing by doctors employed by these services;
2. Aboriginal Medical Services would be given the option of accepting either bulk billing or HPG's; and
3. there would be no compulsion on any service to accept HPG's.
The Government is apparently still using the numerous reports on Aboriginal health which it has received (,Aboriginal Health', House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs, 20 March 1979; National Trachoma and Eye Health Program Report, 1 April 1980; and the PER Report) to postpone adequate funding to existing services and new initiatives by Aboriginal communities in the area of health care delivery.
Recent and current Commonwealth funding has been provided solely for primary (clinical) health care and education. This has meant that any service wanting to provide preventive health care programs has been forced to rely on private donations from individuals and local and international aid agencies.
This is in direct contravention of the WHOjUNICEF 1978 Alma-Ata Declaration which, inter alia, recommended that:
'All governments should formulate national policies, strategies and plans of action to launch and sustain primary health care as part of a comprehensive national health system and in co-ordination with other sectors.'
The Alma-Ata Declaration also clearly defined the relationship which should exist between primary, preventive and other forms of health care delivery.
The other assurances which I also seek are:
1. The continued commitment of Commonwealth funding, via the Department of Aboriginal Affairs, to community-controlled Aboriginal health services; and
2. The continuation of current bulk billing arrangements for those services who choose to use them, without prejudice to their Grant-in-Aid from DAA.
Yours faithfully, BILL HAYDEN, M.P.
Mr HOLDING-The letter simply emphasises the concern of the Leader of the Opposition on behalf of the Opposition and emphasises the importance of the Commonwealth, through its constitutional and fiscal responsibilities, seeing that self-managed Aboriginal health programs receive an appropriate level of funding. I believe that the shameful aspect of the Minister's statement to the Parliament today is that whilst recognising the unsatisfactory health status of Aborigines, the urgent need to improve the environmental conditions affecting Aboriginal health and the importance of increasing Aboriginal involvement in the control and the delivery of health care services, at every point the Commonwealth's own constitutional responsibility and moral obligations to our Aboriginal people are demeaned and those responsibilities and duties are subjugated to an appropriate State area. To put it more bluntly, what this Government is about is turning Aboriginal health care initiatives back to the States even

though the Minister and the Prime Minister know that at least two States are on public record as perceiving self-managed Aboriginal health services-to use their own term-as a 'form of apartheid'. It is interesting to note the kind oflogical slide contained in the Minister's own statement. Whilst supporting the concept as stated on page 8 of his statement, he described those very services as 'rather than segregated services'. That is the kind of logical slide between the view of some States such as Western Australia and Queensland which seek self-managed Aboriginal services as a form of apartheid and the kind of term used in the Minister's statement. When comparing the range of services, he gives support to a generality of such services but uses the very interesting phrase 'rather than segregated services', in regard to self-managed Aboriginal services. More than two years ago the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs reported:
'The level of Aboriginal ill-health will only be reduced if there are dramatic improvements in the physical environment, if there is maximum participation by Aborigines in all stages of the planning and delivering ofhealth care'.
One year later the National Trachoma and Eye Health Program came to much the same conclusion, after practical experience in the field throughout Australia.
The Program Effectiveness Review Task Force reached the same conclusion. Therefore there have been three reports, two of them public and one wrapped in a cloak of secrecy, which all reached the same conclusion.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Mr HOLDING-Prior to the suspension of the sitting, I was making the point that the ministerial statement on Aboriginal health involved the diminution of Commonwealth initiative and a shift in emphasis towards the States. It also involved a shift in departmental control from the Department of Aboriginal Affairs to the Department of Health. In order to centralise the Opposition's concern on both these points, I wish to move an amendment to the motion 'That the House take note of the paper'. I move:
That the following words be added to the motion:
'and that this House reaffirms(1) the continuing constitutional responsibility of the Commonwealth to fund, and give continuing support to, the raising of the health standards of its Aboriginal people, and (2) the continued commitment of Commonwealth funding, via the Department of Aboriginal Affairs, to community controlled Aboriginal health services.
I believe that amendment will give the House an opportunity to express itself in terms of the real

2558 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Committee on Aboriginal Affairs

issues that we believe arise from this ministerial statement.
The underlying theme of the statement-it runs throughout it-presupposes that there is complete accord between the States and the Commonwealth on the objective for administering health services for Aborigines. That is not the fact. I can do no better in order to give a graphic illustration of the facts than to relate the history of Professor Hollows and the work that he did in the whole trachoma area. Quite apart from the events of the last few days, I am certain all members of this House, as well as the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, would acknowledge the very real task done on behalf of the people of Australia by Professor Hollows in dealing with the problems of trachoma amongst our Aboriginal people.
By the time that program was over, the team had seen more than 100,000 people, some of them several times. More than 15,000 Aborigines had participated in month long treatment programs and more than 1,000 people had had eye operations, some performed in mobile hospitals erected by the Army. Eight million pieces of information had been collected and a computer analysis of the results demonstrated conclusively the environmental base of the disease. As Professor Hollows pointed out in his report, Aborigines were living outside the reach of present health care delivery systems, even where such systems were present. He often saw million dollar air conditioned hospitals and clinics in the middle of the squalor of the Aboriginal camps. Professor Hollows has said that Aborigines were still alien and remote from those services.
Professor Hollows' report, which was prepared for the Commonwealth Government, has been with the Government since April 1980. Since then the Department of Health has been trying to negotiate with the States the sort of continuing program that he called for. As the Minister for Health and the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs would know, the States have not complied. They have not been prepared to co-operate and they have made it clear that, even where they accept the findings of Professor Hollows, they want to run the programs themselves, irrespective of the international repute and capacity of Professor Hollows and his team. Professor Hollows has stated that the States want to do more of the same; they want to carry out programs which do not work and which will not work, and to freeze out the vital ingredient in any health care program that is concerned to uplift the standards of our Aboriginal people, that is, the critical question of Aboriginal participation. That was his

experience and none of those argumentscompelling arguments they were, extracted in the field by a noted Australian authority-has been dealt with or even referred to in the ministerial statement.
What does the Government's own bureaucracy say about Commonwealth-State attitudes to Aboriginal health? The program effectiveness review-whose report should have been in the hands of every parliamentarian in this Housewas an internal review of the issues raised by both Professor Hollows and a parliamentary committee and referred to the critical question of Commonwealth-State co-operation in raising health standards. I wish to quote from this confidential document. It is no wonder that the Minister was not prepared to make it public. It shows the paucity, the mendacity and the nonsense which is involved in the ministerial statement. At page 14 of the review, carried out by departmental officers at the request of the Prime Minister, it is stated:
The States have adopted a different stance about Commonwealth responsibilities, based on their interpretation of the agreements-that the Commonwealth is predominantly responsible for financing Aboriginal health programs, that the States are responsible for health policy and planning and for the co-ordination of health services, and that the States' general responsibility for health should not be abrogated by the Commonwealth's Aboriginal health policies.
It is not clear how far the State authorities subscribe to the principle of Aboriginal self-management. Insofar as the principle may apply to States Grants programs, the States are adamant that policy, planning and management of health care must be undertaken by properly qualified personnel, and this tends to exclude Aboriginals because of their lack of training and particularly of formal qualifications.
So, the Government's own internal bureaucracy agrees with the very conclusions that Professor Hollows made in the field. It has summarised those conclusions on page 15 of this confidential report.
If members of Parliament want to get their hands on it and read it, they have to go cap in hand to the Press Gallery and say: 'Please, the Prime Minister regards this report as so confidential and so damning of his policies that we have to get it as if it had fallen off the back of a truck'. This policy document goes on to say:
The PER saw three main areas of policy difference existing between the Commonwealth and the States:
appropriate division of financial responsibility and the role of supplementary funding;
co-ordination of policy and planning; and the emphasis to be given to Aboriginal self-management and the level at which Aboriginals should be involved effectively.
This report complemented and supplemented the report of the parliamentary committee; but, more

Committee on Aboriginal Affairs

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2559

important than that, it came out with very specific proposals. It recommended:
Effective Aboriginal involvement in developing and implementing health programs be a key factor. This would entail setting up a national Aboriginal health body responsible to the ministers for health and aboriginal affairs.
Where is that to be found in the ministerial statement? It continues:
That States be granted less funds and the Aboriginal run medical services be given much more.
It could not be any more specific than that recommendation that the States be given less funds and Aboriginal conducted services be given more. But, that is not the principle we find in this ministerial statement. Further proposals are:
That Aborigines be represented on hospital boards in areas with substantial Aboriginal population.
That more Aborigines be employed in training in the Aboriginal health field.
It goes on to say:
More than $62m is spent on Aboriginal health in general State programs, including hospitals, but the report--
This is the report of the Government's own advisers-
claims that this is 'not effective'.
It is not just a question of the proposals outlined by the Minister today being bad health policy. It is also a question of its being bad medicine. That is the reason this report has been buried and is not available directly to the Parliament so that it can form a consensus on it, so that it can go forward and deal with this critical problem, this matter of life and death which reaches right into every Aboriginal community in Australia.
The Government's own program effectiveness review has made it perfectly clear that the health status of Aborigines is still bad. The effectiveness and perpetuation of many current State-run programs is clearly open to doubt. It suggests that the Commonwealth, by funding the States in this way, is throwing good money after bad. It is interesting to note that the Minister, at page 11 of his statement, gives what he regards as the new model which the Government believes ought to be adopted. He said:

and substantial statement which refers to effective Aboriginal health care models, the Minister said that the new structure operating in Darwin was an excellent working model, when the Aboriginal community was not effectively involved in the decision to establish it. Not once in this very substantial statement did the Minister indicate as an effective working model-I name only one of them-the health service conducted by the Central Australian Aboriginal Congress in Darwin. It treats 30,000 Aboriginal patients a year at a cost of $12.50 per patient. The spokesman for the Northern Territory Administration, Mr Tuxworth, said that the cost to the Territory in a Territory-run operation is $40 per out-patient service. Should not this Minister say that perhaps we ought to be going for the service that seems to be working, which has the confidence of the Aboriginal people and which, most importantly, can be shown by the Aboriginal people to be run with cost savings and more effectively than the glitter and show of large structures which often are built to perpetuate the view of the prevailing State bureaucrat?
I believe those are the issues. In considering this ministerial statement, not the least of the points we have to make is that the Minister has said: 'We should hand it over to the States. We will work it out together. It will be all right.' It might have been all right 12 months ago, but if there is any area in present Commonwealth-State relations where there is not merely chaos but confrontation on almost a daily basis it is health care. The Minister for Health from my own State, a man whose political philosophy is the same as that of this Minister, said only today that if Commonwealth funding continues at the present level Victoria will have to cut back on its health services. Is the Minister for Health serious when he brings in a proposal and says to the Minister for Health in Victoria: 'Despite the fact that you will have to cut back on services, we have an entirely new policy for the treatment of Aborigines which will cost you more than you are paying at the moment'? Have honourable members ever heard such palpable nonsense?

The Aboriginal and Islander Medical Service in Darwin, which is funded jointly by the Commonwealth and Northern Territory governments and works in closely with existing health services, is a good example of what can be achieved through co-operation. The Government will be prepared to consider provision of assistance to similarly innovative approaches elsewhere.
I do not propose in the short time available to me to be overtly critical of that service. I simply say this: The Aboriginal community was not consulted on the establishment of that service. I also point out that it is odd that in this very lengthy

It is not necessary that Government members support this statement. Perhaps it is not so important that the Parliament support it. But when we are talking about Aboriginal health care it is important that the Aboriginal people throughout Australia support the statement. What have they said about this report, this Minister for Health and this wretched Prime Minister? Mr Gary Foley, an Aboriginal who knows a great deal about Aboriginal health care services was reported in an article in the Press. He said:

2560 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Committee on Aboriginal Affairs

We are being trodden down, and every effort we make to improve the serious health problems of our people is thwarted by the Government.
The article continued:
The. Govern~ent is refusing to fund 10 key Aboriginal-run medical serVices-at Campbelltown, Taree and Wilcannia (NSW), Geraldton, Broome, Warburton and Kalgoorlie (WA) and Rockhampton, Mackay and Cairns (Qld) . . . The Aboriginal medical services are the most cost-effective programs and the ones which, on the evidence of several Government reports, are doing by far the most and best work . . .
No objective examination of those reports will contradict that statement. The article continued: torAia1n13A2~osrtaifgfi,nianlclHudeianlgthseSveervnidceochtaovrse abnedendewnortikstis~goffothr eseVviecn-
w~ks Without pay because of a government-induced funding crISIS.
That crisis has been induced by this Government and this Prime Minister. The Minister for Health has made in the Parliament a lengthy statement telling the Aboriginal people that by the appli~ cation of Fraser federalism all will be well. The Aboriginal people have reached, in the course of the last two decades, an understanding about their own rights, perspectives and self-dignity. They know the medical services in which they have confidence. More importantly, they know those services which reach out to meet Aboriginal needs and aspirations. This statement does not meet those aspirations, those hopes or the recommendations of the parliamentary committee. It does not fall within the purview of the Government's own internal review. It is a mediocre muddled statement which simply reflects the present trend of Fraser federalism. Just as that policy is failing in every other area it will fail the Aboriginal people of this nation.

TRADING BANK MERGERS Discussion of Matter of Public Importance Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The Government's apparent intention to approve proposed mergers of major trading banks regardless of the serious national implications of such mergers.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (8.20)-ln the last three weeks we have witnessed the greatest attempt at restructuring our financial institutions for many years. That restructuring has involved merger negotiations by all the major private trading banks with the result that at this stage two mergers are now formally proposed. Those mergers are the Bank of New South Wales with the Commercial Bank of Australia and the National Bank of Australasia Ltd with the Commercial Banking Co. of Sydney Ltd. These mergers have enormous implications for Australia. They are the largest takeovers in our history. The amount involved in the Bank of New South Wales and CBA deal is $700m and the amount involved in the National Bank takeover of the CBC is $450m. For that reason the Opposition believes it is important that the matter be discussed in this Parliament.
Motion (by Mr Macpbee) agreed to:
That the Business of the Day be called on.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is the amendment seconded?
Dr Everingbam-I second the amendment and seek leave to continue my remarks.

(Quorum formed).
TARIFF PROPOSALS Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (8.27)-1 move:

Leave granted; debate adjourned.

Customs Tariff Proposals No.7 (1981).

BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE The following Bills were returned from the
Senate without amendment or requests:
Excise Tariff AmendmentBi111981. Pig Slaughter Amendment Levy Bill 1981.
ASSENT TO BILLS Assent to the following Bills reported:
Customs Amendment (Tenders) Bill 1981. Customs Securities (Penalties) Bill 1981. Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Bill 1981.

The Customs Tariff Proposals 1 have just tabled relate to proposed alterations to the Customs Tariff Act 1966. Proposals No.7 (1981), which operates on and from tomorrow, contains tariff changes resulting from the Government's decision on recommendations by the Industries Assistance Commission in its report on wheelchairs. The Government has accepted the Commission's recommendations that the duty rates applicable to wheelchairs and parts will be reduced to 20 per cent over the next two years. This rate represents a duty reduction of 14 per cent for mechanically propelled and 16 per cent for manually operated

Garden Island Modernisation Stage 2

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2561

wheelchairs. Before reaching this decision the Government gave careful consideration to the need to strike a balance between reducing costs for wheelchair users and providing a level and form of assistance appropriate to the existence of a viable local industry.
I draw the attention of honourable members to the Government's announcement in the 1980-81 Budget of a new program under which a range of aids to daily living will be provided to disabled people. This program is intended to benefit disabled people not eligible under existing Commonwealth, Commonwealth-State or State funded programs. A range of aids including conventional wheelchairs, manual and motorised, will be available on indefinite loan under the program without cost to the recipients. The necessary administrative arrangements for this program are currently being developed under the authority of my colleague the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) with a view to the program commencing later this year.
The proposals also contain changes which remove a tariff anomaly relating to raised nap cotton fabric known as flannelette. A new definition allows concessional entry of only genuine flannelette in accordance with a Government decision taken last year following the Industries Assistance Commission report on textiles, clothing and footwear. The new definition will ensure that cotton fabric with minimally raised nap falls within the quota system, as intended; but to avoid disruption to the industry making up bed linen, importers of raised nap sheeting which does not meet the flannelette definition will be issued with supplementary quota for the remainder of the quota period to 31 December 1981. A summary setting out the nature of the changes has been prepared and is being circulated to honourable members. I commend the Proposals to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned.
INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION: REPORT ON
WHEELCHAIRS
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-For the information of honourable members, J present the report of the Industries Assistance Commission on wheelchairs.
GARDEN ISLAND, NEW SOUTH WALES, MODERNISATION STAGE 2
Reference ofWork: Public Works Committee Act
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (8.28)-1 move:

That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, the following proposed work be referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for consideration and report: Garden Island, N.S.W.- modernisation stage 2.
This proposal is for the second stage of an overall modernisation program which is aimed at improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the dockyard and the fleet base, providing each with a capability of operating independently without duplication, improving the aesthetic qualities of Garden Island while minimising undesirable effects on the environment and preserving historic buildings. Advance works and stage 1 modernisation works at Garden Island have already been reported on favourably by the Public Works Committee and approved by Parliament. The stage 2 works will comprise: Woolloomooloo fleet berth wharves; west dock workshop modules B and C; guided missile launching system overhaul facility; conversion of building 30 to a ready-use store; conversion of buildings 89 and 90 to an office complex; production administrative centre and dock refit berth support facility; surface preparation and preservation facility and oily bilge waste treatment plant; groundworks, and reticulated engineering services. The estimated cost of the proposed works is $79m at April 1981 prices. I table plans of the proposed work.
MI' HURFORD (Adelaide) (8.29)-The Opposition supports the reference of the second stage of modernisation program for Garden Island to the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Public Works. We have always supported the examination by that Committee of the Parliament of propositions such as this which come from the Government. We trust that the work of the Public Works Committee will be facilitated by the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) and his Department so that the report can come back to this Parliament and an early decision may be taken by the Government.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
FISH (EXPORT INSPECTION CHARGE) BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 14 May, on motion by MrNixon:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Before the debate is resumed on the Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Bill I would remind the House that it has been agreed that a general debate be allowed covering this Bill, the Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Bill, the Dried Fruit

2562 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Bill

(Export Inspection Charge) Bill, and the Dried not be long before that will be changed and it will Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Bill. be charging the full 100 per cent.

Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (8.31)-ln continuing my remarks on the Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Bill and the Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Bill I reiterate what I believe to be the Government's reason for imposing these charges. This Government is intent on raising funds to add to its revenue or on cutting expenditure to achieve the same aim. That is what this Bill sets out to do. For the last four months I have sat in this House and listened to ideological rhetoric which could lead one to believe that the Government is about lowering taxes and charges. Nothing could be further from the truth. This measure, although only dealing in small amounts of money, is another measure designed to collect funds from two industries which can ill afford to pay the extra charges.
The Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) said that the purpose of the Bills is to have the fish and dried fruit industries pay half the costs of the services provided. The Bills set out the maximum amounts which can be charged. The previous speaker on the Government side, the honourable member for O'Connor (Mr Tuckey), outlined the clauses of the Bills relating to these maximum charges. I will repeat them for the benefit of those who are listening at present. He said:
Clauses 6 (3) and (4)-
This is the Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Bill-
give details of the maximum charges allowed under this Bill. They are 15c a dozen for oysters and 30c per kilogram for fish other than oysters. In the dried fruit levy Bill, clause 6 (2) also allows for differential treatment and clause 6 (3) sets the maximum charge under the proposed Act at $11 a tonne. However, fish and dried fruit producers should not be alarmed by the amounts referred to as these are truly the maximum charges.
Fruit growers and fishermen would not want their livelihood to depend on this Government keeping any commitments. When the Government says at this stage that the charges are only 50 per cent it will be just a matter of time before we see a change. The honourable member for O'Connor also said that the maximum charges are introduced in line with the present policy and give a sensible life to the Bill. We could ask what he means by the words 'a sensible life to the Bill'. Virtually that means that any time in the near future when the Government sees fit, it can take necessary measures to collect the other 50 per cent thus doubling the charge in a very short time. Those are the policies to which he is referring. At this stage the charge is only 50 per cent of the services provided. No doubt, along with most of the other commitments made by this Government it will

At this stage I would like to refer to a few other points concerning the fishing industry. Recently, the Australian Fishing Industry Council and the Victorian Fishing Industry Council were formed. The fishing industry has as much potential for development as any Australian food industry. The December 1980 edition of the official Commonwealth journal Australian Fisheries shows the value of fisheries production at an estimated $28lm. Exports of Australian fisheries products to the year ended 30 June 1980 were worth a record $256m. It can be seen that this industry is worth a lot to the export income of this country. However, the journal states:
Because of rising costs, particularly fuel costs, most fishermen were probably worse off in 1979-80 than in the previous year.
This applies particularly to the many fishermen catching the high value species such as prawns and rock lobsters where neither catches nor the pace of price increases matched those of the previous year. So from the 1980 edition of the Australian Fisheries we see that there is not a great deal of room in the industry for the Government to be imposing extra charges at this time, particularly when we are constantly told by this Government that it is reducing taxes and charges. The very facts point to the opposite happening.
In applying these charges to the industry the Government is adding to the already large increases in fees which at least one State government imposed at the end of 1980. I refer to the Victorian Government which increased fees for abalone divers and scallop fishermen by up to 100 per cent. Not only is the industry copping it from the Federal Liberal Government but also it is copping it from the Victorian Liberal Government. The fishing industry should be encouraged to expand. Whilst we are exporting fish to the value of $256m, we are importing fish to the value of $150m. The Government would be better advised to concentrate on fostering the industry as it has great growth potential which should be assisted by decreasing costs rather than unnecessarily increasing them.
I do not want to take up a lot of the time of the House tonight. In the time that is available to me I just want to make a couple of comments. I find it rather alarming that, with only a couple of weeks of this parliamentary session left, we have 47 notices on the Notice Paper with many more to come in. Time will be vital. We will need it to discuss some of the more important issues. At this stage I would rather leave my remarks at what I have had to say and I urge the Government to

Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Bill

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2563

bring forward and to debate some of the vital that the very serious situation of the industry at

issues that the country is wanting to hear debated. that time could be resolved. 1 would like to make
r have said enough on this matter. The eight another point about this Bill: Where an industry is

minutes which are remaining to me can go to a paying up to half of the inspection charges, I be-

more sensible debate perhaps for a bigger lieve that it needs to be ensured and guaranteed

industry.

that these inspection services are efficient and

Mr FISHER (Mallee) (8.37)-Tonight I wish to deal with the Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charges) Bill. (Quorum formed). The continual disruptions by the honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott) indicate the importance the

effective and that continual checks are provided to make sure that the amount of money that the industry is paying and the amount of money that the Government, through the taxpayers, is paying is being used in the best possible way.

Australian Labor Party attaches to these primary The Department of Primary Industry provides

industry Bills. The Dried Fruit (Export Inspecthe export inspection services for the fried fruit in-

tion Charges) Bill and associated Bills allow for a dustry. At the present time, there are some 29

maximum charge of $11 a tonne for the inspection DPI officers involved in inspection services. Most

of dried fruit. The actual charge being proposed of these are stationed in the city of Mildura in my

by regulation in the Dried Fruit (Export Inspecelectorate of Mallee. Only a small number-two

tion Charges) Bill is $5.50 a tonne for 1981-82. or three-are stationed in the ports of Adelaide

These charges aim to recover some 50 per cent of and Melbourne. It is also interesting to note that

the cost of inspection of dried fruit and will yield in the dried fruit industry, Commonwealth

some $259,000 in a full year. The charges will opofficers perform both the domestic and export in-

erate from 1 July.

spection services. The charges on the domestic

The House will be well aware that this Government has made significant contributions to inspection services for primary industry as, indeed, it has made to research programs and promotion in many rural industries. I was interested to hear the honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham)-perhaps we can excuse him because he has only been a member of parliament for four months-criticising the Government for the fact that it seeks to recover some 50 per cent of inspection charges. I have been a member of parliament for some nine years. I remember what happened after the report of the Coombs Royal

side are accordingly given to the State governments to pay. 1 believe that this method of inspection could be applied to many more of our rural industries to overcome some of the duplication of costs and effort that occurs. Last year some 70,000 tonnes of dried vine fruit and 4,000 to 5,000 tonnes of tree fruit were involved in the inspection service. An average of 45,000 to 46,000 tonnes of dried fruit is exported each year. The cost of these inspection services is high. It has to be recognised that this cost represents only about one per cent of the value of all returns to the dried fruit industry.

Commission on Australian Government was preIt always amazes me when a shadow Minister

sented to the Australian Labor Party Governfor Agriculture-in this case the honourable

ment. The beef industry was in its most serious demember for Werriwa (Mr Kerin)-tends to talk

pression ever. The Labor Government introduced down some of the smaller horticultural industries.

a program for complete recovery of inspection He mentioned in his speech on this Bill almost a

charges for beef at that time. When we came into fortnight ago that the dried fruit industry is one of

government it was necessary for us to abolish the weakest rural industries.

those inspection charges altogether.

Mr Donald Cameron-Did he say that?

Mr Cunningham-You put them back on again.

Mr FISHER-The honourable member for Werriwa did say that. 1 remember that when I

Mr Uoyd-What did you do for the beef entered this Parliament in 1972 the export value

industry?

of a tonne of dried fruit was some $250. I remind

Mr Scott-What are you doing for Aborigines?

honourable members that at the present time the price being received overseas for Australian dried

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! fruit varies between $1,200 and $1,500 a tonne. I

I warn the honourable member for Kalgoorlie. I think this indicates the importance that this

also warn the honourable member for Hindmarsh Government has placed on ensuring that ad-

and the honourable member for Murray. I call the equate export markets are obtained and that in-

honourable member for Mallee.

dustries are assisted in those markets.

Mr FISHER-Our Government abolished Recently, I read a study by Edward Gibbon, these charges on the beef industry altogether so The History of the Decline and Fall of the

2564 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Bill

Roman Empire, in which he concluded that all eventually was brought about by the authori-

taxes must fall at last upon agriculture. Even in tarian and elitist policies of the power that be. I

Roman times, apparently, agriculture was obvithink there is a message there for the present

ously affected as much by the changes in political Government. In dealing with the Fish (Export In-

and economic life as by the variability of nature. spection Charge) Bill, I would like to talk a little

(Quorum formed}. Whilst man has proved that he about the fishing industry. I represent the elector-

is the equal of nature in some respects, he is also ate which has the largest fishing industry in

proving that he can cause instability and in Australia. It is an industry that has tremendous

security in world agricultural markets. Of course, potential for growth. It is my belief that this

this situation is very much reflected in the AusGovernment should be encouraging that growth.

tralian dried fruit industry. The industry's Clearly this Government, with the imposition of

exports, particularly to the European Economic these additional charges, is not doing that. It is an

Community, have been very difficult to maintain. industry that has potential for export earnings

It is a credit to that industry, both as a strong and, probably more importantly, a potential to re-

organisational group and as a marketing body, duce the level of our foreign exchange. Unfortu-

that it has over the last decade been able to place nately the industry is today in chaos. I had calls

its total fruit crop both in the EEC market and in from my electorate today from the town of Car-

other new markets throughout the world.

narvon where, due to the dumping of fish on the

It is, of course, of concern to the industry at the present time that Greece and Turkey are entering

Australian market, the price of snapper has fallen below an economically viable level.

the European Economic Community, as both Mr Donald Cameron-From which country?

these countries are major producers of dried fruit. Jt is hopcd that the subsidised arrangements that the EEC makes in respect of many of its agricultural products do not magnify and add to the difficulties that the Australian dried fruit industry has in placing its crops. The Australian dried fruit industry has retained its high reputation for quality and reliability of supply throughout the world. This has been done by a strong grower organisation in co-operation with government which has always sought to ensure high quality control through those inspection services that we are talking about tonight in the debate on this Bill. These services guarantee that our products are of a certain standard, both on the domestic and the export markets and, I believe, will ensure that this

Mr CAMPBELL-The countries are South Africa and New Zealand. I am not in favour of protection generally but this is a situation in which the Government should be supporting what is in fact an embryonic industry. It is an industry that is tremendously undercapitalised and an industry that needs to attract capital to improve the size and the quality of its fishing capability. This cannot be done unless there is some stability in the industry. This stability will not be enhanced by the effects of this Bill. One might wonder what will happen with the imposition of these extra charges to the presently flourishing abalone fishing industry.
I think the tremendous difference between the

industry retains a very high reputation both here policy of the Australian Labor Party and the pol-

and overseas.

icy of this present Government is worth bearing in

As you are aware, Mr Deputy Speaker, the Australian dried fruit crop is not a large crop in terms of acreage or in terms of total economic value. But it represents an income of some $80m to $90m a year in areas that contribute very much to decentralisation, economic viability and growth

mind. The Government does claim quite substantial income from royalties on the concessions for fishing within Australia's territorial waters. This Government puts that money into Consolidated Revenue. It is the policy of the Australian Labor Party to return that money to the industry, to make it available in the form of loans to the indus-

in our rural areas. Whilst tonight I recognise that we are placing a higher inspection charge upon an industry, I do know that this industry is increasing in viability and is making a major contribution both to the areas in which it is produced and to the nalional economy overall. T have much pleasure in supporting the legislation.

try, so that fishermen can re-equip with better equipment and better boats to get out and compete with what is now a much better organised and a much better mechanised foreign industry. I think that illustrates the difference.
It is said that the maximum charges will not be applied immediately. I do not think anyone

Mr CAMPBELL (Kalgoorlie) (8.50)-As a seriously believes that. We have seen this present

serious student of Roman history, no doubt the Government grabbing, in the most grubby

honourable member for Mallee (Mr Fisher) fashion, at every available dollar. It will be only a

would know that the fall of the Roman Empire short time before people are paying the maximum

Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Bill

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2565

charge under this legislation. I have no doubt that, once that maximum charge has been reached, the National Country Party and the Government will be only too pleased to introduce another Bill to raise the prices further. One of the things that should be remembered is that the fishing industry is a primary industry. It is one of the great primary industries of this country. Therefore, it is a little surprising that, when we are debating this Bill which relates so much to primary industry, members of the National Country Party in this chamber are noticeable by their absence. 1 do not know why this is so. I think that something fishy is going on. I think people are beginning to realisecertainly this applies to the people in my electorate-that for many years the National Country Party has not been serving their interests. Quite honestly, I do not think there is enough substance to these Bills to warrant the length of time spent on them by the honourable member for Mallee.
In conclusion, 1say that we need to support this industry. It has the potential to reduce our foreign exchange. We are presently importing $150m worth of fish a year. This is a bill which could be substantially reduced. The industry could provide employment to a tremendous number of areas in Australia that today are areas of relatively high unemployment. Small country towns up and down the coast of my electorate would benefit substantially from a revitalised wet fishing industry. If the Government is serious about tackling unemployment-of course, I think it is a very big 'if-this is one area in which a little consideration and the initiative that the Government is always talking about could be applied. The evidence is overwhelmingly present. With a little initiative and encouragement, the fishing industry in this country could develop substantially and could be providing substantial employment in areas which currently have a high level of unemployment.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Macphee) read a third time.
FISH (EXPORT INSPECTION CHARGE) COLLECTION BILL 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 7 May, on motion by Mr Nixon:
That the Bill be now read a second time.

Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Macphee) read a third time.
DRIED FRUIT (EXPORT INSPECTION CHARGE) BILL 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 7 May, on motion byMrNixon:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Macphee) read a third time.
DRIED FRUIT (EXPORT INSPECTION CHARGE) COLLECTION BILL 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 7 May, on motion byMrNixon:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Macphee) read a third time.
CUSTOMS AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Second Reading
Debate resumed from 7 May, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr MOORE (Ryan---Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House has a general debate covering this Bill and the Excise Amendment Bill, as they are associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate

2566 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Customs Amendment Bill

covering these measures? I will allow that course In answer to Opposition questions in the House

to be followed.

of Representatives and recent Senate Estimates

committees, we find that the surveillance effort of

Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (9.1)-As the Department remains very limited. I think it is

the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs a matter of some concern that the Government is

(Mr Moore) has suggested, the Customs Amendnot providing facilities for more extensive sut:veil-

ment Bill and the Excise Amendment Bill are lance. There are only three Nomad aircraft-one

fairly parallel measures, and the Opposition is at Townsville, one at Darwin, and one at Port

quite happy to proceed with a cognate debate. Hedland. Notwithstanding that there are also

The first Bill, the Customs Amendment Bill 1981, capabilities relevant to Customs in the Australian

amends the Customs Act in four principal ways. Coastal Surveillance Centre, the number of air-

Firstly, there are provisions to clarify the powers craft is clearly very limited. The siting of the

of Customs to deal with illegal imports such as planes in northern Australia reflects the highly

narcotics, and in fact those provisions follow the questionable assumption that smuggling activity

recommendations of the Williams Australian will occur only in that zone. Practical experience

Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drugs. Secteaches us that that is just not the case. If I might

ondly, there are provisions which clarify the refer the House back to the tabling in this House

powers and procedures of the Customs Bureau for of the Williams report, the Leader of the Oppo-

clearing goods through Customs. Thirdly, the Bill sition (Mr Hayden) noted that the report cited

invokes powers to the Bureau of Customs to deal the case of a Taiwanese fishing boat sailing a con-

with illegally imported vessels, particularly refsiderable distance up the Brisbane River before it

ugee boats which are condemned or otherwise unwas detected. Apparently it had journeyed unde-

seaworthy. Finally, there is an amendment which tected from Darwin, using a school atlas. I well re-

aims to extend the validation period for tariff and call the classic remark of the Minister for Defence

excise proposals from the present period of six (Mr Killen) that the military capability of

months to 12 months.

Australia was such that it could not defend Bot-

any Bay on a sunny Sunday afternoon, but surely

I would now like to deal in detail with those it is a ridiculous state of affairs when a flimsy

four main areas. Firstly, the clarification and Taiwanese fishing boat can sail around the coast

extension of the powers of Customs in dealing of Australia and up the Brisbane River without

with illegal imports such as narcotic drugs is welanybody noticing it is there.

comed by the Opposition. These changes in part reflect the administrative directions already The Williams report also found that, in the two issued, following the abolition of the Narcotics years to August 1979, there were 109 unresolved

Bureau in 1979. They are in accordance with recsightings of unidentified aircraft flying into ommendations of the Royal Commission of InAustralia. Some of these, the Commission said, quiry into Drugs, which sought to delineate could reasonably be expected to have carried nar-

clearly the responsibilities of the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs on the one hand and the Australian Federal Police on the other. The Bill also provides for an extension of Customs control over ships and aircraft at sea from the present three miles to 12 miles from the coast. The

cotics. That is not a very profound statement, but I am sure it carries a deal of truth. Similarly, in the eight years to June 1978, there were 12 proven illegal importations of drugs by small seacraft, leading to action in the courts and various people being incarcerated. With such limited surveillance

Opposition supports those provisions. However, capacity, it is reasonable to say that no doubt we note with some concern some of the implithese sightings and captures were just the tip of

cations of the changes, which obviously are much the iceberg. It is interesting to note some of the

more extensive than those few words might recommendations of the Williams Royal Comsuggest. The area of responsibility insofar as surmission in relation to surveillance. The first recveillance is concerned is extended by a factor in ommendation I mention appears on page B441,

excess of four. As an example, to comprehend the and it states:

difference between a 3-mile zone and a 12-mile zone, the area involved increases from about

Surveillance of Australia's coastline should not be confined to Northern Australia.

twice the size of Tasmania to about twice the size

of Victoria. It is difficult enough to provide surThat is something with which the Opposition

veillance in compact areas of that size, but the agrees. It should be noted at once that the

fact that the area extends around the 36,735 kiloGovernment's placement of the Customs planes

metres of Australian coastline greatly exacerbates breaches this recommendation. The Commission

the problem.

also recommended:

Customs Amendment Bill

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2567

The responsibility for three Nomad aircraft dedicated to coastal surveillance by the Bureau of Customs should be transferred to the Australian Coastal Surveillance Centre.
We do not disagree with that recommendation either. Going further at page B383 the Commission noted that it was unable to ascertain with any precision the role of these three Customs aircraft. It noted in particular that the speed of the Nomad is very low. Some people say that someone on a hang-glider can almost rush past a Nomad. In fact, its speed is somewhere in the vicinity of 150 to 200 knots, while the only established case of an aircraft being used to drop narcotics in Australia involved an aircraft with a much higher speed capacity-in excess of 200 knots. We all know that that plane was detected because the damn thing crashed. No one caught it; it crashed quite by accident in Central Australia. The Department told the Royal Commission that the planes were response vehicles, 'response' being the operative word, and I would like the Minister to explain what response means. The Royal Commission was not convinced, and probably was not very amused either. I note that, in answer to a question in Estimates Commitee D on 29 August 1980, the Department again referred to these planes as response planes.
There we have it. Firstly, planes are operated by an agency which the Royal Commission recommended should not operate them. Secondly, they operate in areas of Australia which the Royal Commission found should no longer be the focus of attention. Thirdly, they operate in roles which the Royal Commission could not ascertain. That is not a very splendid record of service and devotion, I might say to the Minister. Added to that, we now have a fourfold extension of the surveillance area, which clearly means that the capacity to provide surveillance with such minimal resources is totally inadequate.
I suppose that this is what small government is all about. I hope that more and more Australians will realise that when the penny-pinching philosophy called small government really surfaces, it is an unabashed abdication of government responsibility. In this area of surveillance of our coastline as a means of keeping narcotics out of Australia and out of the reach of Australian kids, I am sure that the Minister shares my concern that the resources available to him are not adequate to do the job. In some other areas the Opposition welcomes the legislative improvements in respect of the role of Customs. We hope-l fear in vainthat the Government will match these im-
t provements with an appropriate commitment of
resources. notice the Minister is smiling. I am sure that he agrees with me.

I turn briefly now to the second group of amendments provided in the Bill. These clarify the powers and procedures of the Customs Bureau and, again, the Opposition has no objection to them. One of the more important provisions in this group is that which makes principals liable for the acts of employees involved in the unauthorised movement of goods in a Customs area. An adequate defence is provided by the Bill to protect principals who take reasonable precautions and exercise due diligence in respect of such goods. The Opposition contacted the Customs Agents Federation regarding these provisions because obviously they have an important effect on the members of that organisation. 1 am happy to report that the Federation has no objection to them, but it should be noted that that is just as well because there appears to have been no consultation between the Federation and the Government. It seems to me singularly appropriate that, where legislation affects business in various ways, there should be consultation, but that seems not to be this Government's philosophy. It is trying to reduce consultation, and apparently it made no effort at all in this case. That is probably a failing of this Government in many other areas. Where changes are made which affect industries, the people who work in them and the people who run them, consultation with those industries should be mandatory before the decisions are made. You, Sir, might well remember the singular victory you had in this House in the case of the wine brandy growers and the certain consultation that was lacking in that area. I suggest to the Minister that he should not neglect this important need. If he does talk to the Customs Agents Federation he will find that its members do have problems with clearing goods through Customs. He should look at ways of improving this situation. I am sure that he will not find that so-called small government is the answer in this case either.
The third major series of amendments in this Bill relate to the powers of Customs to deal with illegally imported vessels, particularly refugee boats, which are condemned or otherwise unseaworthy. Problems arose with the Customs Act two or three years ago when several dozen refugee boats in Darwin Harbour presented a major disposal problem. I can well remember being in Darwin at that stage and seeing the harbour festooned with these odd craft which people had used to escape to Australia. Amending legislation passed last year with the support of the Opposition and these further provisions add to those new powers. Of course, the Opposition supports the provisions which give the Bureau of Customs the right to destroy those boats if necessary.

2568 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Customs Amendment Bill

Finally, the fourth major provision of the Bill is that to amend section 226 to extend the validity period of customs tariff proposals from six months to 12 months. The Excise Amendment Bill, which is also a subject of this cognate debate similarly provides for an extension of the validit; period for excise tariff proposals. Customs tariff and excise tariff proposals are of fundamentalimportance to the Australian economy. They have two fundamental roles. Firstly, they are taxes, and vitally important taxes at that. Many of the excise tariff proposals relate to the crude oil levy, which, of course, has been a massive tax slug for one thing, but which has also been a massive advantage to the Government in reducing the deficit. The Government has trumpeted loudly about its great efficiency in reducing the deficit. We of the Opposition and the Australian public know that the deficit has been reduced only by means of the levy which has come out of the pockets of the public. Total customs and excise taxation revenue estimated for the current year is $7,762m, nearly one-quarter of the Government's total tax revenue.
The second fundamental role of customs and excise tariffs is the implementation of industry policy. Tariffs, of course, are the principal means whereby Australian industries are protected from import competition. The jobs of hundreds of thousands of Australians are at stake every time a customs tariff amendment Bill is passed by this House. We believe that legislation of such fundamental importance to the taxation and industry policies of Australia should not be tampered with lightly. However, the Government is proposing to halve the frequency with which the principal legislation enacting changes in tariff rates is to be dealt'with and debated in this Parliament. Tariff and excise charges can already be implemented months in advance of parliamentary approval, but the Government wants to extend the period during which it can collect these taxes without legislative backing in the forms of customs or excise tariff amendments. The Opposition cannot agree to those provisions. We cannot accept that a government should reserve for itself an extended capacity to impose retrospective legislation to collect taxes while, at the same time, failing to act retrospectively against tax avoiders. This Government has been anything but backward in adopting a holier than' thou attitude when it comes to retrospective legislation with regard to tax avoidance. However, here we find the Government cooly, coldly and blandly implementing this provision in this House to impose taxes retrospectively.

We do not believe that the Parliament's role should be further downgraded in this way. We acknowledge, of course, that it is not possible to change tariffs by legislation enacted in advance of the date such changes come into effect, but there is no reason to extend beyond a full sitting of the Parliament the period before legislation is introduced. If income tax on government spending decisions were treated in such a cavalier fashion we would have a constitutional crisis. The Opposition will not agree to these changes dealing with one-quarter of the Government's revenue. In summary, the Opposition welcomes the improve-
ments in customs administration provided by this Bill in such areas as the clearance of goods, surveillance against illegal imports and dealing with illegally imported vessels. However, we oppose the Government's attempts to reduce further the role of this Parliament in scrutinising and determining excise and tariff rates in Australia. To assist the passage of this Bill and to assist the Government to clear the backlog of legislation, we will be doing our best not to hinder the House too much. We intend to oppose clause 28 of the Customs Amendment Bill in the Committee stage. We intend to oppose the Excise Amendment Bill in its entirety at the second reading stage. We will divide on each occasion.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

In Committee

Clauses 1 to 27-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.

Clause 28 (Time for commencing action).

Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (9.16)- The Opposition proposes that this clause of the
Bill be omitted.

Question put:

That the clause be agreed to.

The Committee divided.

(The Chairman-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes Noes . .

. 59 . 43

Majority

16

Adermann, A. E. Daume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier,J. \V. Bradfield, J. M.
Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G.
Cameron, Donald

AYES

Howard,1. W.
Hunt,R.J.D. Hyde,I.M. Jarman. A. W. Jull.D.F. Kaller, R. C. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKeUar. M. J. R.

Excise Amendment Bill

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2569

AYES
Cameron. Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton,J.J. Chapman,H.G.P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fisher,P.S. (TeUer) Giles,G.O'H. Good luck, B.!. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges,J.C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M.

McLean, R. M.
MMaccVpehiegeh,,Dr. .MT..
Moore,J.C.
Newman, K. E. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson,lan Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Spender, J. M.
Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W.
White,P.N.D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C.
Blewett,N. Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell, G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,I. Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke,R.J.L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Lea (Teller) Jones. Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,I.C. Klugman, R. B. McLeay, Leo
McMahon, Lea Mildren,I.B. Milton,P. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Schol... G.G.D. Scott,I.L. Uren,T. West,S.!. Willis,R. Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. Nixon,P.J. Kmen,D.J.

Theophanous, A. C. Wallis,L.G. Morris,P.F.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Clause agreed to,

Remainder of Bill-by leave-taken as a whole, and agreed to.

Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.

Third Reading Bill (on motion by Mr Moore)-by leaveread a third time.

EXCISE AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 7 May, on motion byMrMoore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question put. The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr G. O'H. Giles)

Ayes

56

Noes

43

Majority

13

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Baume, M. E. Birney, R.J. Bourchier,J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M. A. Cadman,A.G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, 1. 1. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fisher, P. S. (Teller)
Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.I. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M.

Hyde,J.M. Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter,R.C. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. O'Ke.fe,F.L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher,A.C. Ruddock, P. M. 8ainsbury, M. B. Shack,P.D. Shipton,R.F. Sinclair, I. MeG. Spender, J. M. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. 8. Tuckey, C. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson,l. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C.
Blewett,N. Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E.
Child,J. Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins,J.S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke,R.J.L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys,B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A.
Johnson, Les (TeUer) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles
Kelly,R.J.
Kent,L. Kerin,J.C.
Klugman, R. E. McLeay,Loo McMahon, Les
Mildren, J. B. Milton,P.
Morrison, W. L. Mountford,J.G.
Scholes, G. G. D. Scott,J. L. Uren, T. West,S.J. WiIIis,R.
Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Drammond, P. H. Nixon, P. J. KilIen,D.J.
Dobie,J.D.M.

Theophanous. A. C. Wallis,L.G. Morris, P. F. Bowen, Lionel

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.

2570 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Bill

Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third in this area that the success of the Tokyo round is

time.

less than certain.

CUSTOMS TARIFF (ANTI-DUMPING) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 6 May, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House has a general debate covering the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Bill and the Customs Amendment (Security) Bill as they are associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each Bill at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- There being no objection, that course will be followed.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (9.31)~The purpose of these Bills is to bring the Australian anti-dumping law into conformity with the revised codes of conduct for international trade agreed to at the Tokyo round of the Multilateral Trade Negotiations. It will not be any surprise to the Government to find that the Opposition supports these measures because Australia's first venture into anti-dumping legislation occurred in the time of the illustrious Whitlam Government. So we are not about to oppose the Government's sticking to what we originally introduced. The Bills amend the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Act 1975 in accordance with the revised General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade code on anti-dumping, subsidies and countervailing measures. These two codes are among several considered at the Tokyo round in the context of non-tariff barriers to trade.
One of the two principal objectives of the Tokyo round was to secure a series of multilateral agreements on the conduct of international trade.
r think it is fair to say that the Tokyo round
appears to have been successful in respect of its other main objective which was to achieve a substantial reduction in tariffs applying to industrial products. The first instalment of these tariff reductions took effect on 1 January 1980. The major industrial nations reduced tariffs on industrial products. Over the eight years to 1988, tariffs are to be reduced by about one-third. I can only applaud that as being a major breakthrough. This success on the tariff front has moved the centre of attention towards non-tariff barriers to trade. It is

It should be recognised that reductions in nontariff barriers to trade are of vital importance not only to Australia but also to the economy of the entire world. Growth in trade has normally been associated with the growth in national incomes, increased productivity and an increased standard of living. Provided trade is conducted on a fair basis, it will almost always prove mutually beneficial to its participants. In this context the maintenance of Australia's anti-dumping law in accordance with internationally agreed principles is firmly supported by the Opposition. The purpose of the anti-dumping law is to ensure that trade is conducted on a fair and efficient basis. It is not a back door method for controlling imports or for erecting barriers to trade. However, we must always be aware of the fact that indiscriminate use of anti-dumping provisions invites retaliation against our own exports. There have been instances in recent history of this occurring, not necessarily in Australia. At the same time, indiscriminate use limits the effectiveness of our anti-dumping investigations because it prejudices cooperation with our trading partners.
The Opposition notes and welcomes the support expressed by a number of industry organisations for Australia's accession to the anti-dumping code. Of course, it is essential that this responsible attitude is taken if international agreement is to be maintained. I will refer later in my remarks to the subsidies and countervailing measures code to which Australia has not yet acceded. Overall, the new code probably makes it easier to prove a case of dumping against an exporter. The GATT code considers that a product is being dumped:
. . . if the export price of the product exported from one country to another is less than the comparable price, in the ordinary course of trade, for the like product when destined for consumption in the exporting country.
This is a very long-winded way of explaining the position. What is basically meant is that if country A wants to export to country B, then country B has the right to expect that the export price quoted by country A is in fact the price used for the sale of that commodity in country A. The code additionally requires that dumpings cause or threaten to cause injury before dumping action is appropriate to be undertaken. Clearly, the key concepts in the dumping law are export price, normal value and injury. It is the revised definition of these concepts which is at the heart of the new code and its amending legislation.
Clause 3 introduces new provisions which draw a distinction between export prices arising from

Customs Tariff(Anti~Dumping) Bill

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2571

what is known as arms length transactions on the the private sector we have here another example

one hand and transactions where the importer of harm to local companies which may face

and exporter are associated on the other hand. dumping from those countries where we may not

Where the importer and the exporter are have sufficient resources available to prove that

associated and hence the stated export price may dumping is in fact happening.

be higher than the export price which effectively prevails, appropriate adjustments may be made. This clause also covers the contingency where, for example, goods may be sent to Australia for sale on consignment and an agreed export price struck which may not be valid. This clause should assist in the administration of the code enabling the Minister to find anti-dumping action more easily warranted where transaction prices appear to be constructed to avoid anti-dumping action.

I ask the Minister to indicate what is happening to the Customs administration in the anti-dumping area and to explain to the House how a stronger code is to be backed up without an appropriate increment in the staffing resources devoted to its administration. I know that the staff of the Australian Bureau of Customs is extremely efficient. I am sure that the officers sitting in the advisers seats no doubt would support me in this view. However, they are not supermen, no matter

Similarly, clause 4 strengthens the Minister's how much they might try and even though the

hand in relation to the assessment of normal value Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr

by inserting criteria which enable a fair assessMoore) might look like an alfable Clark Kent, I

ment of normal value to be made in the home am sure that his men cannot do the work required

country. Obviously, this clause has been unless they have extra staff. I am particularly

introduced to cover the case of countries that keen to learn what the future of the Hong Kong,

have centrally planned economies where it is Tokyo, Auckland and New York offices will be,

difficult to establish what is, in fact, normal value. given the apparent decision to close the London

Mr Moore-Joh told me about it.

office. The administration of dumping law is of crucial

Mr JOHN BROWN-I presume the Minister importance, it if is to be at all effective. Recently

means Joh Bjelke-Petersen told him about it; I there have been complaints of dumping by

will have to take his word for that. Obviously, Japanese exporters of washing machines and by

there would be anomolies in countries with cenKorean exporters of steel. These complaints need

trally planned economies where goods may be to be dealt with quickly. If they are proven, action

subsidised by all sorts of government measures. should be taken quickly. If they are not proven,

Obviously, it would be difficult to establish what that too should be quickly notified because trade

real, normal value is. I will raise a matter of parshould not be encumbered with false accusations

ticular concern that the Opposition has in this reand hostile attitudes. An efficient and speedy pro-

gard. Obviously, to ascertain the normal value of cess which is as objective as possible is needed. In

an exported product, it is necessary to conduct in this light, I must raise the question of the Govern-

quiries in the exporting country. It would re ment's action in establishing a joint industry-

reasonable to suggest that an adequate staff be government Dumping Evaluation Committee, in

maintained in appropriate locations by the Dethe case of the steel industry, and what that is

partment of Business and Consumer Affairs in likely to achieve.

order for this to happen.

r have with me a media release from the Minis-

The Bill before the House generally strengthens ter for Business and Consumer Affairs which

the provisions of the anti-dumping code. At the speaks of the creation of a joint iron and steel

same time, the economic recession in Europe is industry-departmental Dumping Evaluation

likely to provoke some exporters to attempt to Committee. The Minister decided to set up this

dump goods on the world market; obviously, that committee to look at the proposition that Korean

would include Australia. These two facts imply a steel was being dumped in Australia at a cheap

need to take greater care and to devote more rerate. The chief appellant, of course, was Broken

sources to anti-dumping administration. Yet it is Hill Proprietary Company Ltd. That poses some

my understanding that, as a part of the razor interesting questions. Apart from being

gang's determinations, the Australian Bureau of Australia's steel manufacturing giant, the BHP

Customs staff in London, which also services company is also interested in the export of iron

continental Europe, is to be drastically reduced; in ore and coal, amongst other things. I suppose it

fact, I understand that the office is to be closed must sometimes wonder whether its customers in

down altogether. I consider this another example other countries, particularly Korea, might be

of the stupidity of the 'small government' rhetoric tempted to dump steel back to Australia. I guess

of the Fraser Administration. Far from assisting there would be some manufacturers of white

2572 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Customs Tari:ff(Anti-Dumping) Bill

goods or other implements in Australia which might be concerned that the only steel they can buy in Australia is at a price which is largely set by BHP. I guess that some of those companies might well be interested in buying some Korean steel.
So, when this anti-dumping action was promulgated, the Minister set up this committee. I wonder at the efficacy of that committee. I notice that the industry will be represented by Mr Cox, the Executive General Manager (Tube Division) of Tubemakers of Australia Limited, Mr H. R. Fowler, the General Manager of Australian Tube Mills Pty Ltd, Mr J. R. McGregor, the Chief Tariff Officer of Broken Hill Proprietary Company Ltd, and Mr G. A. White, the Secretary of John Lysaght (Australia) Ltd. It seems to me to be a peculiar state of affairs to have these people on a committee set up by the Government to investigate a complaint by BHP when they either work for BHP or for companies in which BHP has a very large interest. Whilst I am not doubting the honesty, sincerity or integrity of these gentlemen, I think any people who investigate themselves rarely come up with the right conclusion. I throw that in as an object of my interest, and perhaps the Minister might like to respond. I wonder whether it is a legitimate example of Government-industry co-operation or whether it is just another cog in the wheel without any clear function.
Mr MooreYou missed one member. Mr JOHN BROWNDid I miss a member? I do not think I missed any. Mr Moore-Mr Willett. Mr JOHN BROWN-J am talking about industry representatives. I know that the committee will be chaired by Mr Willett, the First Assistant Secretary of the Industries Assistance Division of the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs, but I was merely referring to the business interests on that committee which all seem to have a fairly vested interest in deciding that Korean steel is being dumped here too cheaply. If the Minister had managed to put on that committee a few other people from manufacturing industry, they may have had a countervailing view. I would appreciate a statement on this issue that might shed more light on it than that media release of 8 April. I turn now to clause 5 of the Bill which amends the provisions in relation to injury. I am talking about injury in a financial sense, not in regard to BHP which has probably suffered an injury to its pride. Once again, the new provisions tend to strengthen the hand of those seeking anti-dumping action. The concept of injury is extended

to include a threat of injury because the provisions also apply to the hindrance of the establishment of a new industry. The Opposition welcomes these provisions as they should enable more rapid action against dumping practices without extending unduly the scope of the law.
The three clauses to which I have referred specifically in my remarks relate to the provisions of the Anti-Dumping Code. Other provisions in the Bill relate to the Subsidies and Countervailing Measures Code. These provisions are similar to the anti-dumping law in that they enable the Government to protect Australian industries from imports which are subsidised by foreign governments. As yet, Australia has not acceded to this code, apparently because its prohibition on export subsidies is likely to mean that our own Export Expansion Grants Scheme will be in conflict with the code. Perhaps the Minister might like to comment on that. The Opposition strongly supports the provision of export market development assistance in Australia but is very concerned at the very high cost of the Export Expansion Grants Scheme. I believe that a comprehensive view of export programs is urgently needed. The Government deserves to be strongly condemned for its ad hoc approach to this area.
Mr Robert BrownHear, hear!
Mr JOHN BROWN -I notice that the honourable member for Hunter, who has an abiding interest in this area, supports me. I thank him for that support.
Mr Falconer-He is the only one.
MI' JOHN BkOWN-I would not say that. I think some members opposite would support me if they were game to speak up but they are curtailed by party loyalties. Recently the razor gang extended the Export Expansion Grants Scheme for a further year at a reduced rate of payment. This decision is a classic example of opportunism. There appears to have been no assessment of the scheme in the proper framework of our approach to the GATT codes, and no indication whether the scheme is cost-effective. There has been no consideration whether the $26m spent on trade commissioner services and associated trade services would be better increased rather than spending $200m on hand-outs to successful exporters. I would like to know how an exporter who has managed to get an export industry going and is achieving profits from it but is then handed a financial bonus because of that, can be of advantage to Australia. This Government has responsibility to co-ordinate these programs, to assess them properly not in the context of windy rhetoric about small government but in the proper

Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Bill

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2573

context of our trading policy and our industrial which had been proven to have been dumped in

development policy.

Australia by the then provisions of anti-dumping

This Government exercises no such responsibility. It cuts vital services on the one hand yet thinks nothing of spending hundreds of millions of

codes at an earlier time. I am a little puzzled by that statement, although I am never amazed at the actions of some Labor Ministers.

dollars on subsidies for private companies which it The honourable member for Parramatta com-

claims are in need of, to use its euphemistic phrase, room to grow. It does not know whether these subsidies come close to being effective in terms of their stated objectives or in relation to

mented that generally these amendments are to update the code that was last legislated in 1975. They take into account what has been agreed to under the provisions of the General Agreement

alternatives which involve much lower outlays. In on Tariffs and Trade during the Tokyo round of the meantime, we hear nothing from the Governthe Multilateral Trade Negotiations. Generally

ment about its future policy in this vitally important area of trade relations. This is not a philosophy of small government; it is evidence of incompetent government and of a government

that is a good thing. To me the amendments overcome some, but not all, of the deficiencies which have been shown in succeeding years since 1975. I will refer to those a little later. Some examples of

hell-bent on taking from the poor and giving to the changes and updating in this legislation are:

the rich.

The new power whereby retrospective duties may

After hearing the debates that have gone on in this Parliament in the last week or so about the Government's attempts to introduce what it describes as small government-attempts which I might say have been lauded by all sorts of industry groups such as the Confederation of Australian Industry, chambers of manufacture and particularly rural groups-it seems to me quite strange

be imposed in cases where undertakings previously given are violated; the provision for the Minister to assess amounts of subsidies in cases of goods exported from countries where governments substantially influence prices; and the criteria set out for determining the price level, whether it is the domestic price, export price, third country price or Australian price.

that there has been no suggestion that hand-outs to industry should be curtailed in any way. I do not hear these industry groups suggesting that the investment allowance, the accelerated depreciation allowance or export development grants should be reduced. The only thing that they have been crying for in terms of small government is a reduction in the services required by the poor of this country. I find that rather deplorable. In summary, the Opposition indicates that it will support these Bills, notwithstanding the damage to their administration which the Government has caused and the many unanswered questions regarding trade policy which a consideration of these Bills suggests to us. I hope that my remarks may provoke some reply from the Minister on
some of these questions.

We have seen a recent example of the difficulty in establishing a normal selling price for a product from a country with a socialist economy. Canned ham from Romania and Yugoslavia was imported to Australia. There was difficulty in establishing a normal selling price for that product. Another
provision of this Bill is that, where undertakings have been violated, retrospective countervailing duties may be imposed. The Bill also allows for the imposition of retrospective countervailing duties when massive quantities of subsidised imports over a short period have caused injury. I support all these provisions, particularly the last one. I remember very well the situation in 1973 and 1974 when massive imports of ball-bearings from Taiwan circumvented the voluntary agreement reached between the governments of

Mr LLOYD (Murray) (9.49)-1 think I heard Australia and Japan. The export of ball-bearings

the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John from Japan had been reduced because of the harm

Brown) ask at the beginning of his speech how the it was causing the ball-bearing industry then in

Opposition could oppose the amendments to the Australia. Of course, there is no longer a ball-

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Bill because, bearing industry as such in Australia. The major

after all, it was the Whitlam Government which and only complete manufacturer, the ball-bearing

introduced anti-dumping measures in 1975. Cerfactory at Echuca, eventually closed down. A

tainly the legislation that the House is amending good percentage of the companies which operate

tonight was introduced by the Whitlam Governin Japan also operate in Taiwan. Those

ment in 1975 but I can remember distinctly in companies managed to do very nicely by circum-

1973 when the Whitlam Government first came venting the voluntary arrangement. If my mem-

to power that the then Minister for Customs and ory is correct, there was no ability at that time to

Excise, Senator Murphy, by unilateral action took impose the retrospective duties which. this Bill

off anti-dumping duties against European cheese seeks to provide.

2574 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Bill

The honourable member for Parramatta rereturn. They have special licensing and other pro-

ferred to clause 6 of the Bill which varies some of visions to protect their industries.

the definitions and criteria for the imposition of

duty. He referred to the fact that now injury does I draw the attention of the Minister to another

not only have to be shown to be caused before weakness in the Bill, that is, the ability for a

duties are imposed but also it may be threatened. I producer-primary producers are the main

think this is a very good insertion. We have seen example-to suffer the dumping of a product but

many examples when the threat of a particular be unable to appeal, apply for or be the cause of

product entering Australia has had the same anti-dumping action to be taken because the

effect as would have been caused by the product processed product is being imported into this

actually getting here. I am worried by sub-clause country. The producers of such products are

(b) of clause 6. The word 'material' is to be suffering but because the products are being

inserted bef9re the word 'injury'. That appears to imported in processed forms they cannot make

me to be going the opposite way. I would be very application. The processor has to make such

interested to hear the Minister for Business and application. As the Minister knows, the import-

Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) explain how ation of sweet corn is a very good example of that

material injury differs from injury and how this problem. I hope he can give some assurance that

sub-clause is to be interpreted. I am a little the sourness that has been caused by the import-

worried that it may be interpreted in a negative ation of sweet corn will be eliminated and that the

way.

situation will again be sweet. This problem relates

particularly to New Zealand. It indicates the

I refer to two basic weaknesses that are still apinflexibility in the determination of who can make

parent to me in the protective measures we are an application. In this case the sweet corn pro-

taking against unfair trading competition with ducer is affected. On my understanding, some of

Australian manufacturers or producers. The first the processors of sweet corn have a foot on both

concerns the special agreements we have with a sides of the Tasman. It suits them not to make

number of countries, of which New Zealand is the application for protection from what is clearly a

principal, whereby the ordinary anti-dumping dumped product. I hope that that weakness in the

duties do not immediately apply. Paragraph 10 of code of fair trade to protect Australian industry

the New Zealand-Australia Free Trade Agreewill be remedied in the very near future. I support

ment provides a 60-day consultation period. Rethe legislation.

cently, the report of the Industries Assistance

Commission inquiry into cheese was finally Mr MILDREN (Ballarat) (9.58)-Before I

tabled. It was presented to the Government by the commence my contribution to this debate I refer

lAC, I think, in March 1979. Agreement was to one of the comments made by the honourable

reached between Australia and New Zealand member for Murray (Mr Lloyd). I have a super-

about 12 months later. The 60-day period was exmarket advertisement which appeared in the New

tended to almost 12 months before agreement was Zealand Evening Post on 6 January 1981. It indi-

reached on a product in respect of which dumping cates that a 450-gram can of sweet corn was sell-

had been proved. This is not good enough.

ing in New Zealand at that time for 55c. The same

brand was selling in Australia for 37c. That is evi-

There is too much leeway for a country or an dence of what the honourable member for Mur-

industry to make use of this more flexible apray was saying. There is a gap which needs to be

proach for its own advantage. New Zealand cerremedied.

tainly did so on that occasion. There were dra-

matic increases in the amounts of cheese coming As my colleague the honourable member for

into Australia. At the end of the 12-month period, Parramatta (Mr John Brown) indicated, we on

which should have been only 60 days, New this side of the House will not oppose the Customs

Zealand was able to use the higher base of its Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Bill or the

cheese exports to Australia for the new arrangeCustoms Amendment (Securities) Bill. I will con-

ment which is now in place. I hope that if we centrate on the Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping)

reach some new agreement with New Zealand on Amendment BilL Under this legislation there is an

closer economic relations or an expanded obligation upon us to do two things. The first is to

NAFTA, the New Zealanders will not be allowed bring our own anti-dumping legislation into line

to get away with what they have got away with with the anti-dumping code of the General Agree-

under special provisions when dumping has been ment on Tariffs and Trade. It must be recalled

proved. I assure honourable members that the that it was the Australian Labor Government

New Zealanders do not allow that to happen in which in 1975 brought down the comprehensive

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Bill

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2575

legislation that updated our anti-dumping legislation in line with the then existing GATT AntiDumping Code. Therefore, there is no reason in principle for us to oppose this Bill.
Given that Australia must be a trading partner of a great number of nations, the necessity for orderly marketing practices ought to be only too evident. As the trading parties are off-shore to Australia and, therefore, are not normally subject to the local laws governing their trading behaviour, it has been recognised for years that internationally binding rules are required if orderly and equitable trading relations are to obtain. That point needs to be made clear about the nature of this legislation. We are talking about fair and equitable trading relations. That could not happen unless all parties to GATT brought the anti-dumping legislation into line with the Code to which they were signatories. Obligations to do so were imposed upon all signatories to the GATT Code. As has been said, the practice of dumping is reprehensible. Whilst in the short term consumers in an importing country might benefit from dumping practices, the long term continuation of such practices will no doubt be to their disadvantage. The short term increase in the choice of goods and lower prices will be offset by the disruptive effects upon the economy of the victim country. In all cases, the competing domestic producers will be forced to reduce their prices and employment opportunities or accept lower profits.
Secondly, we ought to put this legislation through to ensure that Australian industries are given adequate protection from the dumping practices of either predatory trading nations or less scrupulous foreign business houses. Some of the business houses alluded to by the honourable member for Murray, who has disappeared from the chamber, are business houses that have a foot in both camps as it were and, therefore, are quite happy to see the situation continue because they are able to do the dumping under the lap. In principle, those members of the Government who have recently inveighed against industry protection in favour of free trade must feel rather uncomfortable with this piece of legislation. It must be stated that there is nothing intrinsically evil in government interference in the trade from one country to another. Some members of the Government would like to propagate the view that there is some evil in government oversight of industry. Without such oversight, as my colleague the honourable member for Parramatta has indicated, trading relations would become chaotic. I hope that as yet the Government has not entirely succumbed to the influence of the free

traders. For example, we reject as unfair the practice of dumping and believe that we require international agreement, such as the GATT code, to enable us to police this practice. If all things were equal it might have been possible to have free trade, but the great differences that exist between ourselves and our trading partners in so many ways will make free trade a disaster for Australian industry and, as a consequence, the welfare of Australian markets, workers and families.
As we know, dumping occurs when goods are exported at a price that is less than the normal value in the country of export. The normal value is generally defined as the price of like goods sold for home consumption in the exporting country in arm's length transactions by the exporter. The definition I have just quoted to the House enables us to establish a legal bar to more obvious injurious trading practices. Our international obligations require us to agree to legislate accordingly. It is for this reason that we of the Opposition support this legislation. However, as in most areas of human relationships, there is a tendency in some instances for exceptions to rules to intrude. This is a typical area. There are some practices which, whilst not necessarily fulfilling all the criteria for being called dumping, nevertheless need to be brought to the attention of the House because they do impose hardships upon sections of Australian industry. Again, the honourable member for Murray alluded to those. The differences between them and dumping are of degree only. I refer, of course, to imports of certain goods from New Zealand.
The House would be aware that in recent days the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) has been meeting with the New Zealand Prime Minister, Mr Muldoon, to negotiate a closer economic relations agreement between the two countries. Generally the relations between our two countries have been cordial throughout our history. It is to be hoped that this relationship will continue. However, I am unable to see how this will continue without some strain if the current negotiations result in opening the access to Australian markets of New Zealand products that will undercut the Australian equivalents. Strictly speaking, this does not fulfil all the criteria for a trading practice to be termed dumping, but the combination of factors will nevertheless result in the destruction of a number of very important primary industries in this country. Two major industries are of concern to me. I refer firstly to the potato industry and then, of course, to the fat lamb industry. Both of these industries affect the

2576 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumping) Bill

livelihood of many specialist farmers in my electorate of Ballarat.
Mr Ian Robinson~You don't know your subject.
Mr MILDREN~It is rather unfortunate that the honourable member for Cowper knows so little about the concerns of people such as those of Ballarat. At the moment, if no cognisance is to be taken of the particular circumstances of the potato industry, for example, imports of potatoes from New Zealand would undercut the price of Australian potatoes to such an extent that the industry would be crippled. Under Australian dumping law, dumping could be said to occur when injury caused by a trading practice is seen to cause material injury and it must be demonstrated to be so. For example, losses of sales, depressed prices or retrenchments must be due principally to imports at non-competitive prices, and the injury must be demonstrated by the major proportion oflocal industry.
Given the above, it is impossible for the injury not to occur should potatoes be fully able to be imported from New Zealand. Why is this so? Firstly, the real cost structure of each country is very different. The contract price of potatoes grown in New Zealand is the equivalent of $A42 per tonne. In Australia the contract price is $97.60 per tonne. The lower price of New Zealand potatoes is assisted by lower wage structures and government incentives. Secondly, the variations in currency values give the advantage to New Zealand potato growers. The depressed value of the New Zealand dollar makes it worth approximately 77c in Australian currency. The Australian dollar is a more buoyant currency and, therefore, movement tends to disadvantage Australian producers even more. Thirdly, the issue of government subsidies to potato producers further widens the gap between the possible price of potatoes imported into Australia from New Zealand and the minimum price Australian producers could obtain for their produce before suffering economic injury.
In the Ballarat potato growing region alone, the loss of such an industry would place an excessive burden upon the capacity of local industries to survive. The potato growing industry will not be the only one to suffer. There are over 300 producers throughout this area and approximately 1,200 people are directly involved in one way or another in the industry. In a direct sense, the industry is worth to that area approximately $14m, and it stimulates a further $15m in local business. I am sure that I do not have to convince you, Mr Deputy Speaker, of the hardship that a policy of

quasi dumping would have upon local potato producers. It should not be without interest to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), in his capacity as the honourable member for Wannon, that there are many potato producers in his electorate who would also be so affected. It is very important for points such as these to be made. As I have said, the practices might not be in direct contravention of the anti-dumping law but the effects are the same. Perhaps it is because of the inadequacies of the anti-dumping law that we have.
Any dumping or quasi-dumping practices must have serious effects upon Australian producers whether they be primary producers such as potato growers or fat lamb producers, vegetable growers, processors, or the clothing, textile, footwear and engineering industries all of which are particularly vulnerable in this country. It is very important for the House to recognise that individuals, their families and the viability of towns and cities are endangered by dumping and quasi-dumping practices. Mr Deputy Speaker, I assure you that the economy of a city such as Ballarat would be rocked should the potato industry collapse as a result of the importing of potatoes produced in an economic climate different from that of Australia. Potato harvesting and packing machinery would be made redundant and so would the industries that produce that machinery. We cannot allow that sort of thing to happen. I do not have to remind the House that the multiplier effect would mean a reduction in the work force in the retail industry of rural and provincial towns. I hope that members on the National Country Party benches~for want of a more appropriate name~ would show some concern about this issue. I highlight the effects of a quasi-dumping practice to bring some notes of caution to those people hell bent on liberalising our marketing arrangements and also because dumping practices in general have all these effects which are evil.
Mr MOORE (Ryan~Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (J 0.13)~in reply~I wish to repond briefly to those honourable members who have taken part in the debate and to thank them for the effort that they have put into their speeches and the contributions that they have made. I am always surprised at the depth of knowledge of the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown). His wide ramble into dumping was quite an illuminating discussion even if one or two of the facts were not quite right. But that is not too bad when we relate it to some of these things. I wish to take issue with him on one point. The great era of dumping did not arrive with E. G. Whitlam at all. In fact, if one looks at

Customs Tariff(Anti-Dumpingj Bill

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2577

the history of events it started when Australia reNew Zealand and Australia would materialise at

moved import licencing in the 1960s. As a consea very high officer level and a very high political

quence certain dumping cases were taken and the level. That requires good will on both sides. Most

procedures that are in place today eventually honourable members have said that sometimes

grew from that. The Government has every intenthey feel there is good will in Australia but not

tion of maintaining these established positions. necessarily in New Zealand.

Commerce needs to know that we will be looking to its interests in every respect. That applies under the staffing situation where adequate provisions certainly will be made in some form to ensure that the dumping provisions are carried out in the best interests of Australian commerce. The anti-dumping committee to which the honourable member for Parramatta referred was established in the steel industry-its membership reflects this-to give a fast track response to dumping in that area. Those honourable members who take

Mr Lloyd-This problem has not been taken into account in those negotiations.
Mr MOORE-As the honourable member for Murray has said it is a matter of grave concern to people in his electorate and the electorate of the honourable member for Ballarat as he has pointed out tonight. I wish to thank those honourable members who have taken part in the debate and I am sure they wish the Bill well.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

some interest in the iron and steel industry and the demand and supply situation will be aware of the high characteristics of fluctuation, to say the least,

Bill read a second time. Third Reading

that occur and the need for prompt action. This committee consists of one member from the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd, one member from a BHP subsidiary, one member from an entirely independent company which has no con-

Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.

nection with BHP, and one member from my DeCUSTOMS AMENDMENT (SECURITIES)

partment. They are there to establish a prima

BILL 1981

facie case. Once that has been established they do not recommend in any way or make any determination in relation to dumping. They purely make a quick response and it then goes to the appropriate authorities to make their determinations. The

Second Re<tding Consideration resumed from 6 May, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.

Department made an effort to assist in this area Question resolved in the affirmative.

which was subject to some very quick changes in .overseas supply and marketing of iron and steel in particular in the new developing nations. The

Bill read a second time. Third Reading

honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd) as usual made--

Motion (by Mr Moore)-by leave-proposed:
That the Bill be now read a third time.

Mr McVeigh-A very good contribution.

Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (10.18)-1

Mr MOORE-He made a good contribution, as the Minister for Housing and Construction has just said. In response to the honourable member for Ballarat (Mr Mildren) it is worthwhile saying that the provisions for trade with New Zealand are really not subject to the multilateral trade

wish to make one small contribution. It has been pointed out to me that perhaps the Government should introduce an anti-dumping Bill to stop the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) from dumping Ministers so regularly.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

negotiations but are subject to the New ZealandAustralia .Free Trade Agreement. Therefore, different provisions apply in relation to NAFTA

Bill read a third time. House adjourned at 10.19 p.m.

products than do to the general dumping in other areas.

NOTICES The following notices were given:

Mr Mildren-I am aware of that but it is just a Mr Hodgman to present a Bill for an Act to

pity that in fact it allows--

establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the

Mr MOORE-It is something of which people should probably be aware. If, as it is inevitable,

Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.

closer associations with New Zealand take place, Mr Moore to present a Bill for an Act to make

one would hope that the negotiations between provision for the holding of inquiries into prices

2578 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Notices

charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Mr Viner to present a Bill for an Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.
Mr Scholes to move--
That this House expresses concern that while acting to direct civilian academic institutions on the courses they may offer in engineering the Government is proceeding to create new engineering places at the Australian Defence Force Academy at cost declared excessive and inefficient by the all Party Parliamentary Public Works Committee.
Mr Scholes to move--
That this House expresses concern that-
(1) engineering courses in Victoria are to be cut back by Government directives based on 5 year old information;
(2) current assessments of future requirements for graduate engineers indicate that Australian demand will shortly exceed the number of places available, and
(3) in 1976 the Government cut back on apprentice training in Commonwealth instrumentalities, which has added. to the present shortage of tradesmen.
Mr Scholes to move-
That this House draws attention to the fact that students, who are forced by the Government's interference in the

autonomy of Deakin University to leave Geelong to study engineering will have a minimum of $3,000 per annum add to their education expenses.
REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Department of the Parliamentary Library
Mr Beazley to ask Mr Speaker:
(1) Does the Parliamentary Library produce both basic papers and current information briefs.
(2) If so, (a) what are the titles and (b) who are the authors of each paper or brief issued since 1January 1977.
(3) Have any papers or briefs been prepared or proposed which have not been released; if so, in each case (a) what was the subject, (b) who were the authors and (c) why was the paper or brief not released.
.(4) Are papers and briefs available for general distribution to Senators and Members; if so, who is responsible for distribution.
(5) Are copies of current papers and briefs held by the Library's Reading Room for distribution to clients; if not, why not; if so, when did the practice commence.
(6) Have representations been made by senior officers of the Parliamentary Library to the Acting Head of the Research Service for a small stock of papers and briefs to be held by the Reading Room for clients who may request them there; if so, when were they made and what decision did the Acting Head of the Research Service make.
(7) What was the reason given for any decision made by the Acting Head of the Research Service.

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2579 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

National Crimes Commission
(Question No. 174)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 27 November 1980:
(1) Further to my question without notice on 11 October 1979 (Hansard, page 1905) urging the establishment of a National Crimes Commission, in view of the appalling escalation of organised crime in this country, has the Attorney General's attention been drawn to press reports of 6 February 1980 that the Australian Federal Police Force is studying a report compiled by a group of Federal and Victorian Members of Parliament on systematic penetration of organised crime?
(2) If so, does the report-
(a) call for the establishment by the Federal Government of a National Crimes Commission to identify the leadership and structure of organised crime in Australia; and
(b) suggest a number of significant amendments to the taxation, company and takeover laws, as these amendments may be the best way to deal with syndicate leaders of organised crime?
(3) If the report is as stated, will the Attorney-General take immediate steps to ensure that the suggested amendments to taxation, company and takeover laws will include measures to block syndicate leaders of organised crime?
(4) If the study finding confirms the appalling escalation of organised crime, will the Attorney-General give urgent reconsideration to my request to establish a National Crimes Commission?
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes.
(2)-
(a) I understand that the report calls for the establishment of a National Crimes Commission.
(b) I understand the report suggests that organised crime can best be dealt with through taxation, company and takeover laws.
(3) The matters referred to do not fall within my administration.
(4) The Government does not propose to establish a National Crimes Commission but rather to tackle identified problems in the area of organised crime with selective investigative machinery involving the State Governments as appropriate. For example, during the past couple of years, in response to suggestions made by the Williams Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drugs and the Woodward Royal Commission into Drug Trafficking, the Australian Federal Police have joined with the police in several States to investigate specific areas of drug trafficking. Also, last year the Commonwealth joined with the Victorian Government in the establishment of a Royal Commission of Inquiry into the Federated Ships Painters and Dockers Union in relation to the activities of crime syndicates on the wharves. Finally, the Government intends, in conjunction with the Governments of the States of New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland, to establish in the near future a judicial inquiry with the powers

of a Royal Commission, to investigate and report upon the activities of the Clark drug syndicate in Australia.
Boeing 707 Aircraft
(Question No. 286)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) What specific servicing and/or modifications (a) have been or (b) are currently being carried out in 1980-81 on the two Boeing 707 aircraft Nos A20-624 and A20-627 used by the Prime Minister.
(2) What is the (a) specific item cost and (b) total cost in respect of each aircraft referred to in part (1).
(3) Is it a fact that the aircraft are being recarpeted and/or fitted with 8 foot beds; if so, (a) what is the estimated cost of supplying and fitting each bed and (b) who is it expected will use the beds.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Both RAAF B707 aircraft undergo normal scheduled servicings during any twelve month period which include a periodic servicing (annual), a Check 3 servicing (three monthly), an A servicing (monthly) and before-flight/afterflight servicings as required. In respect of modifications to the two aircraft, I refer the honourable member to my answer to Parliamentary Question No. 5604, which appeared in Hansard on 18 September 1980 (page 1612). I am further advised that the on-board cargo handling system was delivered in early January 1981 and will be in service by May 1981. Additionally, auxiliary power units are being acquired, at an estimated cost of $1.32m, for fitment to the two RAAF Boeing 707 aircraft in June 1981, to meet a Defence operational requirement.
(2) The RAAF does not compile individual cost records of servicing carried out by its own personnel. Based on recent servicings performed by QANTAS the overall cost of services is as follows:
Check 3 Service-$29,560
Periodic Service-$408,920
The annual cost for each aircraft for QANTAS servicings is therefore estimated as $527,160. However, variations to individual servicing costs do occur depending on the actual work content of each servicing.
(3) There is currently no plan to re-carpet the RAAF B707 aircraft. However, the aircraft are re-carpeted as necessary to meet normal RAAF servicing standards, i.e. carpets are replaced as dictated by wear and tear. In the VIP configuration the B707 aircraft has two divans. The two divans supplied by QANTAS with their VIP fit have been demonstrated to be extremely uncomfortable on long distance flights and were difficult to remove and replace. Therefore RAAF (No. 486 Squadron) has manufactured two replacement divans which can also be used as fold-out beds. The estimated cost of materials is $120 for each divan. The new divans are fitted to the B707 aircraft in the same position as the old divans and are the same overall length.

2580 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Artificial Insemination
(Question No. 315)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(I) Is the National Health and Medical Research Council investigating the po"ible use of (a) 17-beta-oestradiol silicone rubber implant and (b) progesterone-releasing intra-uterine device for use with livestock.
(2) If not, are any Commonwealth Government bodies investigating the use of the devices referred to in part (I).
(3) If investigations are being conducted, at whose instigation were the inquiries initiated.
Mr MaeKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The National Health and Medical Research Council has assessed the toxicological aspects of the use of 17-betaoestradiol in a silicone rubber matrix controlled release device. Progesterone-releasing intra-uterine devices for the synchronisation of oestrus in breeding herds to facilitate artificial insemination have also been assessed toxicologically.
(2)See(I).
(3) The submissions relating to 17-beta-oestradiol and progesterone were submitted by companies as part of the normal process of regulatory control of veterinary drugs.
Petrol Prices
(Question No. 345)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
Will he declare petrol in the Australian Capital Territory a declared item under the Prices Regulation Ordinance 1949.
Mr Hodgman--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Government has determined as part of its Review of Commoowealth Functions that the position of Controller of Prices pursuant to the Prices Regulation Ordinance 1949 will be abolished.
Accordingly, I do not intend to introduce price control on petrol in the Australian Capital Territory.
Bureau of Statistics Survey of Labour Costs
(Question No. 501)
Dr Klugman asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 24 February 1981 :
(1) How many husinesses, clubs, etc., are selected by the Australian Bureau of Statistics for the survey of labour costs.
(2) How is the selection made.
(3) For what period do they remain participants in the survey.
(4) Is there any provision for the reimbursement of costs.
(5) Would the Census and Statistics Act 1905 have to be amended to provide for reimbursement.
(6) What would be the estimated cost of reimbursement for this and similar surveys.
Mr Howard The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) to (4) Following the Review of Commonwealth Functions the Australian Bureau of Statistics will not now conduct a survey of labour costs in 1981.

(5) Yes.
(6) Costs would vary according to the size and complexity of the surveys.
Hire of Civilian Tugs
(Question No. 507)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) What sum was spent on the hire of civilian tugs by the Royal Australian Navy in (a) all Western Australian ports, (b) the Port of Fremantle and (e) HMAS Stirling during (i) 1978-79, (ii) 1979-80 and (iii) 1980-81 to date.
(2) Is he able to state what sum was spent in the hire of civilian tugs by (a) the United States of America Navy and (b) other foreign navies in the same ports during the same periods.
(3) What proportion of the charges associated with the hire of civilian tugs for the visits of foreign vessels to Western Australian ports is met from Australian resources.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Year

All Western Australian Port of ports Fremantle

HMAS Stirling

1978-79
1979-80 1980 to 24 February
1981

$ 54,001 29,142
130,776

$ 31,376 8,293
38,012

$ 19,906 16,148
85,583

(2) No.
(3) Charges for the hire of civilian tugs engaged for tug and berthing duties are paid for by the foreign navy concerned. As a safety precaution announced by the Australian Government in its conditions of entry for nuclear powered warships to Australian ports, the Australian Government pays for the hire of a tug to be on standby during visits by nuclear powered warships. Charges from 16 May 1980 to 24 February 1981 for this task amounted to $36,840; prior to 16 May 1980 an RAN vessel was available for standby duty as a tug.

Telephone Services

(Question No. 531)

Mr Free asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:

How many applicants for telephone service are currently awaiting connection in each electoral division in New South
Wales.

Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Banks

171

Barton

175

Bennalong

636

Berowa

425

Blaxland

293

Bradfield

352

Cal are

963

Canberra

609

Chifiey

192

Cook

122

Cowper

946

Cunningham

505

Dundas

415

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2581

Eden-Monaro Farrer
Fraser Grayndler Gwydir
Hughes Hume Hunter Kingsford-Smith Lowe Lyne . .
Macarthur Mackellar Macquarie
Mitchell Newcastle New England North Sydney Parramatta Paterson Phillip Prospect Reid Richmond Riverina Robertson Shortland St George Sydney Warringah Wentworth Werriwa

677 690
649
95
857
402 399 431
760
1 1,880
771
387 662 619
28 753
859 404 1,513 406 532 218
2,066 410
24
140 168 2,058
308 824 1,003

These figures were taken at 25 February 1981 and fluctuate daily as services are connected and new applications are received.

Nomad Aircraft
(Question No. 542)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) What are the reasons for delays in the production of the Nomad aircraft by the Government Aircraft Factory.
(2) How many unfilled orders ~re presently on Government Aircraft Factory order books.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
On 15 December 1980 I announced that the Government had approved the production of a further 55 Nomad aircraft, bringing the total number of aircraft authorised to date to 200.
Over 100 Nomads are operating in Australia, Papua New Guinea, the United States of America, the Philippines, Indonesia, the Marshall Islands, Guam, Samoa, the Caribbean, Chile, Surinam, Sabah.
Nomads are being used in regular passenger transport and charter operations, in various Military Command, Communication and Support Roles, in Coastal Surveillance, in Aerial Medical Roles including Flying Doctor Service, in Aerial Survey, in Geophysical Search, in Float-Plane Operations, in General Utility and Cargo Carrying Roles.
The aircraft is being operated successfully and profitably in extremes of climate which include Papua New Guinea and Alaska.
Concerning the specific matters raised by the honorable member, I am advised that:

(I) A number of factors have contributed to the slowing down of the Nomad production rate during 1980 and 1981; these include:
(a) the unexpectedly longer lead-times for basic materials, parts and equipments from overseas suppliers due to the pressures of a buoyant overseas market for aircraft, have resulted in a shortage of supply to the production line;
(b) the need for the urgent incorporation of aircraft modifications to improve the service life and acceptability of the aircraft: and
(c) difficulties in the incorporation of special equipments for aircraft for the USA market which involved both local production and purchase of items from the USA which are hard to obtain.
The situation was further compounded during 1980 by industrial unrest, including a month-long strike at the Government Aircraft Factories in March 1980 which had disruptive effects on production extending well beyond the period of the strike itself.
(2) Nineteen for delivery in 1981 and four for delivery in 1982.
Ashton Joint Venture Project
(Question No. 585)
Mr Holding asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on25 February 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the editorial 'The kangaroo from the veldt' in the Australian Flnancial Review, 19 February 1981.
(2) Is there any substance to the allegations made in the editorial, that the Ashton joint venture is 53.6 per cent foreign-owned.
(3) Has the Government or the Foreign Investment Review Board placed any conditions on the partners in the Ashton joint venture project: and specifically, what provision was made for (a) adequate consultation with all affected Aboriginal groups and (b) assessment and control of the environmental impact of the project.
(4) What timetable has the Government set for Ashton Mining NL to achieve 51 per cent Australian equity.
(5) What will be the frequency of Ashton Mining NL'sdiscussions with the Foreign Investment Review Board on its progress towards achieving 51 per cent Australian ownership.
(6) Did the Government give the Ashton joint venture any special consideration due to the involvement of the Malaysia Mining Corporation Berhad (MMC) , a company partly owned by the Malaysian Government; if so, what was the nature of that special consideration.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) My attention was drawn to the editorial 'The Kangaroo from the veldt' in the Australian Financial Review of 19 February 1981 and I wrote a letter to the editor which was published in the Australian Financial Review on 24 February 1981.
(2) The Ashton joint venture comprises CRA Ltd 56.76 per cent, Ashton Mining Ltd 38.24 per cent and Northern Mining Corp NL 5 per cent. Major foreign interests hold 61.1 per cent of CRA and 60.35 per cent of Ashton Mining. Accordingly, foreign equity in the Ashton joint venture is at present 57.8 per cent. However, under the Government's naturalisation provisions of its foreign investment policy, undertakings have been given by the parties concerned that Australian ownership in CRA and Ashton Mining will be increased to 51 per

2582 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

cent. As a consequence, foreign equity in the Ashton joint venture will be reduced to 48.4 per cent.
(3) As the Ashton joint venture project is to be developed by two naturalising companies and an Australian company, the patties are not required to notify the Foreign Investment Review Board of proposals for development of the venture. Accordingly, there are no conditions including matters such as Aboriginal consultations and environment protection attaching to the project at this stage. However, arrangements for the marketing of product from the project could affect the equity and control arrangement for the joint venture and will be examined by the Government in terms of its foreign investment policy prior to the project proceeding to development.
(4) The Government does not specify a firm time limit for a naturalising company to meet its obligations to increase Australian equity to the required level of 51 per cent. The Government expects this level to be achieved over the shortest period consistent with sound company management.
(5) Discussions between the Foreign Investment Review Board and Ashton Mining and its major foreign shareholders will be held annually.
(6). No. The Government saw no reason why it should treat Ashton Mining differently, on the ground that it has a connection with a Malaysian Government agency, from other companies seeking naturalisation. To have done so would have involved discrimination against a company which in all respects complied with the relevant terms of the naturalisation provisions. It is the Government's objective that a naturalised or naturalising company should operate with a predominantly Australian board and should be controlled by that board. Ashton Mining was able to satisfy the Government on all aspects of these requirements.
Aerodrome Local Ownership Plan
(Question No. 612)
Mr Jull asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
(1) What criteria are considered in determing whether Commonwealth funds should be provided under the Aerodrome Local Ownership Plan for maintenance and development projects.
(2) Which airports are financed under this scheme in each State and Territory.
(3) What negotiations have been undertaken with local authorities in relation to the transfer of Cairns Airport to local ownership and when is a decision expected in relation to this matter.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honour.able member's question is as follows:
(1) Criteria used in determining whether Commonwealth funds should be provided through the Aerodrome Local Ownership Plan (ALOP) are that the works to be carried out are approved as being necessary for the basic functioning of the aerodrome to meet the foreseeable demands of civil aviation.
Grants are made available to local authorities, mission stations and other bodies accepted as performing the functions of local government. Privately owned licensed aerodromes may be eligible for Commonwealth assistance through the ALOP for approved maintenance projects if the aerodromes are served by regular public transport services.
The criteria applied in determining whether Commonwealth funds should be provided are:
the work is necessary for the safe operation of efficient and effective air services and that the need for these services can be adequately demonstrated

in the case of remote communities, funds can also be made available to ensure a reasonable level of transport and communication and provide for essential services such as medical flights
where a local authority takes over ownership of a Commonwealth aerodrome, funds are provided for the whole cost of bringing the aerodrome movement area to full standard for current and known future aviation commitment.
(2) Aerodromes participating in the ALOP are:

QUEENSLAND

Aerodromes receiving maintenance and development grants 68.

Alpha Aurukun Bedourie Bollon Burketown Chillagoe Collinsville Dejarra Doomadgee Eulo Gladstone Gympie Injune Julia Creek Maroochydore Mornington Is. Muttaburra Redcliffe St George Tara Thargomindah Weipa Wondai

Aramac
Ayr Birdsville Boulia Caloundra Chinchilla Croydon Dalby Emerald Gaynday Goondiwindi Hughenden Innisfail Jundah Mitchell Mount Coolon Proserpine Richmond Stanthorpe Taroom Theodore Windorah Wyandra

Atherton Barcaldine Blackall Bowen Charters Towers Clermont Cunnamulla Dirranbandi Eromanga Georgetown Gregory Downs Ingham Isisford Kingaroy
Monto Mount Garnet Quilpie Roma Stonehenge Thangool Toowoomba Winton

Aerodromes receiving maintenance grants only 36.

Arrabury Blackwater Cuddapan Durham Downs Glen Ormiston Iflley Kowanyama Miranda Downs Moranbah Mappa Merrie
Rutland Plains Thylungra

Augustus Downs Betoota

Canobie

Cluny

Davenport Downs Delta Downs

Durrie

Dysart

Glengyle

Hervey Bay

Kamileroi

Karumba

Lawn Hill

Lorraine

Monkira

Mooraberrie

Morney

Mount Howitt

Orientos

Roseberth

South Galway Tanbar

Wondoola

Wrotham Park

Total 104.

NEW SOUTH WALES

Aerodromes receiving maintenance and development grants 70.

Albury Baradine Brewarrina Casino Collarenebri Cooma Cootamundra Deniliquin Gilgandra Goulburn Gunnedah Holbrook Kempsey Lismore Moree

Armidale
Bathurst Burren Junction
Cessnock Condobolin Coonabarabran Corowa Dubbo Glen Innes Grafton Hay Inverell Lake Cargelligo Lord Howe Is. Moruya

Balranald Bourke Carinda Cobar Coolah Connamble Cowra Evans Head Goodooga Griffith Hillston Ivanhoe Lightning Ridge Merimbula Mudgee

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2583

Mungindi Narromine Parkes Scone Tibooburra Tottenham Warren White Cliffs Young

Narrabri Nyngan Port Macquarie Taree Tocumwal Tumut WeeWaa Wilcannia

Narrandera Orange Quirindi Temora Tooraweenah Walgett West Wyalong Wollongong

Aerodromes receiving maintenance grants only Nil Total 70.

VICTORIA
Aerodromes receiving maintenance and development grants 31.

Ararat Benalla Corryong Hamilton Kerang Maryborough Orbost Sale Shepparton Warracknabeal Yarram

Bairnsdale Bendigo Donald' Hopetoun Latrobe Valley Mildura Portland StArnaud Stawall Warrnambool

Ballarat Birchip Echuca Horsham Leongatha* Nhill Robinvale Sea Lake Swan Hill Wycheproof

* Not yet licensed.

Aerodromes receiving maintenance grants only Nil.

Total 31.

TASMANIA

Aerodromes receiiving maintenance and development grants (3)

Queenstown

St Helens

Strahan

Aerodromes receiving maintenance grants only (1) Smithton
Total 4

SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Aerodromes receiving maintenance and development grants (11)

Cleve Loxton Naracoorte Streaky Bay

Cowell Millicent Port Pirie Waikerie

Kimba Minnipa Renmark

Aerodromes receiving maintenance grants only (2)

Cordillo Downs Innamincka

Tota1l3

WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Aerodromes receiving maintenance and development grants (14)

BalgoHill Kalumburu Laverton

Esperance Karratha Leonora

Geraldton Kununurra Mullewa

Norseman Southern Cross

Roebourne Wiluna

Rottnest Island

Aerodromes receiving maintenance grants only (14)

Beverley Springs Gordon Downs Mount House Ord River Sturt Creek

Flora Valley Margaret River Newman Paraburdoo Tom Price

Gibb River Mitchell Plateau Nicholson Rosewood

Total 28

NORTHERN TERRITORY

Aerodromes receiving maintennance and development grants (5)

Crocker Island Daly River Mission Hermannsburg

Port Keats

Santa Teresa

Aerodromes receiving maintenance grants only (II)

Birrindudu Groote Eylandt Kirkimbie Victoria River Downs

Brunette Downs Inverway Limbunya Waterloo

Gove Jabiru Urapunga

Total 16

(3) Following a submission by my Department to the Cairns City Council and Mulgrave Shire Council in February 1979 the question of local ownership was examined in detail by the Cairns Airport Development Committee. Negotiations culminated in an offer by the Government to provide grants of up to $16m for upgrading of airport facilities associated with the transfer of the airport to local ownership.

Local authorities are seeking transfer of ownership of the airport to a State Statutory Body. The State Government is currently reviewing the impact of the ALOP in Queensland and discussions by State and Local Governments, including legislation enabling a State Statutory Body to own the aerodrome are awaited. 1 look forward to a successful conclusion to the negotiations as soon as possible.

Nitinol
(Question No. 649)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 26 February 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that Nitinol is an alloy of nickel and titanium which exhibits a wide range of physical changes when subject to low level differences in temperature.
(2) Is he able to say whether research has been carried out in Japan, the USSR, the Federal Republic of Germany and China and in the United States of America by NASA, the MCDonnell-Douglas Corporation, the US Navy, the US Department of Energy and the University of California at Berkeley into use of Nitinol in solid state heat engines.
(3) Has his attention been drawn to the paper 'Proceedings of the Nitinol-Heat Engine Conference' edited by Goldstein and MacNamara (NSWC MP 79/441), published by the US Naval Surface Weapons Centre and the Department of Energy.
(4) Is research and development work being done on Nitinol in Australia; if so, what are the details.
(5) In view of Australia's large reserves of nickel and titanium, will he undertake to have the significance of Nitinol examined as a matter of urgency.

2584 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes. Nitinol is an alloy of nickel and titanium. It has the interesting property that it is a 'shape memory' alloy-that is, when plastically deformed at one temperature, it will, on being heated above a specific temperature, regain its initial shape. In scientific terms this phenomenon is known as a thermo-elastic martemsitic transformation. Other alloys, including those of copper, zinc, and aluminium, display shape memory effects similar to Nitinol. However, they are much cheaper than Nitinol, are much easier to machine and fabricate and therefore find much greater use industrially. Nitinol provides a very good example of the shape memory phenomenon and is widely used in research into this phenomenon. Its high relative cost, and disadvantages vis-a-vis other alloys have meant that its industrial usage remains insignificant.
(2) Research work on Nitinol is conducted in a number of countries, including those listed. Intermittent research on shape memory alloys has been conducted in Australia over the past 20 years. None of the Australian work has been directed explicitly towards the use of Nitinol in solid state heat engines.
(3) I am aware of this publication and would be happy to provide a copy to the honourable member if he so desires.
(4) Research work on Nitinol and related alloys is being conducted in Australia in the Department of Metallurgy of the University of Wollongong, under the direction of Associate Professor N. F. is:ennon. This work has heen supported, in part, by grants from the ARGC ($9,000 in 1981, and $8,000 in 1980). The Australian research on Nitinol, and shape memory alloys in general, is consistent with the scale of the total Australian research effort seen in a world context. More importantly, the priorities of the Australian research community reflect its perceptions of the solubility and fruitfulness of the various research areas.
As noted in (2) above, no research is being conducted in Australia on the use of Nitinol in heat engines although CSIRO maintains a 'watching brief' on overseas developments.
(5) Technological developments which would utilize Australia's large reserves of nickel and titanium would be of significant value. However, as noted above, the current industrial use of Nitinol is negligible and it is unlikely that applications for Nitinol will be developed in the foreseeable future. An urgent examination of the significance of Nitinol could not be justified.
Commonwealth Superannuation Fund Investment Trust
(Question No. 650)
Mr Fry asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 26 February 1981:
(1) Has a firm of accountants been commissioned by the Commonwealth Superannuation Fund Investment Trust to advise it on accounting policy and ways of ensuring equitable distribution of earnings hetween past, present, and future contributors, following the Trust's decision to invest in equities.
(2) Was a firm of actuaries commissioned to produce a similar report.
(3) If so, (a) on what basis were these investigating accountants and actuaries engaged, (b) who was responsible for the decision to appoint them and (c) were CAGEO, ACOA, or any other contributors' organisations consulted before these firms were engaged.

(4) Has any member of the Trust had any dealings with these consultants in the past through private or other interests.
(5) When are the reports expected to be completed and will they be made available to contributors' organisations and individual contributors at the same time that they are made available to (a) the Department of Finance and (b) the Trust.
(6) Does the Australian Taxation Office require nongovernment superannuation schemes to revalue assets regularly to ensure that contributors receive their. correct share of the net worth of the fund on exit; if so, is there a similar requirement for the Commonwealth Superannuation Fund; if not, why not.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The Superannuation Fund Investment Trust is an independent corporate hody established under the Superannuation Act 1976. As such, the Trust has sole responsibility under the Act for the management and investment of the Superannuation Fund, being required only to report annually on the management of the Fund to the Parliament through the Minister for Finance. The Chairman of the Trust has, however, provided the folJowing answers to the honourable member's questions (I) to (6):
(1) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) (a) Both the accountants and actuaries were engaged on the basis of their expertise in the particular area on which the advice was heing sought.
(b) The Trust.
(c) The ACOA Federal Executive was made aware ~ft~e commissioning of the firms of accountants and actuafles In replies to correspondence on the subject received by the then Minister for Finance from the office of the late Senator Knight on 8 July 1980 and 18 August 1980.
(4) The firm of accountants has carried out audit and accounting advice work on hehalf of the Trust since 1976.
The firm of actuari.es has not previously carried out any work on behalf of the Trust.
Other than that mentioned in the foregoing, no member of the Trust has had dealings with these consultants in the past through private or other interests.
(5) The Trust is currently considering the report from the firm of accountants and the report from the firm of actuaries is expected shortly. It is a matter for the Trust, in the first instance, to complete its examination of the reports and to submit recommendations to the Minister on any changes to the accounting arrangements that it considers are warranted. When hoth reports are to hand, the Trust will give consideration to seeking the views of staff organisations on the issues addressed in the consultants' reports.
(6) The Commissioner of Taxation oversights the practices followed by non-government superannuation schemes to ensure that the levels of benefits provided are not excessive and that appropriate contributions are made. To this end, I understand the Commissioner has regard among other things, to the value of any investment assets owned by a superannuation fund but the basis of valuation of these assets would depend upon individual circumstances. Although the Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme is not subject to the Income Tax Assessment Act 1936, the formulation and operation of the Scheme, including the operations of the Trust, broadly follows the principles applicable to private sector schemes. Consistent with this, I understand that the Trust will have regard to private sector practice when making its recommendations.

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2585

Nugan Hand Ltd
(Question No. 656)
Mr Willis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 3 March 1981:
(1) Under the terms of the Banking Act and the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations, did Nugan Hand Ltd or its employees ever apply to the Reserve Bank for exchange control approval (a) to borrow orlend overseas, (b) to raise capital in Australia on behalf of associated foreign companies, (c) to take or send Australian or foreign currency out of Australia, or in any way to bring capital into Australia and (d) to deal in any way with securities, bills of exchange or other financial instruments between Australia and overseas; if so, were these applications approved.
(2) When were the applications made and what dealings were involved.
(3) Has the Reserve Bank ever investigated whether financial transactions between Australia and overseas countries conducted by Nugan Hand Ltd were in breach of foreign exchange regulations; if so, what was the result of these applications.
(4) Has the Reserve Bank ever communicated with overseas banking authorities in relation to the banking practices of Nugan Hand Ltd.
(5) Has Nugan Hand Ltd, to the Reserve Bank's knowledge, ever been in breach of overseas banking and currency laws.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1), (2) and (3) The categories of transactions referred to in (I) would require the prior authority of the Reserve Bank under the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations. However, the Reserve Bank does not publicly disclose information on individual exchange control applications or details of possible exchange control offences as this would be a breach of confidence.
(4) In response to requests from overseas banking authorities, information has been provided only on the status of Nugan Hand Ltd under the Financial Corporations Act. In accordance with the provisions of the Financial Corporations Act the Reserve Bank does not publicly disclose information with respect to the affairs of a particular corporation.
(5) No.
Nugan Hand Ltd
(Question No. 657)
Mr WilIis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 3 March 1981:
(1) Was Nugan Hand Ltd registered as a financial corporation with the Reserve Bank under the terms of the Financial Corporation Act 1974; if so, did the N ugan Hand Bank comply with all the provisions of the Act with regard to furnishing information to the Reserve Bank.
(2) Was this information supplied regularly and did the Nugan Hand Bank ever breach the requirements of the Act.
(3) Was the Reserve Bank able to make a judgment as to the financial position and practices of the Nugan Hand Bank from the information supplied; if so, were they regarded as sound.
(4) Did the Reserve Bank ever seek additional information and statements from the Nugan Hand Bank relating to its business.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Nugan Hand Bank does not have a legal presence in Australia and is not subject to the Financial Corporations Act. The Reserve Bank has advised the following answers on the basis that Nugan Hand Ltd is the subject of the question.
(1) Yes.
(2) The information was supplied regularly and Nugan Hand Ltd has not breached the requirements of the Act.
(3) The information furnished under the Financial Corporations Act is not designed for these purposes.
(4) Aside from such additional information sought to determine in which category of institutions under the Act Nugan Hand Lld should be placed, no.
Teachers: Australian Capital Territory
(Questiou No. 701)
Mr Dawkins asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 4 March 1981:
(1) h there a shortage of teachers within schools operated by the Australian Capital Territory Schools Authority in relation to:
(a) specific subject areas; and, (b) age/grade levels.
(2) [I' so, how many teachers would have been required to overcome this shortage as at 28 February 1981.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I have received the following advice from the Office of the ACT Schools Authority.
(I) (a) and (b) No.
(2) Not applicable.
Public Sel'Vice: Deduction from Salaries of Union Dues
(Question No. 748)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 10 March 1981:
(I) Was the practice of deducting union dues from the salaries of public servant union members discontinued in 1979; if so, has the practice been reintroduced.
(2) If the practice has not been reintroduced, what is the reason.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) Yes, in relation to certain unions whose members had been involved in industrial action. The payroll deduction facility has not been reintroduced for members of those unions.
(2) The Government has decided that once the facility had been withdrawn it would not be reintroduced.
Defence Force Personnel Stationed in the United States
(Question No. 792)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister [or Poreign Affairs, upon notice, on 24 Mareh 1981:

2586 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) Has Australia an operative Status of Forces agreement in respect of Australian Defence Forces personnel stationed in the United States of America?
(2) If im agreement does not exist, have negotiations to establish a Status of Forces Agreement been undertaken; if so, when were they taken and what stage have the negotiations reached?
(3) If an agreement does not exist, what is the legal status of these personnel?
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No.
(2) Discussions concerning the establishment of a reciprocal Status of Forces Agreement between the United States of America and Australia are continuing.
(3) The status of members of the Australian Defence Force stationed in the United States is established by the applicable principles of International Law; by any arrangements made between Australia and the United States relating to the presence in the United States of particular members; and by a proclamation iss.ued by the President of the United States on 10 October 1965 under the Service Courts of Friendly Foreign Forces Act. Whilst members of the Australian Defence Force are subject to the laws of the United States of America during their stay in that country, pursuant to Presidential proclamation, Australia has been permitted to exercise Australian jurisdiction within the United States in respect of offences committed by members of the Australian Defence Force in the United States.
Bushfires: Role of Royal Australian Air Force
(Question No. 810)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice,on 12 March 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a press report in the Australian of 18 February 1981 stating that the RAAF was not pleased at the role it has been given in fighting bushfires in Victoria next summer.
(2) Is there a continuing role for the RAAF in fighting bushflres, using specially adapted RAAF aircraft.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Air Force Office has made no such comment on the proposed employment of RAAF aircraft in the operational trials of fire bombing to be conducted in Victoria in the 1981-82 fire season.
(2) Apart from (1) above, the RAAF has no current role in fighting bushfires using specially adapted RAAF aircraft. RAAF aircraft have, however, been employed from time to time for fire evaluation and to transport men and equipment for the purpose of fire fighting at the request of the States. Both the joint Commonwealth/Victoria project and CSIRO's Project Aquarius are aimed at determining the effectiveness of fire-bombing in Australian conditions.
United States Forces in Australia
(Question No. 832)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:
(1) Are members of the United States of America forces in Australia covered by a Status of Forces Agreement or other form of arrangement?
(2) What will be the status of US military or civilian personnel associated with any

(a) US naval facilities established on Western Australia, or
(b) B-52 operations throughout Australia?
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Members of the United States of America forces in Australia are subject to the 1963 Status of Forces Agreement.
(2)-
(a) The United States Government has not put forward a proposal for the home-porting of any United States naval units in Western Australia. The question is therefore hypothetical. However, the 1963 Status of Forces Agreement would be applicable to members of the United States forces in Australia, their dependants, and to civilian US nationals employed directly by the United States forces involved in such an operation unless other arrangements were concluded by the two governments.
(b) I refer the honourable member to Article IV in the agreement on the terms and conditions which will govern United States Air Force B-52 staging fiights through Darwin which was tabled in Parliament by the Prime Minister on 11 March 1981 (page 666 of Hansard of that date). This provides that the 1963 Status ofForces Agreement will apply.
Relations with South Africa
(Question No. 851)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:
(1) Is he able to say whether codes of conduct relating to apartheid and employment practices in South Africa have been adopted by the United States of America, the European Economic Community and the Canadian Government with respect to companies which carry out active operations in South Africa.
(2) Is he also able to say whether at least 35 Australian companies have active operations in South Africa.
(3) Has the Australian Government taken any action to establish a code of conduct in the light of its proclaimed opposition to South Africa's racial policies; if so, what action.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) On September 1977 the European Community Council of Ministers adopted a code of conduct for companies of European Community member states operating in South Africa: The code is not mandatory. Canada also has introduced a code of conduct which likewise is exhortatory and not mandatory in character. The Australian Government understands that the United States has recently moved to adopt a code of conduct, but no details on this action are yet available to relevant Departments. The Australian Embassy in Washington has been asked to pursue the question.
(2) Records held by the Bureau ofStatistics indic~te that as at June 1980 there were 17 Australian enterprises with investments in 18 South African enterprises.
(3) The Australian Government believes that the apartheid policy of the South African Government is manifestly unjust, discriminatory and exploitive. The Government has made its opposition to apartheid widely known in Australia and overseas. The Government hopes that Australian firms operating in South Africa will be guided by the Australian Government's overall policy on apartheid.
The question of establishing a code of conduct for Australian firms operating in South Africa is being considered

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2587

further. Officials are currently examining the practice of other countries with more extensive commercial involvement in South Africa.
Taxation
(Question No. 915)
Mr Willis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 26 March 1981:
(I) What was the total amount of tax outstanding as at 30 June in each year since 1975-76.
(2) How much of this sum was due from (a) companies and (b) individuals.

(3) What proportion of the total amount outstanding does the sum referred to in part (I) represent for each of the same years.
(4) How much of the total sum outstanding in each year was for taxpayers who have been identified as participants in tax avoidance schemes and what proportion has this been of total tax payable.
(5) How much of the total sum outstanding in each year due to identified participants in tax avoidance schemes has subsequently been collected and what has happened to the remainder.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (2) and (4) Information available from income tax records of the Australian Taxation Office is set out below:

30 June

Income tax outstandingt Total* Companies

Individuals

Tax outstanding in
respect ofidentified participants in avoidance schemest

1976
1977
1978 1979 1980

$m

$m

$m

$m Percentage of

total income

tax debited

473

177

294

Not

Not

available

available

545

200

345

Not

Not

available

available

680

192

496

158

1.06

1019

294

731

433

2.75

1324

403

922

711

4.01

* Including withholding taxes. t Includes amounts that were outstanding at beginning of financial year.

(3) This part of the honourable member's question has
been taken to relate to the amounts outstanding at the end of each financial year that had also been outstanding at the end of the previous financial year. This information is not available. However, figures that are available show the amount of
tax outstanding at the end of each financial year that represents tax that was due for payment before 1 April of that
year. In the case of individuals, most of the tax due for pay-
ment before 1 April was outstanding at the beginning of the financial year. The relevant figures are as follows:

Financial year ended 30 June
1976 1977 1978 1979 1980

Original due date for payment
before 1 April
$m 91
116
189
223
489

(5) This information is not available. However, it is known that the great bulk of the tax outstanding in avoidance cases remains uncollected pending the resolution of disputes between the Commissioner and taxpayers regarding assessments
made.

Tax Avoidance
(Questioll No. 916)
Mr Willis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 26 March 1981:
(1) What were the total claims for deductions from assessable income which have been made under tax avoidance arrangements against which the Government has taken action for each year from 1975-76 to 1979-80.
(2) What was the amount of tax revenue at stake in each of these years.
(3) How much of this revenue has been recovered.
(4) How much of this revenue has been written off in each year and how much has been carried forward as revenue losses in subsequent years.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) A separate record of claims for deductions under tax avoidance arrangements against which the Government has taken action was not kept in respect of the income years 1975-76 and 1976-77.
Identified claims by individual and company taxpayers for such deductions in respect of the 1977-78 income year amounted to about $2,100m. A further $660m was claimed in returns for the 1978-79 income year. Comparable figures are not yet available for the 1979-80 income year. Returns for that year are stH being received and processed.
(2) On the assumption that the taxpayers concerned derived enough income in relevant years to fully absorb the deductions claimed it is estimated that the revenue loss, if the

2588 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

1977-78 and, 1978-79 claims were allowed, would be in the vicinity of $1 ,300m,
(3) The amount paid or credited against disputed tax liability has not been -separately recorded,
,- (4) Any unpaid-tax deemed to be irrecoverable, after all practicable avenues to coUectthe debt have been exhausted, is written ofl' under section 70c of the Audit Act.' Income tax written off during the 1979-80 financial year amounted to $13,2m including $6,Om in respect of tax instalment deductions, No amount written off is known to have related to the arrangements that are the subject of the question.
Telephone Services at Gladstone, Queensland
(Question No. 918)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 26 March 1981:
(1) Are there mounting backlogs and delays in installing telephones in Gladstone, Queensland, and other centres, despite record connections, as reported by Telecom Australia annually,
(2) If so, is this, in part, because of Government policy limiting public sector investment despite incentives to private industry for investment-led economic recovery.
'(3) Has Telecom been prevented from providing housing assistance to employees in Gladstone despite recognition by State departments and private employers of the need to provide incentives to attract labour to Gladstone.
(4) Is Telecom losing essential skilled personnel to private enterprise because of Government policies limiting pay and other entitlements well below free labour market standards,
(5) lIas Telecom experienced delays in delivery of essential supplies for new work because of Government policy on tendering procedures which provides no penalties for such delays.
Mr Sinclair-Thc answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2)Yes. The situation in Gladstone is-

1980-81 1980-81 1979-80 to 3-81 expected

Telephone orders issued Telephone orders
completed Unsatisfied demand

1,313
1,103 520

1,029
999
842

1,500
1,500 500

The demand for all telecommunication services in Queensland is extremely high and increasing annually. Similarly, new telephone service connections have been increased from an annual connection rate in 1977-78 of 61,167 to the current year connection which will exceed 97,000.
Special attention has been and is being given to the allocation and development of resources but in the present situation connection delays are increasing in the highest growth areas,
(3) No, Telecom owns a 21 unit staff barrack and 3 residences. Two additional residences are being purchased and provision is being made for additional purchases as required. Additional staff transferred into the area enjoy the normal provision of subsidised rental until a residence is purchased.
(4) During the past 12 months there have been two instances where staff have resigned to seek employment with private industry in Gladstone. This number is not considered abnormal.

(5) No. Because of the lead times involved in many items of equipment, the increasing demand has introduced supply problems not related to tendering procedures.
Telephone for the Deaf
(Question No. 959)
Mr Adermann asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the answer to my Question No. 381 by the Minister for Communications regarding Porta Printer II, the telephone for the deaf.
(2) If so, did that answer indicate that the price of these sets will be in the order of $800-$1 ,000.
(3) Is he able to say whether this is the only type of telephone which profoundly deaf persons can use for communication or to summon assistance.
(4) Will sales tax be a component of the cost of these receivers purchased by deaf persons.
(5) If so, as the cost is so great, will he consider the exemption of these sets from sales tax on the production of a medical certificate proving profound deafness.
(6) Would this be an appropriate action in 1981, the International Year of Disabled Persons.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) No.
(4) and (5) The Commissioner of Taxation informs rile that the Porta Printer II is exempt from sales tax.
(6) In 1979 the Government widened the then existing sales tax exemption item 123 covering certain goods for use by blind persons so as to cover goods designed and manufactured expressly for use by handicapped persons unless those goods are of a kind ordinarily used by persons who are not handicapped, The Porta Printer II is exempt from sales tax under this provision.
Exotic Animal Disease, New Zealand: Procedures
(Question No. 978)
Mr Uoyd asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(I) Further to his answer to my question without notice on 25 March 1981 (Hansard, page 882), is he able to say when the New Zealand authorities first were alerted to the outbreak of suspected exotic animal disease near Timaru which subsequently led to investigation and declaration of an infected place on 11 February 1981.
(2) Is he also able to say why there was such a long delay between the declaration of the farm at 4.30 p.m. on I 1 February 1981 and the official announcement at 9.30 a.m. on the following day; if so, have the New Zealand authorities been questioned about this,
(3) Are there any international arrangements covering the timing and form of these arrangements; if so, what are they.

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2589

(4) If his Department first received information from the media about the declaration, does this mean that there is no agreement between the 2 countries to immediately notify the other; if not, is this situation being rectified.
(5) Why was there a delay from 10.30 a.m. to 11.15 a.m. between the first report and the telephone call initiated by his Departmental officers at that time to New Zealand.
(6) Were precautionary measures taken at Australian airports following the unofficial news from New Zealand, and was any alert sent to the airports or a check made of incoming New Zealand planes after the 10.30 a.m. news but ahead of the confirmation; if so, what measures were taken.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) A Ministry of Agriculture Veterinary Officer first suspected that a vesicular disease was implicated on the morning of 11 February 1981. He called in a second Veterinary Officer from the New Zealand Ministry later that morning. The conclusion was reached on the afternoon of 11 February that a vesicular disease was implicated. This led to the declaration of the property as an infected place at 4.30 p.m. New Zealand time on the same day.
(2) No. The New Zealand Government decided that foreign authorities should be notified at the same time as the Prime Ministerial announcement was made to the New Zealand people (viz. 9.30 a.m. on 12 February). The matter has been discussed with the New Zealand authorities and a Senior Veterinary Officer will visit New Zealand early in May for further discussions.

(6) Additional precautionary measures were in place at Mascot by 11.50 a.m. (i.e. 20 minutes after completion of the call to New Zealand) and in all Australian airports by 12.30 p.m. No alert was sent to airports or any additional check of New Zealand planes implemented after the 10.30 a.m. media reports. Rather, immediate confirmatory action as outlined in (5) was taken. As indicated there, the time between placing the call to New Zealand and connection (viz 10.40 a.m. to 11.15 a.m.) was utilised to plan additional quarantine measures which may have been necessary. There was of course no way of knowing how quickly the connection to New Zealand would be made. It would have been totally irresponsible to implement restrictions before confirmation of the outbreak had been received from the source.
Statutory Marketing Corporations: Industry Representatives
(Question No. 997)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 1 April 1981 :
(1) What are the provisions applying in Commonwealth legislation with respect to the appointment of industry representatives to statutory marketing corporations for primary products.
(2) Is it required that all such nominees should forgo their positions in farm organisations.

(3) Australia and New Zealand are members of the Office Internationale des Epizooties (located in Paris), the rules of which require notification of exotic diseases within 24 hours of confirmation. (This disease was never con firmed). In addition to this, an Australia/New Zealand Technical Committee on Quarantine was set up in 1966 and regular communication on quarantine matters is exchanged by annual meetings of this group. Between meetings, information is exchanged on a direet basis and may involve any of the folIowing matters: changes in vaccination or in importation policies and, in particular, outbreaks of disease. These arrangements are on the basis of bilateral notification 'as soon as possible'.
(4) Yes. Arrangements for notification exist. See 3 above. I am advised that arrangements were made for a telex to be sent to Australia to coincide with the New Zealand Prime Minister's announcement at 9.30 a.m. on 12 February New Zealand time. I understand that the telex left the New Zealand Ministry immediately after the public announcement but, in accordance with normal New Zealand diplomatic procedure, was forwarded via the NZ High Commission in Canberra. The telex did not reach the Australian Quarantine Service until 1.45 p.m. Australian time by which time the news had been received through the media. ,
(5) My officers received the first reports through the media at 10.30 a.m. on 12 February Australian time. The Quarantine Division immediately established that the Department of Primary Industry had heard simultaneously of the incident via a call from Paris where the Office Internationale des Epizooties was, by chance, meeting. The call indicated that an incident had been reported in New Zealand. At 10.40 a.m., a call was placed by the Quarantine Division to the New Zealand authorities to seek confirmation. Connection was not achieved until approximately 11.15 a.m. While awaiting connection the implementation of additional quarantine precautions, was planned in case they proved to be necessary. When connection was achieved the New Zealand authorities confirmed a suspected vesicular disease outbreak and, at the
same time, were advised, broadly, of precautionary measures that Australia would take.

(3) Are there variations from corporation to corporation or to board; if so, why.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The legislative provisions governing the appointment of industry representatives to the eleven primary industry statutory marketing authorities established by statutes which I administer are summarised below.
The appointment provisions for industry representatives are not uniform for all authorities but fall within the following broad categories:
appointed on either the nomination of an industry body/interest group or from a panel of names provided by an industry body/interest group
appointed on either the nomination of a State marketing board or State Minister
appointed upon election by a formal poll of qualified voters.
(2) No.
(3) Yes.
Generally speaking, the appointment provisions (see (1) above) reflect the different circumstances of each industry and the functions of the authority, including the extent to which the powers of the authority remove the rights of individual growers in respect of their products.

2590 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

SUMMARY OF LEGISLATIVE PROVISIONS FOR APPOINTMENT OF INDUSTRY REPRESENTATIVES TO STATUTORY AGRICULTURAL MARKETING AUTHORITIES

Statutory authority

Legislation and relevant section

Mechanism for appointment of industry representatives

Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation
Australian Wheat Board
Australian Wool Corporation Australian Dairy Corporation
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation
Australian Canned Fruits Corporation
Australian Dried Fruits Corporation
Australian Wine Board

Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation Act of 1977-- Sections 19-29
Conflict of Interest Provision is at Section 29A (1) (2) (3)
Wheat Marketing Act 1979Sections 29-35
Conflict of Interest Provision is at Section 35 (1)-(3)
Wool Industry Act 1972Sections 8-18
Contlict of Interest Provision is at Section 16 (2)-(4)
Dairy Produce Act 1924Sections 5-12A
Conflict of Interest Provision is at Section 12 (1)-(4)
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act I973-Section 13
Conflict of Interest Provision is at Section 22
Canned Fruits Marketing Act I979-Section 22
Conflict of Interest Provision is at Section 28
Australian Dried Fruits Corporation Act 1978--Section 15
Conflict of Interest Provision is at Section 22
Wine Overseas Marketing Act 1929-Section 5
Legislation has no Contlict of Interest Provision

Each member to represent livestock producers is appointed by me from among persons whose names are included in a list of names submitted by the Producer Consultative Group
Each member to represent the meat processors and exporters is appointed by me from among persons whose names are included in a list of names submitted by the Exporter and Abattoir Consultative Group
Members representing wheat growers in a State are appointed by me through either of the following mechanisms where there is a State Board (Qld, WA)- from among the members of the State Board; on the nomination of the State Board, or
if there is no State Board (NSW, Vic. or SA) after being elected by wheat growers in the State in accordance with the regulations
The finance member, the member representing flour mill owners and the member representing employees are appointed by me.
Members to represent wool growers are appointed by me on the nomination of the Wool Council of Australia
Members representing dairy farmers are appointed by me from among persons whose names have been submitted by the Australian Dairy Farmers Federation or by another dairy farmers organisation
Members representing manufacturers of dairy produce are appointed by me from among persons whose names have been submitted by organisations of manufacturers of dairy produce
Each member representing apple and pear growers is appointed by me from persons nominated by the Australian Apple and Pear Growers' Association
Members representing canners are appointed by me from among persons nominated by canners for the purpose, each canner nominating one person
Members representing growers are appointed by me on the nomination of the Australian Canning Fruit growers' Association
Members representing producers of dried fruits are appointed by me from among persons whose names are included in a list of names submitted by the Australian Dried Fruits Association
Members appointed to represent co-operative wineries and distilleries are appointed by the Governor-General upon the nomination of the Co-operative Winemakers' Association
Members appointed to represent proprietary and privately owned wineries and distilleries in the various States are appointed by the Governor General upon the nomination of the respective State associations affiliated with the Australian Wine and Brandy Producers' Association Incorporated
Members appointed to represent grapegrowers supplying grapes to wineries and distilleries are appointed by the Governor-General upon the nomination of the Winegrape Growers' Council of Australia

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2591

Statutory authority Australian Egg Board Australian Honey Board
Australian Tobacco Board

Legislation and relevant section

Mechanism for appointment of industry representatives

Egg Export Control Act 1947Sections 5, 7, 8
Legislation has no Conflict of Interest Provision
Honey Industry Act 1962Sections 7, 7A
Conflict of Interest Provision is at Section llA. (1), (2)
Tobacco Marketing Act 1965-c Section 7-14
Legislation has no Conflict of Interest Provision

A member representing a State Egg Board is appointed by the Governor-General from among the members of the State Board on the nomination of the State Minister administering the relevant State legislation
Members representing producers in each State are elected by a poll of honey producers and automatically take their place on the Honey Board
Members representing honey packers are appointed by me from among persons nominated by honey packers
Appointment mechanism for members representing tobacco growers depends on whether there is a State Board if there is a State Board-he is appointed by me from among the members of the State Board on the nomination of the appropriate State Minister; or if there is no State Board in the State-he is appointed by me on the nomination of the appropriate State Minister
One other member to represent tobacco growers is appointed by me as are four members to represent tobacco manufacturers

Drought Assistance
(Question No. tOOO)
Mr Kerin, asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 1 April 1981 :
(1) Is he able to say what are the provisions for drought being made by each of the States?
(2) What is the Commonwealth involvement in each State's catalogue of assistance measures?
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) See answer to Question No. 335 provided by Mr Howard on 5 May 1981.
B52s in Darwin: Quarantine Precautions
(Question No. t002)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
Will quarantine precautions be taken against the B52s of the United States Air Force if and when they land in Darwin, Northern Territory: if so, what measures.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Normal quarantine procedures will apply to all United States Air Force B52 aircraft arriving at Darwin, Northern Territory.

The usual quarantine measures are as follows: On arrival the aircraft is boarded by a Quarantine Officer and his assistants. The General Declaration prepared in advance by the captain of the aircraft is sighted and a visual examination made of the persons on board. The quarantine assistants disinsect both the aircraft cabin and holds. Vaccination certificates and other travel documents are examined for compliance with Australia's entry requirements.
When the Quarantine Officer is satisfied that the aircraft and all on board are not a source of infection, a certificate of pratique is granted. Until this time po goods (including refuse and unconsumed foodstuffs) can be landed and no persons are allowed to board the aircraft.
Following.the granting of pratique refuse and unconsumed foodstuffs may be removed from the aircraft under quarantine supervision. Items of quarantine concern are not to be removed without the permission of the Quarantine Officer.
Appointments to Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Health
(Question No. tOtS)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
What are the (a) names, (b) dates and terms of appointment and (c) salaries of all persons appointed to the Boards and Commissions of Statutory Authorities under his jurisdiction.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Name
MrF. W. Millar CBE. Mr R. G. Williams

Appointment

Term

HEALTH INSURANCE COMMISSION Chairman (part-time)
General Manager (full-time)

1.11.80 to 31.10.85 19.9.79 to 18.9.82

Remuneration $
11,375 49,495

2592 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Name

Appointment

Term

Remuneration

Mr W. A. Butterss
Mr R. L. Gradwell Mr K. N. Willis Mr R. N. H. Denton A.O. Dr P. P. Glenning

Commissioner (part-time)
Commissioner (part-time) Commissioner (part-time)
Commissioner (part-time) Commissioner (part-time)

plus allowance
1.11.80 to 31.10.85 1.12.80 to 30.11.85 1.11.80 to 31.10.85 1.11.80 to 31.10.82 1.11.80 to 31.10.82

$ 2,800 5,725
5,725 5,725 5,725
5,725

Dr K. M. Doust

CAPITAL TERRITORY HEALTH COMMISSION

Chairman (full-time)

11.6.80 to 10.6.86

47,322

plus allowance 750

The two full-time commissioner positions created under the Health Commission (amendment) Ordinance 1981 have not yet had permanent appointments made to them. The Remuneration Tribunal has decided that the Commissioners will be paid at $38,265 p.a. Their terms of appointment will be 6 years.
The Ordinance also establishes a Health Services Council of advisers to the Commission and the Minister. Between 6 and 10 people will be appointed by the Minister to the Council. Their terms of appointment will be a maximum of 3 years. Members' meeting fees will be decided by the Remuneration Tribunal.

Name

Appointment

Term

Remuneration

COMMONWEALTH SERUM LABORATORIES COMMISSION

Dr A. J. Forbes C.M.G., M.C.
Dr T. H. Hurley OBE. Mr V. B. McMullan . . . Mrs B. R. Hardy . . . .
Mr H. D. Huyer

Chairman Deputy Chairman Commissioner (part-time) Commissioner (part-time) Commissioner (part-time)

1.7.80 to 30.6.84 1.7.80 to 30.6.84 1.7.80 to 30.6.84
1.7.80 to 30.6.84 1.7.80 to 30.6.84

$
10,675 6,420 4,300 4,300 4,300

The full-time Director, Dr N. J. McCarthy, was appointed on 19 September 1979. His appointment expires on 19 September 1984. He receives a remuneration of $49,495 and an allowance of $2,800.

Appointments to Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Education
(Question No. 1019)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 1April 1981:
What are the (a) names, (b) dates and terms of appointment and (c) salaries of all persons appointed to the Boards and Commissions of Statutory Authorities under his jurisdiction.

Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
TERTIARY EDUCATION COMMISSION
Sections 10,21,24 and 27 of the Tertiary Education Commission Act 1977 provides for 35 Commissioners to be appointed to the Tertiary Education Commission and its councils.
The Commissioners appointed by the Governor-General are:

Name

Date of current appointment

Professor P. H. Karmel, A.C., CBE. (Chairman)

Professor D. N. F. Dunbar

Dr H. S. Houston

Mr H. K. Coughlan

Mr C. O. Dolan
Sir David Griffin, CBE. Mr R. Goldsworthy Mr 1. V. Gzell, QC. Mrs C. M. Searby

Professor D. N. F. Dunbar (Chairman) Mr R. K. Chambers . Professor P. J. Fensham
Professor H. G. Gelber . . . . .

UNIVERSITIES COUNCIL

22.6.77-21.6.84
22.6.77-22.6.83
22.6.77-21.6.84
22.6.77-22.6.83
30.6.79-22.6.81 30.6.79-22.6.82 22.6.80-21.6.82 22.6.80-21.6.83 22.6.80-21.6.83
22.6.80-21.6.83 30.6.79-22.6.82 22.6.80-21.6.81 30.6.79-22.6.82

Salary/ allowance
~p.a.
53,976+ 2,800* 47,322+ 1,400* 47,322+ 1,400* 47,322+ 1,400* 5,725 5,725 5,725 5,725 5,725
5,725 4,300 4,300 4,300

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2593

Name

Date of current appointment

Salary/ allowance

Professor L. J. Kramer, OBE. Dr P. S. Lang, OBE. Mr J. MeG. McIntyre Mr B. W. Roland, QC. Mr N. Stockdale . .
Dr H. S. Houston (Chairman) Dr C. D. Blake Dr G. G. Burniston, C.M.G., OBE. Mr P. C. E. Cox, M.B.E. MrsN. C. Ford Dr D. A. Jecks Professor G. H. Newstead Mr A. R. Patching Mr A. W. Wilkinson

ADVANCED EDUCATION COUNCIL

30.6.79-22.6.82 22.6.80-21.6.83 10.10.79-22.6.82 22.6.80-21.6.83 22.6.80-21.6.83
22.6.80-21.6.83 22.6.80-21.6.83 30.6.79-22.6.82 22.6.80-21.6.81 22.6.80-21.6.83 22.6.80-21.6.81 30.6.79-22.6.82 30.6.79-22.6.82 30.6.79-22.6.82

$p.a. 4,300 4,300 4,300 4,300 4,300
4,300 4,300 4,300 4,300 4,300 4,300 4,300 4,300 4,300

TECHNICAL AND FURTHER EDUCATION COUNCIL

Mr H. K. Coughlan (Chairman)
Mr H. Hauenschild Miss L. C. C. Hodsdon Mr J. Limbrick Mr W. J. Menz Professor J. R. Niland Mr J. A. Rickard Miss P. E. Seitz Mr M. A. Watson

30.6.79-22.6.82 22.6.80-21.6.83 6.11.80-21.6.82 30.6.79-22.6.82 20.9.79-22.6.82 30.6.79-22.6.82 22.6.80-21.6.81 22.6.80-21.6.81 22.6.80-21.6.81

4,300 4,300 4,300 4,300 4,300 4,300 4,300 4,300 4,300

SCHOOLS COMMISSION
Sections 4, 5 and 6 of the Schools Commission Act 1973 provide for a full-time Chairman of the Commission, and not more than three additional full-time members out of a total of between four and eleven members of the Commission. Members of the Commission appointed by the Governor-General are:

Name
Dr P. D. Tannock (Chairman)
Dr G. A. Hancock Miss M. D. Miland Dr R. J. Andrews Mrs J. S. Brown Mr E. G. Dunne MrA.D.P.Dyer Mr W. L. Hamilton Mr A. G. Marriage Dr D. Mossenson Associate Professor M. J. Norst Fr J. M. Williams

Date of current appointment
15.1.81-14.1.88
20.2.80-31.5.81 20.4.81-19.4.84 15.1.81-14.1.83 11.8.79-14.1.82 15.1.80-14.1.83 15.1.80-14.1.82 15.1.81-14.1.84 30.3.80-14.1.83 11.8.79-14.1.82 28.4.81-14.1.84 15.1.80-14.1.83

Salary / allowance
49,495 + 2,800*
38,265 38,265 5,725
5,725 5,725 5,725 5,725 5,725 5,725 5,725 5,725

CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT CENTRE
Section II of the Curriculum Development Centre Act 1975 provides for one full-time Director and between ten and fifteen part-time members of Council.
Members of the Council appointed by the Governor-General are:

Name
Dr R. W. Rawlinson (Chairman) Director, vacant . . . . .
Mr D. J. Francis has been appointed by the Minister as Acting Director Mr N. H. Campbell Mr R. H. Cavenagh Mrs D. H. Encel MrA.V.Gough

Date of current appointment
1.8.78-30.6.81 1.5.81
31.8.80-30.6.81 1.7.80-30.6.83 1.7.80-30.6.83 1.7.80-30.6.81

Salary / allowance
5,725 41,286+
650*
4,300 4,300 4,300 4,300

2594 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Name
Dr G. A. Hancock (nominee of Schools Commission) Mr W. I. D. Hayward . . . . . . . . . . Dr R. V. McSweeney . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr D. M. Morrison (nominee of Commonwealth Department of
Education) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr W. Nay (nominee of Australian Education Council) Dr M. J. Rado (nominee of Australian Education Council) DrG. W. Speedy . . . . . . . . . . . . . Mr J. R. Steinle (nominee of Australian Education Council)

Date of current appointment
21.2.80-20.2.82 1.8.78-30.6.81
25.8.80-30.6.82
15.8.78-30.6.81 6.3.80-30.6.82 15.8.78-30.6.81 25.8.79-30.6.82 25.8.79-30.6.81

Salary/ allowance
$p.a. n.a.
4,300 4,300
n.a. 4,300 4,300 4,300 4,300

AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY
Section 11 of the Australian National University Act 1946 governs the membership of the Council of the Australian National University including up to 12 persons appointed by the Governor-General. Members of Council do not receive salaries or allowances.
Members of the Council appointed by the Governor General are:

Name
Dr L. K. Boardman Dr L. A. Brodribb, A.M. Mr L. K. Burgess
Mr A. <;. Copeman
Mr G. P. Dutton, A.O. . Commissioner P. M. Griffin Mr L. T. Hinde Mr T. F. C. Lawrence, A.M. Mr L. M. Muir, V.R.D. MrW.A.Park Mrs M. E. Reid . Mr A. J. R. Yencken

Date of current appointment
30.9.79-29.9.82 30.9.79-29.9.82 30.9.78-29.9.81 30.9.80-29.9.83 30.9.78-29.9.81 30.9.78-29.9.81 30.9.78-29.9.81 30.9.78-29.9.81 30.9.80-29.9.83 30.9.80-29.9.83 30.9.78-29.9.81 30.9.80-29.9.83

CANBERRA COLLEGE OF ADVANCED EDUCATION
Section 8 of the Canberra College of Advanced Education Act 1967 governs the constitution of the Council of the College including up to 8 persons appointed by the Governor General. Members of Council do not receive salaries or allowances.
Members of the Council appointed by tIle Governor General are:

Name
Dr D. F. Waterhouse, A.O., C.M.G. (Chairman)
Mrs H. C. Crisp (Deputy Chairman) . . . . . .
Mr L. J. Daniels, C.B., OBE. Mr R. J. Fryer Dr R. J. Millington Mr D. M. Morrison Mr C. Price, M.B.E. Dr A. M. Walshe

Date of current appointment
1.1.79-31.12.81
1.1.81-31.12.82 1.1.81-31.12.82 1.1.80-31.12.82 1.1.81-31.12.83 1.1.80-31.12.82 1.1. 79-31.12.81 1.1.79-31.12.81

ACT SCHOOLS AUTHORITY Section 10 of the Schools Authority Ordinance 1976 provides for one full-time member and fourteen part-time members.
Members of the Authority appointed by the Governor-General are:

Name

Dr R. J. Campbell (Chairman) . . . . . . Mr R. P. Sadler (Acting Chief Education Officer)

Dr G. A. Hancock, Chief Education Officer

Mr B. F. M. Baratta (nominee of ACT Pre-School Association)

Mr K. R. Doyle (nominee of ACT House of Assembly)

Lt Col. M. G. Heal . . . . . . . . . . .

Ms M. Horder (nominee of ACT House of Assembly)

Miss J. A. James . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr A. L. Ketley (nominee of ACT Council of Parents and Citizens Inc.)

Mr R. R. Lee (nominee of ACT Teachers' Federation)

Mr 1. R. McPhee (nominee of ACT Teachers' Federation)

Mr R. B. Mitchell

Mr H. G. Roberts . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr R. B. Topfer

............ .

Mr H. D. Waring (nominee of ACT Council of Parents and Citizens Inc.)

Mr W. J. White (nominee of ACT Teachers' Federation) . . . . .

Date of current appointment
1.1.80-31.12.81 16.1.81-31.5.81
1.6.81-31.5:86
1.3.79-31.12.81 24.7.79-31.12.81 27.3.80-31.12.82 24.7.79-31.12.81
1.1.81-31.12.83 1.1.80-31.12.82 7.10.79-6.10.81 7.10.79-6.10.81 1.1.81-31.12.83 19.8.80-31.12.82 1.1.81-31.12.83 1.1.80-31.12.82 7.10.79-6.10.81

Salary/ allowance
$p.a. 8,575 41,286+ 1,175* 41,286+ 1,175* 4,300 4,300 4,300 4,300 4,300 4,300
n.a. n.a. 4,300 4,300 4,300 4,300 n.a.

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2595

COMMONWEALTH TEACHING SERVICE
Section 6 of the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972 provides that there shall be a Commonwealth Teaching Service Commissioner. The Commissioner is appointed by the Governor-General.

Name

Date of current appointment

Salary / allowance

Mr M. J. Woodward (Acting Commissioner)

27.2.81-26.5.81

$p.a. 38,265

AUSTRALIAN MARITIME COLLEGE
Section 11 of the Maritime College Act 1978 provides for a College Council of not fewer than 14 nor more than 23 members. Members of Council do not receive salaries or allowances.

Members of the Council appointed by the Governor General are:

Name

Date of current appointment

Mr T. B. Swanson CBE (Chairman) . . . . .

10.12.80-9.12.82

Name
Mr 1. H. Backler Mr J. Bicknell Mr F. A. L. Connell Mr J. K. Edwards Mr A. R. Dailey Mr C. J. McGrane Mr R. G. McLennan Mr M. A. Pollard Capt F. G. Ross Dr D. D. Francois

Date of current appointment
10.12.80-9.12.83 10.12.80-9.12.82 10.12.80-9.12.82 10.12.80-9.12.83 10.12.80-9.12.84 10.12.80-9.12.82 10.1 2.80-9.12.83 10.12.80-9.12.82 10.12.80-9.12.84 10.12.80-9.12.84

ACT APPRENTICESHIP BOARD
Section 8 of the ACT Apprenticeship Ordinance 1936 governs the membership of the ACT Apprenticeship Board, which consists of a full-time Chairman and four part-time members.
Members of the Board, appointed by the Minister, are

Name

Date of current appointment

Salary / allowance

Mr R. A. Smart (Chairman) Mr J. E. Benson Mr S. Jordan . . . . .
Mr B. Marcus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mr J. F. Dallas
Deputy MembersMr E. P. Swinton Mr A. K. Walklake MrP. W.Millar
Mr F. J. Gellatly
Mr F. J. McCauley

$ p.a.

8.10.75

n.a.

31.5.80

n.a.

1.12.78-30.11.81 sitting fee $80 full

day- $40

under 3 hours

1.5.78-30.4.81 sitting fee $80 full

d a y- $ 4 0

under 3 hours

17.10.80-16.10.83 sitting fce$80 full

day- $40

under 3 hours

21.7.70

n.a.

11. 7.67

n.a.

17.10.80-16.10.83 sitting fee $80 full

day- $40

under 3 hours

1.12.78-30.12.81 sitting fee $80 full

day- $40

under 3 hours

1.5.78-31.5.81 sitting fee $80 full

day $40

under 3 hours

*Annual allowance.
n.a. Not applicable (Public Service Act Regulation 38 GO 14/D/8).

Repatriation General Hospital, Daw Park, South Australia
(Question No. 1030)

(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the state of the operating theatres at the Repatriation General Hospital, Daw Park, South Australia, which were built in 1942 but Which have not been upgraded since.

Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 2 April1981:

(2) Does the small size of these theatres provide a number of serious problems, such as (a) increasing the potential for infection because it is difficult to prevent sterile drapes on the trays from being touched by staff who have to move in and out

2596 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

of the operating room and (b) necessitating the operating table to be placed diagonally across the room in certain major surgical procedures to allow X -ray machinery to be brought in.

(3) Are there too few theatres at the hospital which means that (a) they cannot be left to 'breathe' while being effectively
cleaned between cases, (b) it is not possible to reserve at least one theatre for certain particular 'clean' cases and (c) it is frequently necessary for surgery to be performed on 'clean' cases straight after 'dirty' cases such as open bowel surgery thereby greatly increasing the likelihood of infection.

(4) Is the endoscopy room at the hospital where minor procedures are performed, often used for procedures for which it is not equipped, such as cardiac pacemaker insertion.

(5) Is the air conditioning in this room sub-standard, and does it result in the problems of (a) accumulation of dust and bacteria which cause particular concern in eye and ear surgery and (b) the likelihood that operating rooms are either too hot or too cold placing patients under anaesthesia at great risk from such temperature "xtremes.

(6) Are the floors of the operating theatres also substandard, and in particular, does the repeated lifting of the floor coverings and the pooling of water in certain areas create a situation encouraging the growth of bacteria.

(7) Have there been recent problems with the isolation of pathogenic organisms and are the measures taken only temporarilyeffective.

(8) Is there a hazardous communicating passage between lhe 2 main theatres which leads to the carriage of infection between theatres and cross-contamination.

(9) Is the recovery room far too small, being equipped for 4

patients but often having to cope with 7, so that patients have

had to be left in the main corridor because no space has been

availablein the recovery room.

.

(10) Are there suitable areas for anaesthetising patients at the hospital; if not, do patients requiring local anaesthetics usually have these administered in the recovery room, next to patients who may be vomiting, coughing, et cetera thereby adding to the anxiety of the patients awaiting treatment, and are other patients undesirably exposed to the flurry and fright of being wheeled conscious into the operating theatre, against modern standards of surgical practice.

(11) Is some equipment at the hospital stored in corridors because the storage area is too small; if so, has some of this equipment been damaged because of this situation.

(12) Are surgical instruments crowded into cupboards which are totally inadequate for this purpose; if so, are there difficulties in maintenance and in the selection of particular items when they are suddenly and urgently required.

(13) Is there any area where out-patients awaiting surgery can comfortably sit and is there any suitable area where students and staff can be given instruction or teaching; if ilot, does this considerably limit educational possibilities.

(14) Is the development of a new operating theatre block at the hospital urgently required and paramount to the development of the hospital as a whole; if so, will the Minister approve this development as a matter of urgency.

Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(1) I understand that the operating theatre block at the Repatriation General Hospital, Daw Park, was built in 1942. In 1963 a urology theatre was added and-in 1975 the two major theatres were partially renovated to remove a number. of deficiencies.

(2) (a) While the potential for infection does exist, extraordinary care is taken by the staff to preserve sterility of drapes on the trays during movement about the theatres and (b) Yes.
(3) (a) With the increase in the number of surgical cases in recent years it is necessary to maintain tighter control on theatre utilisation and ensure that sufficient time is available for staff to clean the theatres and to prevent any risk of 'dirty' cases causing infection in 'clean' cases, (b) Yes and (c) Careful and continuous monitoring of infection rates in surgical cases shows that cleaning and scheduling measures undertaken by the staff are effective and that there is no added risk to patients.
(4) Some selected procedures such as cardiac pacemaker insertion are performed in the endoscopy room. However, the surgeon undertaking these procedures ensures that precautions are taken to fully protect the patient.
(5) (a) The existing air conditioning system does create potential for infection. However, regular environmental monitoring is performed to ensure safe bacteriological conditions and (b) The existing air conditioning system does have difficulty maintaining full temperature control during heat wave conditions. Surgical sessions are cancelled when the operating theatres become too hot for surgery in order to avoid unnecessary risks to patients. The anacsthetists and theatre staff take all necessary precautions against the effects of temperature variation on patients.
(6) Ptoblems with the theatre floor coverings have been detected in the regular and rigorous inspections of the theatres. However,preventative measures and close monitoring ensure that the potential for growth of bacteria is controlled.
(7) An organism was detected in the theatres on one occasion. However, this was quickly and effectively controlled. Continuous monitoring and adequate cleaning procedures ensure that the potential for growth of bacteria is adequately controlled.
(8) The two main operating theatres are in direct and open communication with each other, but care is taken to ensure that no cross-contamination occurs.
(9) Due to the limited size of the recovery room there are times when the number of surgical cases results in some overcrowding. However, when insufficient sp~ee is available, patients are returned to their ward where the necessary staff care is provided.
(10) Facilities for the anaesthetising of patients in the 'operating theatre complex are limited. However, despite this shortcoming, patients undergoing anaesthesia are not put at risk. On occasions it has been found necessary to use the recovery room for patients requiring local anaesthetic. It has also been found necessary on occasions to administer general anaesthesia to patienls in the main operating theatres themselves. In these circumstances the staff are careful to minimise any possible distress to patients.
(II) Storage facilities in the operating theatre complex are inadequate and some equipment is stored in the main theatre corridors. Staff are careful to ensure that equipment is protected from damage.
(12) Equipment storage facilities are inadequate and some problems have been experienced. By careful attention to maintenance, this problem is minimised.
(13) Out-patient waiting facilities and areas for student teaching are limited within the operating theatres.
(14) New theatres are required and a proposal for replacement of the operating theatre complex is currently under consideration.

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2597

Broome Aboriginal Medical Service
(Question No. 1035)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 2 April 1981:
(1) Is the Broome Aboriginal Medical Service, WA, at present struggling for survival because of a shortage of funds.
(2) Has his attention-been drawn to a statement by the Western Australian Minister for Health, which suggests that the Service should be treated simply as a private practice ineligible for Government funding; if so, what is his reaction to the statement.
(3) Has the Service approached his Department for funds; if so, what has been his Department's response.
(4) If the response was unfavourable, what does he require of the Service before he is able to give more favourable consideration to the submission.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) My colleague the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs on 9 April 1981 announced the provision of assistance to the Broome Aboriginal Medical Service.
(2), (3) and (4). I am aware of the statement by the Western Australian Minister for Health. Apart from benefiting from assistance already provided by my Department under the direct billing arrangements for disadvantaged patients, the Broome Aboriginal Medical Service sought a Health Program Grant. However, at present the Service is not eligible for assistance in this way. The Government is currently considering future policy in relation to Aboriginal health and it is expected an announcement will be made shortly.
Motor Vehicle Registration Inspections
(Question No. 1060)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 2 April 1981:
(1) What is the capacity per day of registration inspections at the (a) Dickson and (b) Phillip Motor Registry Offices.
(2) Do facilities exist for 3 lanes of vehicles to be tested.
(3) How many lanes have been utilised during each month of 1981.
(4) Are all 3 lanes being utilised at the present time; if not, why not.
(5) What was the average wait per motorist for a registration inspection during March 1981.
(6) Have any estimates been made of the fuel consumption and pollution caused by cars waiting for long periods in inspection queues.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The capacity of the testing stations varies with level of staffing, number of hours worked and type of vehicle. At present staff level and hours of opening (43 hours per week), the theoretical capacity is 1750 motor cars per week at each testing station, or approximately 383 cars each day. From October 1980 to March 1981 Phillip operated at half capacity while certain construction work was in progress.
(2) Each station normally has 4 lanes but Phillip operated on only 2 during reconstruction of the inspection pits.
(3) In each month of 1981 to date 4 lanes at Dickson and 2 at Phillip have been utilised. Since April 3 lanes have been available at Phillip most of the time.
(4) See answers to (2) and (3).

(5) The average wait per motorist during March 1981 was approximately fifty minutes at Phillip and fifteen minutes at Dickson.
(6) No.
Control oCPollution in the Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 1061)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 2 April 1981:
(1) Is he able to say whether the Koppers timber processing firm is proposing to move to the Hume Industrial Estate; if so, what environmental controls will be applied.
(2) Are the environmental standards of the Australian Capital Territory lower than those which apply in New South Wales.
(3) What provisions exist in the Australian Capital Territory for control of (a) noise, (b) air, (c) water and (d) other forms of pollution.
(4) What powers does his Department have in the control ofpollutionin the Australian Capital Territory.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) In January 1980 Koppers (Aust.) Pty ~tdmade formal application for the lease of a site at Hume suitable for a timber treatment and log processing plant. Negotiations are not yet concluded.
My Department and the National Capital Development Commission are aware of the potentially adverse environmental impact of such a plant. The proposal has therefore been the subject of close scrutiny and controls have been formulated to ensure that any adverse effect is minimised.
The controls cover the discharge of liquid wastes, noise emissions and air pollution. A monitoring program will be established to measure the effectiveness of the safeguards.
The controls will be embodied in the Crown Lease to ensure complete environmental protection in the interim period before the proposed Australian Capital Territory environmental protection legislation is promulgated. Adequate sanctions exist to ensure compliance with covenants of lease.
(2) While there is presently no comprehensive legislation controlling environmental pollution in the Australian Capital Territory, the need is recognised and draft legislation is being prepared based on the advice of an Inter-Departmental Committee on Environmental Quality. The standards will be similar in effect to those in force in New South Wales.
(3) The following Australian Capital Territory Ordinances and Regulations allow for limited control of forms of pollution:
(a) Noise
the Animal Nuisance Control Ordinance 1975 covers noise emitted by animals;
the Inspection of Machinery Regulations made pursuant to the Machinery Ordinance 1949 sets noise levels above which the use of hearing protection devices is compulsory in the workplace;
the Motor Traffic Ordinance 1936 allows for the refusal of registration for a motor vehicle which emits excessive noise. and provides that it is an offence to drive a motor vehicle which emits undue noise;
the Police Offences Ordinance 1930 provides that the emission of noise which causes undue disturbance is an offence;

2598 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

the Small Claims Ordinance 1974 allows individuals to take action to have noise nuisance emitted by neighbours abated.
(b) Air
The Building Ordinance 1972 allows the Building Controller, in considering plans and specifications, to take into account whether the proposed structure makes adequate provision for the disposal of smoke, gas, fumes, and ash;
The New South Wales Smoke Abatement Act 1902, in its application to the Australian Capital Territory, provides that it is an offence for a person to use a furnace which has not been constructed so as to prevent the formation of smoke therein.
(c) Water
The Police Offences Ordinance 1930 provides that the dumping of dead animals and the diversion of watercourses, are offences;
The Cotter River Ordinance 1914 provides protection for the Cotter River catchment;
The Public Health (General Sanitation) Regulations made pursuant to the Public Health Ordinance 1928 provides for the protection of the water supply;
The Canberra Water Supply (Googong 1?am) Act 1974 provides for the protection of that part of the Canberra water supply derived from the Googong Dam;
The Canberra Sewerage and Water Supply Regulations made pursuant to the Building and Services Ordinance 1924 provides that pollution of a stream which is part of the water supply is an offence;
The Lakes Ordinance 1976 provides that pollution of a lake and any stream, creek or river flowing into a lake is an offence.
(4) The legislation referred to in (3) is administered by the Minister for the Capital Territory apart from the Police Offences Ordinance administered by the Attorney-Genera~ and the Public Health Ordinance administered by the Minister for Health. Various powers and procedures are available under the legislation which does apply:
Noise-The Registrar of Dogs has power under the Animal Nuisance Control Ordinance to make application to the Court for an order that an animal not be kept or that specified works be carried out.
The Chief Inspector of Machinery and Inspectors appointed under the Inspection of Machinery Regulations have power to enter any premises when machinery is in operation.
The Registrar of Motor Vehicles has power to refuse registration to a vehicle which does not comply with registration standards. The Police have normal powers to prosecute persons who operate a motor vehicle that emits undub' noise,
The Police have normal powers of prosecution under the Police Offences Ordinance.
Air Pollution-The Building Controller has power to refuse approval for a structure under the Building Ordinance.
The Police or an owner or occupier of premises may bring an action under the New South Wales Smoke Nuisance Abatement Act.
Water Pollution-The Police have normal powers of prosecution under the Police Offences Ordinance;
The Capital Territory Health Commission, Medical Officers of Health and Inspectors have powers under the Public Health Ordinance and Public Health (General Sanitation) Regulations to prosecute offenders;

The National Capital Development Commission has power to plan and make provision for the prevention of pollution of water supplied or to be supplied from the Googong Dam under the Canberra Water Supply (GoogongDam) Act;
The Proper Authority appointed for the purposes of the Canberra Sewerage and Water Supply Regulations and the Minister have power to prosecute offenders;
The Minister for the Capital Territory or the Police have the power to prosecute offenders under the Lakes Ordinance.
In addition a power exists under many leases which enables a measure of control over various forms ofpollution.
Re-targeting of Ballistic and Guided Missiles
(Question No. 1070)
Dr EYeringham asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to President Carter's Directive 59 allowing re-targeting of ballistic and guided missiles to military rather than economic or popUlation targets.
(2) Is he able to say whether this change from countervalue to counterforce or limited nuclear war strategy has been supported by increased accuracy or ice-pick capability in nuclear attacks against missile silos and missile control centres.
(3) Has the Government expressed its view on this initiation of nuclear strikes against nuclear emplacements (INSANE) policy as an alternative to the preceding mutually assured destruction (MAD) doctrine as a deterent to the arms race.
Mr KiUen--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) See my answer to 18 September 1980 to Question on Notice No, 6374 (Hansard, page 1634) and my statementof5 May 1981.
(2) Presidential Directive 59 does not constitute a change in US strategy from countervalue to counterforce. In addition to my answer to question (1) above, I also refer the Honourable Member to the United States Department of Defense Annual Report Fiscal Year 1982, particularly pages 42-3. I would draw to his attention in particular however the following sentences:
'The countervailing strategy by no means implies that we do not-or no longer-require the ultimate deterrent effect of being able to threaten the full Soviet target structure including the industrial and economic base.'
and
'It (the countervailing strategy) does not caJl for substituting primarily military for primarily civilian targets. '
(3) The premise on which the honourable member's question is based is mistaken.
Australian Railways Commission
(Question No. 1078)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) What has been the annual profit or loss of the Australian Railways Commission since 1972-73,
(2) Where a percentage dividend was paid by the Australian Railways Commission to the Government, in which years was it paid and what was the quantum of that dividend,
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2599

(1) Since 1972-73 Railways operated by the Commonwealth have incurred operating losses as follows:

1972-73
1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79
1979-80

$m
3.246
7.206 14.479 10.665
5.199 73.756
72.909 64.828

It should be noted that for the years up to and including 1976-77 the figures quoted above refer only to the operation
of the former Commonwealth Railways. ANRC Annual Re-
ports for 1975-76 and 1976-77 include separate financial statements for the Northern Region (the former Commonwealth Railways system), the Tasmanian Region and for the Rail Division of the State Transport Authority (the nonmetropolitan railways of that Division comprising the Central
Region of ANRC). However the financial statements of each of these regions employed different accounting methods and
are not directly comparable.

(2) No dividend was paid to the Commonwealth over this period.

Australian Trading Ports
(Question No. 1081)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) What were the Australian trading ports operating as at (a) 30 June 1960 and (b) 30 June 1980 and what were their respective individual throughputs in (i) 1959-60, (ii) 1969-70 and (iii) 1979-80.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) As at 30 June 1960 there were sixty-one ports actively trading. These are listed in the table below under 1959-60. By 30 June 1980 eight of these ports had ceased active trading and eighteen new ports had been established. The 1980 total of seventy-one active ports is also listed in the table under 1979-80.
(2) The information sought in the honourable member's second question is given in the table below. Cargo throughput records for certain, mainly smaller ports, are not available for earlier years. These have been annotated 'not available'.

TRADING PORTS AUSTRALIA AND CARGO THROUGHPUT 1959-60, 1969-70 AND 1979-80 Note: n.a. means not available; n.t. means not trading in a particular year (000 tonnes)

State/Port

1959-60

1969-70

1979-80

Sydney (Port Jackson)
Botany Bay
Bass Point
Catherine Hill Bay
Clarence River Coifs Harbour Newcastle (Port Hunter)
Port Kembla Richmond River Trial Bay Twofold Bay (Eden)

NEW SOUTH WALES

Melbourne Geelong Portland Port Welshpool (includes Corner Inlet) Westernport

VICTORIA

Brisbane Bowen Bundaberg
Cairns Cape Flattery Gladstone Hay Point Lucinda (Dungeness)
Mackay MafYborough (Urimgan) Mourilyan (Innisfail) Quintell Beach Rockhampton (Port Alma)
Thursday Island
Townsville Weipa

QUEENSLAND

(a)
9,730 4,906
100 n.a.
35 23 7,870 5,163 26 13 4
8,632 4,845
96 n.a. n.t.
2,354 20 143
464 n.t. 285 n.t. 208 378 70 n.t. n.t. 57 n.a. 625 n.t.

(a)
16,919 6,986
n.a. n.a.
32 9 15,365 11,874 43 68 47
11,878 7,260
500 8
1,954
6,383 49 258 588 121
10,134 n.t. 328 722 54 327 n.t. 350 25
1,404 5,939

(b)
23,982 10,528
186 129 146 n.t. 20,789 17,764 n.t. 237 2,091
18,810 7,228 1,913
180 11,576
9,742 8
588 832 510 17,106 14,751 413 1,226 41 430
1 251
19 2,077 11,151

2600 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

State/Port
Port Adelaide American River Ardrossan Ballast Head Edithburgh Farquhar Jetty Kingscote Klein Point Port Augusta Port Giles Port Lincoln Port Pirie Port Stanvac Proper Bay Rapid Bay Stenhouse Bay Thevenard Wallaroo Wardang Island WhyaUa

1959-60

SOUTH AUSTRALIA

(a)
3,358 21 198 n.t. 38
186 58 n.t. 22 n.t.
339 828 n.t. n.t. 238 206 99 142 21 3,614

WESTERN AUSTRALIA Fremantle (includes Kwinana) Albany Barrow Island Broome Bunbury Carnarvon (includes Cape Cuvier, Shark Bay and Useless
Loop) Dampier Derby Esperance Exmouth Gulf (North-West Cape) Geraldton Port Hedland Port Walcott Wyndham YampiSound

6.658 340 n.t. 17 435
18 n.t. 28 58 n.t. 348 82 25 31 795

TASMANIA Hobart (includes Risdon, Electrona, Spring Bay, Port Huon
and Prince of Wales Bay) . . . . . . . . . . . Burnie Devonport Flinders Island King Island (includes Currie, Grassy and Naracoopa) Launceston (includes Bell Bay)
Port Latta Stanley

1,211 364 331 n.t. 23 456 n.t. 34

1969-70
(a)
3,695 35
488 154 n.t. n.t. 146 463 n.t. n.t. 871 1.416 2.682 489 288 n.t. 477 351 n.t. 8.347
5.134 501
1.887 37
1,009
682 14,379
39 476
29 1,258 14,991
14 75 2.676
1,837 940
1,236 11 5
1,248 2,090
85

1979-80
(b)
4.081 33
1.096 168 n.t. n.t. 101 780 n.t. 183
1,239 1,496 3,521
54 366 n.t. 1,)10 512 n.t. 3,429
16,487 1,283 1,174 86 3,444
791 39,314
24 652 1.036 1,831 36,242 14,881 68 2,563
3,187 1,786 1,127
38 92 4,719 2,381 69

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2601

State/Port

1959-60

1969-70

1979-80

Strahan
Darwin Gove Groote Eylandt

(a) 99
NORTHERN TERRITORY
n.a. n.t. n.t.

(a) 24
1,250 n.t. 656

(b) n.t.
608 4,539 1,855

(a) units are combined mass tons and 'measurement' tons of 40 cubic feet. (b) units are combined mass tonnes and 'measurement' tonnes of 1 cubic metre.
Sources Commonwealth Department of Transport, Port Authority Cargo Movement Records. State Year Books Annual Reports:-State Departments
-Port Authorities
State Statistics

Freight Rates of Containerised Cargoes

(Question No. 1084)

Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:

What have been the average annual increases for (a) conference import freight rates into Australia of containerised cargoes from (i) Europe and (ii) the United States of America
and (b) conference export freight rates from Australia of containerised cargoes to (i) Europe and (ii) the United States of
America, since 1972-73.

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(a) This information is not available in Australia but the Australian National Line has obtained it from overseas. It is estimated that the average annual increases for Conference
import freight rates into Australia of containerised cargoes, after allowing for adjustments due to competitive influences and other factors after every freight rate increase, have been
as follows:

(i) from Europe-

Per

cent

1972-73

8.5

1973-74

15.0

1974-75

15.0

1975-76

11.5

1976-77

11.0

1977-78

5.0

1978-79

7.0

1979-80

4.7

1980-81

8.6

(ii) from the United States of America-

Per

cent

1972-73

20

1973-74

10

1974-75

18

1975-76

9

1976-77

12

1977-78

9

1978-79

10

1979-80

8

1980-81

9

(b) Same as that provided in response to the honourable member's question upon notice No. 1080 part 1 (b).

Pecuniary Interest in Meat Freight Transported by Qantas to Middle East
(Question No. lUI)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
Further to his answer to my Question No. 626 (Hansard, 10 March 1981, page 628), has a quantity or have quantities of meat freight transported by Qantas to Middle East destinations within the last 5 years belonged to a company or companies in which a past or present member or director of the board or chairman, vice chairman or manager of Qantas Airways Limited has or had a pecuniary interest.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am advised that Qantas is not aware of any meat freight which was carried to Middle East destinations during the past five years which belonged to any company in which a past or present member or director of the board or chairman, vice chairman or manager of Qantas has or had a pecuniary interest.
Departmental Air Travel: Department of Transport
(Question No. 1140)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :
(1) How many travel warrants have been issued for his Departmental officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980 to 31 March 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this travel.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable ~ember's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) Records maintaiped by my Department are not in a' form that wduld readily provide the detail sought and I would not be prepared to authorise the resources required to extract the specific information requested.
Departmental Air Travel: Department of Aboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 1149)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:

2602 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(1) How many travel warrants have been issued for Department of Aboriginal Affairs officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980 to 31 March 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this travel.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(l) and (2) Information to answer the question is not readily available in departmental records. I am not prepared to authorise the use of resources to identify the particular information necessary to answer the question.

Social Security Expenditures for OECD Countries

(Question No. 1177)

Dr KI~gman asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 8 Apnl1981:

Is he able to provide the (a) gross national social security expenditures and (c) the latter as

parpoedruccet~ta(bge)

of the former (defining (b) to include expenditures under

public medical care systems and cash payments under public

welfare programs including age, survivor, unemployment and

disability insurance payments) for OIleD countries' if so

what are the details.

',

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

A number of attempts have been made to compare different countries' spending on social security as a percentage of GDP or GNP.

Unfortunately such studies encounter a number of definitional and technical problems. These problems are discussed in an article 'International Comparisons of Social Security E~penditur~', that appeared in Social Security Quarterly, Wmter/Spnng 1977, Vol. 5, No.1.

International comparisons of social security expenditure may be misleading for a number of reasons.

Some of the problems are:

comparisons generally include only direct puhlic sector expenditure and do not include contributions towards welfare outside the public sector;

taxation concessions or deductions may be provided iristead of or as well as cash payments;
other forms of subsidies towards Jiving costs may not be included in the total of welfare expenditure;
differing economic circumstances (e.g. level of unemployment) will require differing levels of social security expenditure.
For these and other reasons international comparisons of social security expenditure are not only extremely difficult to make, but are of limited value for ascertaining the adequacy of such expenditure in meeting the welfare needs of communities.
Expenditure by OECD countries on education, income maintenance and health during the early 1960s and mid 19708 formed part of a study by the OECD in 1978 (PlIblic Expenditure Trends, Studies in Resource Allocation, OECD, June 1978-see especially Table 6). However, the study warned that problems of data availability and their interpretation limit the conclusions which could be drawn. In addition, it was stressed that since the countries concerned differ in terms of their historical experience with public expenditure, their institutions, and their national tastes and values, caution should be exercised when basing conclusions on such international comparisons.
Tax Revenues, OECD Countries
(Question No. 1179)
Dr Klugman asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
Is he able to state what are the total (Federal, State and local where applicable) tax revenues as a percentage of gross domestic product by type of tax: (a) indirect taxes (sales, value added and excise), (b) personal income tax, (c) company income tax, (d) employer paid social security tax, (e) employee and self-employed paid social security tax, (f) property taxes, (g) other and (h) total, for OECD countries; if so, what are the details.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is incorporated in the followingtable:

MAJOR TAXATION REVENUES AS PROPORTIONS OF GDP-OECD COUNTRIES, 1978

Indirect taxes(a)

Personal income tax(b)

Company income tax (c)

Employer
paid social ,eeutity tax

Employee, selfemployed and non-employed paid social security tax(d)

Property taxes(e)

Other(f)

Total

Australia Austria
Belgium
Canada Denmark
Finland France
Germany Greece'" Ireland Italy
Japan Luxembourg
Netherlands New Zealand Norway

7.89
12.69
11.16 7.62 15.68
14.07 12.07 9.35
ILl 15.33 8.30
3.59 8.50
11.11 6.57 17.58

12.59
9.84 15.45
10.16 22.23
16.13 5.21
11.30 3.01
9.56 6.67
5.28
13.24
12.37 18.03
17.16

3.07 1.32
2.63 3.55
1.38
1.57 1.85
2.19 1.14 1.67
2.88
4.43 10.68
2.93 2.42 2.29

6.32 8.52
n.a. 0.23
3.76
11.78 6.88 4.05 2.91
9.03
3.67 7.78
7.88
n.a. 8.44

2.56

2.70 28.81

6.35

1.20

3.71

41.43

4.74

1.24

0.44 44.18

n.a.

3.11

6.69

31.13

0.35

2.66

1.06 43.59

0.84

0.17

36.54

4.89

1.32

2.55 39.67

5.94

1.11

1.05 37.82

3.S4

3.42

1.56 28.12

n.a.

1.96

1.95

33.38

4.23

1.20

0.27

32.58

3.42

2.06

1.61

24.06

6.42

2.57

0.69

49.88

9.57

1.93

1.00 46.79

2.65

0.69

30.36

n.a.

0.83

0.64 46.94

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2603

Employee, self-

employed and

Personal Company Employer non-employed

Indirecl income income paid social

paid social Property

ta"es(a)

tax(b)

lax(c) security tax security tax(d) taxes(e) Other(f)

Total

Portugal
Spain . Sweden Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom
United States

9.68

2.87

n.a.

4.85

4.17

1.24

11.91

22.55

1.63

5.92

11.44

1.99

6.86

8.82

0.99

8.47

11.44

2.47

4.51

10.41

3.44

5.17 9.04 13.69
n.a. n.a. 3.72
4.48

2.61

0.39

5.43 26.15

n.a.

1.17

2.29

22.76

0.61

0.44

2.67

53.50

n.a.

2.26

9.86

31.47

n.a:

1.23

4.63

22.53

2.49

4.13

1.73

34.45

3,07

3.65

0.63

30.\9

TotalOECD'2I

9.69

11.68

2.70

5.96

3.42

1.84

0.5\

35.80

(1) 1977. (2) Excluding Greece.
NOTES: (a) Includes sales taxes and value added taxes; excise; import duties; export duties; taxes on investment goods; taxes on specific services; and other international taxes. (b) Personal income tax includes capital gains taxes levied on individuals and does not include employee or employer social
security contributions. (c) Includes capital gains taxes levied on companies. (d) Employee's social security contributions cover compulsory contributions made by employees either as a general levy or
for specified purposes such as health insurance. (e) Includes rates, land taxes; taxes on net wealth; estate, inheritance and gift duties; taxes on financial transactions; and
non-recurrent taxes on property. (f) A residual item which includes payroll tax, vehicle registration fees, broadcasting licences, etc. It also covers some re-
funds of taxes and taxes not allocated directly to other categories. Source: Revenue Statistics of OECD Member Countries, 1965-79 OECD 1980.

Value Added Tax, OECD Countries
(Question No. 1180)
Dr Klugman asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 8 April 1981 :
(I) Is he able to provide the latest standard rates for value added tax for the OECD countries.
(2) If so, what is the proportion of goods and services affected by the tax in each case.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) and (2) The attached table sets out the rates of value added tax (VAT) for those OECD countries where a VATis imposed. The information in the table refers to the various VAT regimes as at July 1980. While the proportions of final consumption expenditure subject to VAT are not available, the attached table does describe the basic coverage of the VAT in each country.

VALUE-ADDED TAXES OF OECD COUNTRIES: RATES, COVERAGE AND EXEMPTIONS

Country

Rates (per cent) Coverage( I)

Exemptions(2)

Australia Austria
Belgium
Canada

Standard Standard

30 Perfumes; carpets and rugs; Transfer of immovable property;

furskins; tapestries; jewellery; certain scientific and cultural

motor vehicles; sound reproactivities; banking and insurance

duction equipment

18 Taxable items not subject to a

special rate

Food; leasing and hiring of im-

movable property; hospital, medi-

cal and dental services; certain

entertainment services; public

transport; books and newspapers;

agriculture and forestry

25 Automobiles; jewellery; furs; radio Sales of previously-occupied im-

and television sets; alcoholic movable property; leasing of im-

drinks

movable property; (4)medical,

dental and legal services; edu-

cation; banking; insurance

16 Taxable items not subject to a

special rate

6 Food; (3)tobacco; non-motor

fuels; medicine, newspapers and

books; fertilizers and certain

services

2604 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 198\

Answers to Questions

Country Denmark Finland France
Germany
Greece Ireland
Italy
Japan Luxembourg

Rates (per cent) Coverage(1 )

Exemptions(2)

Standard 20.25 All taxable goods and services

Sales of previously-occupied immovable property; medical and dental services; supply of gas, water, electricity and heating for household use; banking and in-
surance; education

Standard Standard

33t Automobiles; jewellery; furs; teleSale of previously-occupied im-

vision sets; perfumary

movable property; leasing of im-

movable property; (4)medical,

dental and legal services; edu-

cation; banking and insurance

17.6 Taxable items not subject to a

special rate

7 Food; (3)books; medicine;

newspapers; public transport

13 Taxable items not subject to a Sale of previously-occupied im-

special rate

movable property; leasing of im-

movable property; (4)medical and

dental services; education; bank-

ing; insurance; postal services;

radio and television broadcasting,

except advertising

6.5 Food; (3)newspapers; books; or-

chestra performances; legal ser-

vices; municipal transportation

Standard Zero(5)

25 Taxable items not subject to a Sales of previously-occupied im-

special rate

movable property; leasing of im-

movable property; (4)medical,

dental and legal services; edu-

cation; banking and insurance;

broadcasting and television,

except advertising; transportation

of persons

10 New buildings; medicine; goods

subject to separate excise taxes,

such as automobiles, motor fuel,

alcohol and tobacco; real property;

o

radio and television sets Food; (3)non-motor fuel; clothing;

medicine

Zero

35 Jewellery; furs; large automobiles; record players
18 Beef; motor vehicles 14 Taxable items not subject to a
special rate 9 Non-luxury hotel and restaurant
services 6 Food; (3)medicines; gas and elec-
tricity for household use; lowpriced housing
oI Pasta; bread -Newspapers-

Sale of previously-occupied structures; leasing of immovable properly; (4)medical and dental services; education; banking;
insurance; public transportation; postal and telegraph services

Standard

10 Taxable items not subject to a Sale of previously-occupied im-

special rate

movable property; leasing of im-

movable property; (4)medical arid

dental services; banking; in-

surance; postal and telephone ser-

vices

5 Food; e16ctricity and fuels for

heating and lighting; books; legal

services; transportation of persons

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2605

Country Netherlands
New Zealand Norway
Portugal Spain . Sweden

Rates (per cent)

2

16,19 or 21.5

Standard

18

4

Coverage ( 1) Basic foodstuffs Private motor vehicles Taxable items not subject to a special rate
Food; public transportation; medicine; books

Exemptions (2)
Sale of previously-occupied immovable property; leasing of immovable property; (4) medical and dental services; education; banking; insurance; radio and television; broadcasting, except advertising; postal, telegraph and telephone services

Standard Zero

20 All taxable goods and services

11.11
o

Fishing and selling of fish by fisherman
A rate for investment which applies to buildings and other business assets used by the owner in the manufacture of goods and in mining

Sales of goods required for the professions of physicians, dentists and dental mechanics and the services of these persons; postal services; newspapers; books; banking and insurance services; cultural and entertainment services

Standard 23.46 (effective)(6)

Taxable items not subject to a special rate

Water; products required by den-
tists and dental mechanics; postal services; medical and veterinary services; war materials; medicines; fuels for heating and production of
energy; newspapers

Switzerland Turkey(7) United Kingdom
United States

14.08 or 4.69

Immovable property; hotel and restaurant trade; services relating to transport facilities, e.g. bridges, roads, airports, etc.

Standard Zero(5)

15 Taxable items not subject to the zero rate
o Food; children's clothing; fuel and power; new buildings; transportation of persons; books

Sale of previously-occupied immovable property; leasing of immovable property; (4)medical and dental services; education; banking; insurance; postal services

(1) The list of items covered is illustrative, not exhaustive. (2) This lists the more important exemptions, but is not a complete list of all exemptions.
(3) Food purchased for on-premises consumption, such as at a restaurant, is taxed at the standard rate.
(4) The leasing of immovable property to taxable persons is a taxable transaction. This allows the lessee a deduction for tax paid to the lessor.
(5) The 'zero rate' treats the taxable item as incurring a rate of zero on its sale, but allows a credit for tax paid on purchases. Thus an item taxed at a rate of zero bears no tax. This is in contrast to an exempt transaction where no tax is charged on the sale, but no deduction or credit is allowed for tax paid on purchases.
(6) The normal rate of VAT generally applicable to all taxable transactions is 19 per cent on the taxable base including the VAT itself. Thus the effective rate is 23.46 per cent on the taxable base excluding VAT itself.
(7) As at 1978.

2606 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Television Program 'To Market, To Market'
(Question No. 1184)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 8 April 1981 :
(1) Is it a fact that, after 21 years, the ABC Brisbane television segment To Market. To Market, terminated on 3 April 1981.
(2) Has the Queensland Chamber of Fruit and Vegetables protested strongly against the programming decision.
(3) Who made the decision and for what reasons was it made.
(4) What will replace this program and another recently terminated program called Bon Appetit.
(5) Are the replacement programs Australian-made.
(6) Will he intervene to re-instate the program To Market. To Market, perhaps at an alternative viewing time.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The final To Market. To Market program in Brisbane was televised by the ABC on 9 April 1981.
(2) The Queensland Chamber of Fruit and Vegetable Industries Co-operative Ltd requested the ABC to continue the program.
(3) Senior ABC officers of the ABC's Program Division. It was considered that the program no longer adequately served its original objective.
(4) Programs designed to appeal to family viewing audiences. Other consumer affairs programs are to be developed.
(5) Some will be produced in Australia.
(6) The ABC's responsibility to the community as a whole is to present programs which reach the highest possible standard and reflect the wide range of interests found within the community. This is not an area in which I can direct the Commission.

Integration of Handicapped Children

(Question No. 1196)

Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:

(1) Does the Schools Commission recommend that the
philosophy and general application-of integration practice should be the subject ofcontinuing research.

(2) If so, what provision has been made to initiate this research.

(3) How do the approaches of the various State Departments of Education differ in respect of integration of handicapped children.

(4) Does the Schools Commission advocate investigation of

ways in which the Commonwealth may assist in the early

identification of disabilities in children and intervention to

correct disabilities where possible.

.

(5) Is this function being performed by ANSUA.

(6) Will the Schools Commission investigate the work of ANSUA.

(7) What activities have been undertaken during the International Year of Disabled Persons in respect of the following educational programs: (a) training of special education teachers, (b) provision of support personnel, (c) attention to the educational environment, (d) extension of the age range

for the education of handicapped young people, (e) early intervention, (f) transition programs, (g) integration into regular schools, (h) provision for isolated handicapped students and (j) educational services for severely handicapped children who are homebound or who live long-term in residential institutions.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) In its Report for the Triennium 1982-84 the Schools Commission has undertaken to foster research on the integration of handicapped children into regular schools.
(3) As described in the Schools Commission's Report for the Triennium 1982-84 the diverse approaches of the various State Departments of Education in respect of integration of handicapped children include:
(a) the establishment of a flexible placement system which seeks appropriate educational provision for all students;
(b) provision of appropriate education within a wide range of schooling options rather than the adoption of integration as the ultimate goal for all handicapped students;
(c) working to a policy of meeting students' needs with their peers at neighbourhood schools with as little restriction as possible;
(d) maintaining all students, except the moderately, severely and multiply handicapped in regular schools;
(e) the provision of segregated special schools which work towards preparing handicapped students for future social integration in the community.
(4) In its Report for the Triennium 1982-84 the Schools Commission undertakes to investigate ways in which the Commonwealth may assist in early intervention programs.
(5) Yes.
(6) The Schools Commission advises that its proposed investigation will include a study of the work undertaken by such organisations as ANSUA.
(7) During the International Year of Disabled Persons activities which have been undertaken in respect of the following educational programs include:
(a) Training of special education teachers-No specific activities have been undertaken by the Schools Commission. However, funding for such activities is available under the Commission's Services and Development Program.
(b) Provision of support personnel-Basically this is a matter for State education authorities. However, funding available under the Schools Commission's Special Education Program for special schools and classes, integration and the development of programs for severely handicapped children may be used for this purpose.
(c) Attention to the educational environment-Funds available to special schools under the Schools Commission's Capital Grants Program can be used for the provision and improvement of buildings and equipment.
During International Year of Disabled Persons the Schools Commission is funding:
a national co-operative study, involving government and the larger non-government education authorities, of the school facilities required to meet the needs of handicapped children in special and regular schools;

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2607

a national conference to focus on facilities required for handicapped school children.
(d) Extension of the age range for the education of handicapped young people-No Commonwealth funds are available for this purpose through Schools Commission funding. However, recommendations for such an extension have been made in the report on the national survey of special education undertaken for the Schools Commission by the Schonell Educational Research Centre.
(e) Early intervention-The Schools Commission has undertaken in its Report for the Triennium 1982-84 to investigate ways in which the Commonwealth may assist in early intervention programs.
(f) Transition programs-The Schools Commission has drawn attention in its Report for the Triennium 1982-84 to an increasing interest in transition training for adolescent students, an interest which is characteristic of most schools, including special schools. The Schools Commission supports developments in the States and Territories which include the framing of policies on work experience and vocational training; the provision of training in independent living skills and techniques; vocational counselling; and the provision of pre-vocational and vocational courses, daily living skill courses and access courses for vocational study by Colleges of Technical and Further Education.
(g) Integration into regular schools-In 1981 the Government is making available through the Schools Commission's Special Education Program $1.059 million for the integration of handicapped children into regular schools.
(h) Provision for isolated handicapped students-In its Report for the Triennium 1982-84 the Schools Commission has drawn attention to the needs of isolated handicapped children and it has made such children eligible for funding to attend neighbourhood regular schools under the integration program.
(j) Educational services for severely handicapped children who are homebound or who live long-term in residential institutions-In 1981 the Commonwealth Government has made $2.118 million available for the development of educational programs for severely handicapped children.
Depo-Provera
(Question No. 1203)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to (a) an article by Jan Mayman in the National Times, 15-21 March 1981 (page 4), pointing out hazards of the use of DepoProvera as a contraceptive and (b) the reported banning of the drug in the United States of America.
(2) If so, will the Minister take steps (a) to recommend to Australian doctors that the drug not be used for Aboriginal women and (b) to ensure that special efforts be made in advising them to ensure that they (i) understand the available alternatives, (ii) have an opportunity to discuss these with an informed person who can communicate effectively with them, with time to make an informed choice, especially in view of the reported high incidence among Aborigines of diabetes and other conditions which allegedly increase the hazards of use of the drug.
(3) If the Minister will not take these actions, will he request that all users of Depo-Provera for contraception be

recorded for statistical analysis of (a) safety, (b) side-effects and (c) reliability.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) I am informed that Depo-Provera has been available on the Australian market for many years for use in certain indications but not including use as a contraceptive. The Australian Drug Evaluation Committee which advises my colleague, the Minister for Health, on matters relating to the importation and distribution of drugs in Australia, has considered progressively available information on Depo-Provera for contraceptive use on a number of occasions. The Committee is of the opinion that this use of the drug must be regarded as investigational since there are unresolved questions related to its safety for this indication. This statement is included in the product information distributed by the Company for this drug.
As with any drug which is regarded as investigational, ethics dictate that, where the medical practitioner is of the opinion that special circumstances warrant the use of such a drug, there is a responsibility on his part both for adequately informing the patient or the guardian, and for any adverse consequences of the therapy.
In regard to 'informed consent', I appreciate that special care is required in respect of Aboriginal patients. My Department encourages additional training in cultural matters for doctors and other medical professionals who propose to work in areas where there is a significant Aboriginal population and supports the provision of orientation and in-service courses. In addition, most State Health Departments, often with Commonwealth support, employ Aboriginal Health Workers, several hundreds in all, who have important liaison roles. Both of these measures are designed to achieve the quality of communication necessary to ensure that Aboriginal patients are at ease with and have clear understanding in, their contacts with health care personnel.
(3) I have brought the honourable member's suggestion to the notice of my colleague, the Minister for Health.
Disposal of Authorities to Prospect
(Question No. 1205)
Dr Everingham asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the case of BjelkePetersen v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation (A.L.R. 1963 pages 24-30).
(2) If so, can he state whether (a) this report disclosed actions by the appellant who in effect sold for  12,650 assets whose valuation was based solely on the holding of an authority to prospect which had reportedly cost  2,723 some 8 months before, (b) the judgment noted that the appellant was pursuing precisely the same course with respect to another authority to prospect in the State of Queensland, (c) the course referred to was the formation of a company of which the appellant was in effect sole proprietor so that in selling about half the interest in that company to an independent company he could use their capital contribution to cover dividends decided and paid by and to himself and (d) the company the appellant reportedly formed was regarded as a device to avoid a State lav,: providing that an authority to prospect could in effect not be sold at market value.
(3) Is he able to say whether Queensland law has been amended to prevent similar actions regarding the disposal of authorities to prospect.

2608 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. (2) The report of the case is a matter of the public record. (3) I have no information on this matter.

recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.
Mr Viner--The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

Recruitment through Private Employment Agencies: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 1290)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Were any staff of his Department or statutory authorities under his aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
There were no staff of the Department of Primary Industry recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80.
Six statutory authorities recruited staff through private employment agencies in 1979-80. The positions involved with individual costs indicated are:
Australian Canned Fruits CorporationFinancial Controller-$1,812.00
Australian Dairy CorporationClerk Class 6-$1,324.26 Steno-Secretary Grade 2-$921.84 Steno-Secretary Grade 2-$819.00 Steno-Secretary Grade 2-$794.78 Steno-Secretary Grade 2-$778.05 Steno-Secretary Grade 1-$746.20 Teleprinter Operator-$374.00.
Australian Meat and Livestock CorporationSteno-Secretary Grade 1-$672.00
Australian Wheat BoardClerk Class 10-$2,370.00 Clerk Class 7-$1,830.00 Clerk Class 7-$1,773.00 Clerk Class 7-$1,384.00 Clerk Class 5-$1,199.36 Clerk Class 5-$1,137.68 Clerk Class 5-$1,136.00 Clerk Class 5-$1,118.80 Clerk Class 5-$1,088.72 Clerk Class 4-$1,004.00 Clerk Class 2/3-$632.59 Steno-Secretary Grade 2-$783.16 Steno-Secretary Grade 2-$533.00
Australian Wine BoardInternational Marketing Officer-$2,963.00
Australian Wool CorporationInternal Auditor-$2,300.00 Programmer/ Analyst-$I,750.00 Programmer/ Analyst-$I ,300.00 Steno-Secretary Grade 2-$670.80
Recruitment through Private Employment Agencies: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 1296)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Were any staff of the Attorney-General's Department or statutory authorities under the Attorney-General's aegis

No staff of the Attorney-General's Department or statutory authorities under the Attorney-General's aegis were recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80.
Recruitment through Private Employment Agencies: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 1297)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Were any staff of the Department of Social Security or statutory authorities under the Minister's aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Temporary Nursing Sisters for short-term relief and sessional duties in the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service were recruited in Victoria and South Australia through private employment agencies for various periods during 1979-80. The cost to the Department was $92.00 in Victoria. There was no cost in South Australia.

Recruitment through Private Employment Agencies: Department of Transport
(Question No. 1298)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Were any staff of his Department or statutory authorities under his aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Department of Transport, Australian National Airlines Commission and the Australian National Railways Commission did not recruit any staff through private employment agencies in 1979-80. The Australian Shipping Commission used private employment agencies to assist in the recruitment of staff with particular expertise. These are detailed below:

Position
Accountant . . . . . . Accounting Officer Accounting Machine Operator Analyst/Programmer Programmer Computer Scheduler Supply Officer

Cost
$ 1,380.0 419.16 180.00 1,900.00 1,213.00 612.24 1,647.00

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2609

Industrial Action: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 1368)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(1) How many officers or employees in his Department have been (a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to
regulations or other restrictive work actions, in each of the last
2 years.

(2) How many manhours were involved in these actions.

(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike; if so, on what occasions.

(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions; if so on what
occasions.

Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) (a) The number of officers or employees of my Depart-

ment who engaged in strike action in each of the last two years

is as follows:

1979

702

1980

1791

(b) During this period no officer or employee engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions.

(2) During 1979, 4352 manhours were involved in strike action and in 1980, 8007 manhours were lost.

(3) No officers or employees engaged in strike action were paid by the Department during the strike.

(4) During this period no officer or employee engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions.

Approx.

salary

Division level

Nature of outside employment

3rd' 18,000 Part-time taxi driver (from 5.00 p.m. on Friday and from 3 p.m. to 12 midnight on Sundays, from 7 August 1980).

Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department of Finance
(Question No. 1398)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Have any officers and employees of the Department of Finance been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many?
(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment approved in each case?
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes; two.
(2)-

Salary Division level

Nature of outside employment

Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department of Industrial Relations
(Question No. 1396)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

$p.a. Second 35,250
Third 22,359

To present periodical lectures for the Australian Society of Accountants Professional Orientation Program.
Tutor in Computer Science at the Canberra College of Advanced Education.

(1) Have any officers and employees of his Department been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many.
(2) What is the division and approximate salary of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment approved in each case.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes, 3 officers.
(2)-

Approx.

salary

Division level

Nature of outside employment

$p.a.

3rd

21,000 Lecturing and tutoring at college of ad-

vanced education. (3 hours/week 25

February to 27 June 1980).

3rd

16,000 Part-time cocktail waitressing. (4 hours/

night on various nights of the week, frol)l

11 February 1981).

Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department of Transport
(Question No. 1402)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(l) Have any officers and employees of his Department been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many.
(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment approved in each case.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Thirty-three officers and employees have been granted permission to engage in outside employment. This figure excludes those approvals given on occasions to certain specialist staff' who are invited to present lectures at various educational institutions.

2610 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) See following table:

Approx.

salary

Division $ p.a.

Nature of employment

Third Fourth

25,000 Electronics consultant
23,000 Electrical and mechanical repairs
21,000 Fishing vessel insurance surveys
20,500 Toy manufacturing and marketing 20,500 Chauffeur
20,000 Fundraising equipment supplier
17,000 Master of ceremonies
16,500 Musician
15,500 Store assistant 15,500 Salesman
14,000 Driving instructor 14,000 Barman 14,000 Lawnmowing 13,000 Sailing tuition 13,000 Cleaner
9,000 Foot-running commentator 15,500 Electrical work 14,500 Bus driver
14,500 Home electronics
14,500 Stagehand 14,000 Musician 13,300 Engineering repairs 13,300 Taxi-driving 12,500 Photography
12,500 Solar-heating installation 12,500 Watchman 12,500 Fundraising equipment supplier
12,000 Barman
11,000 Stewardess 10,500 Security service 10,000 Usherette 9,000 Disco compere
- 8,000 ---S-to-re-as-s-ist-an-t--------------

Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department of Business and Consumer Affairs

(Question No. 1408)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April, 1981:

(1) Have any officers and employees of his Department
been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many.

(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was
the nature of outside employment approved in each case.

Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's questions are as follows:

(1) Thirty four (34) officers have been granted permission to engage in outside employment.

(2)-

Division Salary

$

3rd

23,224

3rd

17,718

3rd

15,113

3rd

12,272

3rd

14,247

3rd

15,981

Nature of Employment
Lecturer Entertainer Trotting Stipendiary Steward Instructor Lecturer Lecturer

Division Salary

$

3rd

17,718

3rd

15,981

3rd

20,618

3rd

18,879

4th

9,946

3rd

17,718

3rd

17,718

3rd

12,272

3rd

12,272

3rd

12,272

3rd

12,272

3rd

12,272

3rd

12,272

3rd

17,718

3rd

14,686

3rd

13,807

4th

15,728

3rd

16,848

3rd

14,247

3rd

13,420

3rd

12,652

3rd

18,299

3rd

13,037

3rd

14,247

3rd

10,157

4th

10,255

3rd

14,247

3rd

15,113

Nature ofEmployment
Lecturer Sports Commentator Bookmaker's Clerk Bookmaker's Clerk Distributor of household and personal
goods Marketing partnership Marketing partnership Service Station Attendant Barman Bottleshop Attendant Bottleshop Attendant Bookmaker's Clerk Book-keeper Musician Security Officer Tupperware dealer Alderman Pool Maintenance Mechanic Language Teacher Avon Representative Con-Stand Consultant Salesman Taxi Driver Casual Waitress Barman Casual Waitress Casual work with TNT. Casual Model

Overseas Travel: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 1452)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(l) How many officers and employees of the Attorney General's Department travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances etc.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answers to the honourable member's questions:
(1) 12. (2) The total cost to my department was $56,743.
Overseas Travel: Department of Transport
(Question No. 1454)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances, etc.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as followings:
(1) One hundred and fifty-five.

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2611

(2) $361,947.61 is the total expenditure for overseas travel excluding travel to Papua New Guinea. To extract from departmental records expenditure for travel to Papua New Guinea would require use of resources I am unwilling to authorise.
Overseas Travel: Department of Education
(Question No. 1456)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, acccommodation, allowances, etc.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable members question is as follows:
(1) Seven officers of my Department travelled overseas during 1979-80. Ten visits were involved.
(2) $12,020. The cost of three visits was not met by my Department.
Overseas Travel: Department of Aboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 1463)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances, etc.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) The number of officers and employees of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs who travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80 was two (2) and the total cost of that travel was $5,764.36.
Overseas Travel: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 1465)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances, etc.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Seven officers of the former Department of Home Affairs travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) The total cost to the Department of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances, etc., was $33,550.

Air Travel in Australia: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 1472)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What sum was paid by his Department, or by Departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by his Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The sum paid by my Department, or by Departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by my Department to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80 was:

Airlines of New South Wales Ansett Airlines Ansett Airlines of South Australia Bass Air . . . . Bizjets Boomerang Airways Bush Pilots . . Cobden Airways Hazelton Airlines Kendall Airways MacRobertson Miller Airlines North-West Airlines Sky-West Airlines TAA . . . . .

$ 165.20 195,018.01 5,320.00 144.00 1,624.70 637.00 8,728.91 420.50 356.50 467.00
7,128.39 136.00
186.80 383,622.91

Air Travel in Australia: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs
(Question No. 1477)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What sum was paid by his Department, or by Departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by his Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Airline
TAA . Ansett Airlines MacRobertson Miller Airlines East West Airlines Aero Pelican (NSW) Air North Bush Pilots Airways Connair . . . Murin Airways Air Tasmania NT Air Charter Tillair (NT)

Payments 1979-80
652,000.99 450,828.62 96,389.44
30,071.05 1,310.90 1,619.40 8,154.70 16,443.91
640.00 2,984.50 2,231.00
448.00

2612 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Airline
Alice Springs Aero Club Gove Flying Club Groote Eylandt Air Charter Missionary Aviation Fellowship (NT)

Payments 1979-80
118.66 158.60 163.50 7,969.04

Air Travel in Australia: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 1478)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
What sum was paid by the Attorney-General's Department or by Departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by that Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The amount paid by the Attorney-General's Department for air travel within Australia during the financial year 1979-80 was $305,197 to Ansett Airlines of Australia, $580,361 to Trans Australia Airlines, $3,144 to East-West Airlines Ltd, $6,154 to MacRobertson Miller Airline Services and $162 to Kendall Airlines.
Air Travel in Australia: Department of Education
(Question No. 1482)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What sum was paid by his Department, or by Departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by his Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The amounts paid to airlines for air travel within Australia during the 1979-80 financial year were:

Ansell Airlines Trans Australia Airlines MacRobertson Miller Airlines Bush Pilots Airways East-West Airlines Conn air Transwest Aerial Enterprises Air North . . . Kingfisher Aviation Opal Air Thorpe's Transport Rundle's Air Darwin Aviation Club Mailair Charter Others

$ 1,158,619
974,625 177,253 41,474 18,261 12,571
8,710 4,730 3,917 3,480 2,540 2,443 1,813 1,665 1,106 6,668

Air Travel in Australia: Department of Horne Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 1491)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
What sum was paid by his Department, or by Departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by his Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) $221,789 was paid to Trans-Australia Airlines during 1979-80.
(b) $54,893 was paid to Ansett Airlines of Australia during 1979-80.
(c) $3,965 was paid to MacRobertson Miller Airlines during 1979-80.
Head Office, Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 1498)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Are any sections of the Head Office of his Department not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many staff are in each.
(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so, when.
Mr Nixon The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Sections of the Head Office of my Department not located in Canberra and staff in each are as follows:
Management Services Branch; Financial Management Section; Financial Operations Sub-section; Investigations Unit.
New South Wales-4 Victoria-6 Queensland-I South Australia--l
Management Services Branch; Internal Audit Section.
New South Wales-l Victoria--I Qucensland-l South Australia-l
Industry No.2 (Dairy Products) Division Production and Inspection Services Branch Technical Services and Export Standards Section.
Victoria-5
Industry No.4 (Sugar and Horticultural Crops) Division. Sugar, Canned Fruits and Inspection Services Branch. Technical Services and Export Standards Section.
Victoria--6
Industry No. 6 (Wool) Division. Production Branch. Australian Wool Measurement Standards Authority.
New South Wales-3

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2613

Agriculture and Food Services Division. Grants Administration and Farm Services Branch. Australian Plague Locust Commission. Field Operations Sub-section.
New South Wales-3 Queensland-6
(Note: The Government has decided that Commonwealth staffing involvement in the Australian Plague Locust Commission is to be terminated. )
(2) Decisions to relocate units of government employment to Canberra are taken by government on the advice of the Location of Australian Government Employment Committee (LAGE), an inter-departmental committee chaired by the Public Service Board. The advice tendered to government by the LAGE Committee is based on submissions by the relevant department and consultations with interested bodies such as staff organisations. Any plans to relocate the Sections in Canberra is a matter for LAGE Committee consideration and subsequent decision by government.
Home Telephone Rentals: Department of the Treasury
(Question No. 1525)
Mr Bungey asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(l) How many officers and employees of his Department have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully or (b) partially paid by his Department.
(2) What was the cost to his Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) One officer has a fully-charged telephone. The telephone is for official use only. The officer in question maintains a separate telephone for the private use of himself and his family.
(b) Forty.
(2) $8,381.56.
Recycling of Paper: Department onndustry and Commerce
(Question No. 1572)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Has any action been taken by his Department to re-cycle paper; if so, what action?
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
In regard to the Department's office in the Edmund Barton Building, Canberra, the Department of Administrative Services has let a contract for the re-cycling of paper generated by the tenants of that building. Further details of this arrangement can be obtained from that Department.
Recycling of Paper: Department of Transport
(Question No. 1584)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Has any action been taken by his Department to re-cycle paper; if so, what action.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Cleaning contracts for my Department which include waste-paper collection are under the control of the Department of Administrative Services. I understand that in most major centres the Department's bulk waste-paper is re-cycled by pUlping or shredded for use as packing material.
Recycling of Paper: Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 1588)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(1) Has any action been taken by his Department to recycle paper, if so what action.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Department of Science and Technology recycles paper:
(a) by overprinting letterhead where changes in title or in location occur;
(b) by converting unrequired paper to other uses, e.g. note pads; and
(c) by sending used paper to outside organisations for pulping.
Tea Services: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 1608)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many (a) full-time and (b) part-time staff are employed on tea-making and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (ii) other offices of the Attorney-General's Department.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in the Department in 1979-80.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answers to the honourable member's questions:
(1) (a) There are no full-time staff members employed on tea making services.
(I) (b) There are ten part-time staff on tea-making, four in Head Office and six in other offices.
(2) (i) The cost of salaries in the 1979-80 financial year was $61,608.56.
(2) (ii) There were no other charges in that year. Staff contributions met the cost of consumables.
United States Tariff on Imports of Raw Wool
(Question No. 1624)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
What action has been taken to obtain reductions of the United States of America tariff on imports of raw wool during the last 3 years.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
One of the Government's main objectives during the recent Multilateral Trade Negotiations was to obtain a substantial reduction.in the wool tariff in the United States of America. The USA is the only major industrialised country to maintain a duty on raw wool imports.

2614 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

The Government was successful in securing a 60 per cent reduction in the tariff on raw apparel wool-the maximum reductionthat the US Administration was empowered to offer.
This reduction is being phased in over three years, from 25.5 cents per lb (clean equivalent) to 10 cents per lb. Phasing commenced on 1 January 1980 and the current rate of duty is 15 cents per lb.
200-Mile Fishing Zone
(Question No. 1641)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Has a declaration of a 200-mile fishing zone been made in r~pect of (a) Cocos Island (b) Christmas Island (c) Heard Island and (d) Macquarie Island: if so, when and what action has been taken to enforce it.
(2) If a declaration has not been made in any case, what is the reason.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's questions is as follows:
(1) A 200-mile fishing zone was declared in relation to (a) Cocos Island, (b) Christmas Island, (c) Heard Island and (d) MacquarieIslandon 1 November 1979.
Surveillance patrols by RAAF Orion aircraft of these territories is undertaken on an opportunity basis. In addition, secondary sources of surveillance (commercial aircraft, local fishing vessels, research vessels under contract to the Australian government etc.) provide supplementary information on foreign fishing activity.
(2) See (1).

Export ofLive Sheep
(Question No. 1645)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(I) How many live sheep have been shipped from Australia in each of the last two years.
(2) How many of these were (a) merino rams, (b) merino wethers, (c) vasectomised merino rams, (d) merino ewes and (e) other breeds.
(3) How many were loaded at each port. (4) What were the respective ports of destination.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

1979

1980

(1)Slaughter Sheep Breeding Sheep

5,244,494 5,676,990

28,069

62,099

5,272,563 5,739,089

(2)Merino Rams Merino Wethers* Vasectomised Merino Rarus Merino Ewes Other Breeds

57 5,165,913
17,220 89,373

318 5,540,668
44,287 153,816

5,272,563 5,739,089
*Includes a small proportion ofcrossbred wethers.

(3) A. LIVE SHEEP EXPORTS BY PORT AND TYPE 1979

Merino rams

Merino Vasectomised

wethers

rams

Merino ewes

Other breeds

Total

Adelaide Albany Brisbane Bunbury Devonport Esperance Fremantle Geraldton Hobart Melbourne Portland Perth Sydney WaUaroo
Total

19 2,047,693 140,715
32,849 52,265 354,216 2,155,745 11,050 99,361 17 206,260 3 18 65,759
57 5,165,913

34 17,186
17,220

2,580 6,000
420
12,646
33,227
14,748 224
9,513
15

2,050,292 146,715 420 32,883 64,911 354,216
2,206,158 11,050 114,109 241
225,773 3
33 65,759

89,373 5,272,563

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2615

Adelaide Albany Brisbane Bunbury Devonport Esperance Fremantle Geraldton Hobart Melbourne Portland Perth Sydney Wallaroo
Total

(3) B. LIVE SHEEP EXPORTS BY PORT AND TYPE 1980

Merino rams

Merino Vasectomised

wethers

rams

Merino ewes

9 1,590,165 29,516

143,919 403,850 2,553,243
42,072 20,549
305 713,081

4

..

44,273

318

5,540,668

..
44,287 44,287

Other breeds 29,879
220
.. 39,422
66,220
748 16,668
659
153,816

Total
1,620,053 29,516
22.0.
183,341 403,850 2,663,750 42,072
20,549 1,053
729,749
663 44,273
5,739,089

Bahrain Belgium Brazil Dubai Hungary India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Kuwait Libya Malaysia Mauritius Papua New Guinea Peru Qatar Romania Saudi Arabia Singapore South Africa South Yemen Taiwan Thailand Uruguay USA
Total

(4) A. LIVE SHEEP EXPORTS BY DESTINATION 1979

Merino rams

Merino Vasectomised

wethers

rams

Merino ewes

88,293

7 8,300
9 18

1,605,144

;,

19

1,597,540

489,971

1,700

1,344

184

183,000
1,020,878 81,349
3 88,394

17,036

57 5,165,913

17,220

Other breeds 9,748
5 99
280 38,796
174 30 6 12,408
60 3
150 20
27,104
409
6 20

Total
98,041 5
106 8,300
9 18 280 1,643,940 193 30 6 1,609,948 489,971 1,760 1,531 150 20 183,000 27,104 1,020,878 98,794 3 88,394 6 20

55 89,373

55 5,272,563

\

2616 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(4) B. LIVE SHEEP EXPORTS BY DESTINATION 1980

Merino rams

Merino Vasectomised

wethers

rams

Merino ewes

Other breeds

Total

Argentina
Bahrain Brazil Chile .
Dubai Falkland Is. India . . Indonesia
Iran Japan Kuwait
Libya Malaysia Mauritius
Mexico . New Zealand
Peru
Qatar Romania Saudi Arabia Singapore South Africa South Yemen
Uruguay USSR

20 161,156
2
8,000
97
1,365,297
1,473,868 845,935
900 55
203,406 9
1,320,200 62,456
99,450
135

1,500 12,755
199
4,983 24,850

32 5
5 483 1,369 46,997 220 19,670 13,989
16,668 18 131
42,750 1l,379
2 1
3 94

20 161,156
34 5
8,000 5
580 1,369 1,412,294
220 1,495,038
872,679
1,099 16,723
18 131 203,406 42,759 1,336,562 87,308
1 99,450
3 229

Total

318 5,540,668

44,287

153,816 5,739,089

Note: The information in these tables has been drawn from Department of Primary Industry records.

Flexitime Absences during Protest Stoppages
(Question No. 1664)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
Have any studies been made of the use of tlexitime absences by public servants on days in which Public Service unions have planned protest stoppages or days of non-attendance; if so, what are the findings.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No such studies have been undertaken. Flexitime schemes, once introduced within certain parameters, are a matter for administration by individual departments. In providing departments with advice on the administrative arrangements to be applied in relation to industrial action, the Public Service Board has stated that under no circumstances should staff who absent themselves without authority be permitted to claim any period of their absence as tlexitime.
Central Classification Committees
(Question No. 1666)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 8 April 1981 :
What central classification committees have been appointed under the Public Service Act during the last 5 years.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
None. Although great use was made of these Committees in the immediate post-war years and through the 1950's, they

have not been used since the early 1960's. The establishment and continuing review of employment groups in the Service, following the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission's decisions in the Professional Engineers' Case in 1961, the broadbanding of classification structures, and the tendency to take to arbitration those classification issues which could not be resolved by conciliation, has created a situation in which the establishment of Central classification Committees has not been warranted.
Commissioner for Community Relations: Report on Fitzroy Crossing
(Question No. 1669)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(1) Has the Attorney-General's attention been drawn to the statement by the Commissioner for Community Relations at page 16 of his 5th Annual Report, for 1979-80, that Appendix H to that Report entitled 'Report on Fitzroy Crossing, Western Australia,' is objective.
(2) If so, what aspects of that Appendix does the Attorney General understand to be inaccurate, biased, simplistic in its approach and racist as detailed in his letter cited at page 15 of the Report.
(3) Who wrote the report on the Fitzroy Crossing.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes.
(2) The description referred to in the honourable member's question was used by the Premier of Western Australia in a

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2617

letter to the Prime Minister. The Attorney-General considered that some aspects of the report were open to criticism. Particulars of those aspects arc set out in the fourth paragraph of the Attorney-Genera!'s letter set out at page 15 of the Commissioner's Report.
(3) The Attorney-General notes that at page 19 of the Commissioner's Annual Report the Commissioner stated that the report was prepared by his Office, but the Attorney General is not aware of the identity of the person or persons who wrote the report.
Legal Aid
(Question No. 1671)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Has the Attorney-Genera!'s attention been drawn to a comment in the 1979-80 Annual Report of the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission that unless economies in the conduct of cases be practised by such (private legal) practitioners it is probable that State and Territory Commissions and other legal aid authorities will be obliged to rely to a greater extent on the services of salaried lawyers, especially in criminal trials.
(2) Does this trend accord with Government policy; if not, what is heing done to reverse the trend.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) It has always been the Government's view that legal aid should be provided by both private legal practitioners and salaried lawyers. The legislation estahlishing the State and Australian Capital Territory Commissions provide accordingly. The Government, however, does maintain a continuing scrutiny of the effectiveness of existing arrangements for the provision of legal aid, so that funds can be most effectively, efficiently, and economically applied. The Government has provided funds for a cost comparison study between salaried and private lawyers. This study is expected to be completed later this year, and the results will be closely considered. It should be noted that all State and Territory Commissions are independent statutory authorities and hence it will be primarily for those Commissions to decide whether any changes should be made to existing arrangements.
5th Annual Report of the Commissioner for Community Relations
(Question No. 1673)
Mi' Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Has the Attorney-General's attention been drawn to the statement in the 5th Annual Report, for 1979-80, of the Commissioner for Community Relations, at page 99, that the solution to the white problems lies with the white governments and white bureaucracies; the answer to black problems lies with the power that oppressed the Aborigines in the first place.
(2) Has the Attorney-General given consideration to the meaning of this statement; if so, what is that meaning.
Mr VinerThe Attorney-General has provided the following answers to the honourable member's questions:
(1) Yes.

(2) The elucidation of particular statements in the Commissioner's Report is something that would have to be done by the Commissioner himself, as the author of that report.
Social Security: Aborigines, Western Australia
(Question No. 1676)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
How many Aborigines on (a) Lake Gregory Station, and (b) Billiluna Station, WA are in receipt of (i) aged pensions (ii) unemployment or sickness benefits and (iii) other forms of Commonwealth social security payments.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
As at 28 April 1981 , the number of social security recipients on each of the two stations is shown in the table below:

Station

Type of income supplement

Lake Gregory Billiluna

Age pension Unemployment or sickness benefit Family allowance Supporting parent's benefit Other pension

8

15

17

6

12

4

3

3

4

Although social security claim forms do not provide for identification of the racial extraction of claimants, I am
advised that all of the social security recipients on the two stations are Aboriginals.

Air Traffic Controllers
(Question No. 1677)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many Air Traffic Controllers have retired on invalidity grounds in each of the last 5 years.
(2) What was the nature of their disabilities.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) 1976-11; 1977-18; 1978-19; 1979-14; 1980-17.
(2) Cardia-vascular conditions-7; Ear, nose and throat conditions-2; Eye conditions-4; Stomach and other viscera conditions-3; Neurological conditions-5; Orthopaedic conditions-5; Peripheral vascular condition-I; Psychiatric conditions-32; Insufficient information readily available to provide confident categorisation-20.

Australian Domestic Airlines: Cost of Travel Concessions
(Question No. 1678)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) What is the cost to each major Australian domestic airline of travel concessions granted to their staffs.
(2) By what percentage are domestic air fares higher than if the staff travel concessions did not apply.

2618 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(3) Has he or his Department examined the question of staff travel concessions; if so, what were the conclusions and what action resulted.
Mr Hunt--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) There is negligible cost as staff travel for both Ansett and T AA is taken on a stand-by basis or undertaken at off-peak periods.
(2) Domestic air fares are no higher because of staff travel entitlements.
(3) No. Staff travel entitlements for both Ansett and TAA are the prerogative of the Company and the Commission respectively and individual concessions are negotiated between staff members and their respective employers.
Launceston General Hospital Laundry
(Question No. 1706)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) What investigations were made by the Commonwealth or Tasmanian Governments into the use of commerciallaundry services prior to the decision to construct a new laundry for the Launceston General Hospital.
(2) If investigations were made, whO conducted them and what was the result; if there were no investigations, why not.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) The Tasmanian Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works in its hearings into the proposal for a group laundry at the Launceston General Hospital received oral and written submissions from the Textile Care and Rental Association of Tasmania supporting the use of commerciallaundry services at Launceston. After considering the submissions and evidence and hearing evidence from the Tasmanian Department of Health Services and a special laundry consultant appointed by the Tasmanian Department of Health Services, the Committee concluded-
'The Committee does not think that commercial laundries are the right solution to future increased demand even though their premises could be expanded. It is felt that there is validity in the opinion that, as far as possible, laundry should be serviced and treated on a hospital site where there are laboratory facilities for testing bacteriological problems and adequate specialised supervision.'
The Committee went on to recommend that a new group laundry be built at Launceston. This recommendation was accepted by the Tasmanian Parliament. The conclusion and recommendation are in line with general practice adopted by Commonwealth and State health authorities for the provision of laundry services for hospitals; approximately 95 per cent of hospital laundry is handled by specialist laundries.
Smuggling of Plant Material into Australia
(Question No. 1707)
Mr Bungey askeq the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1 ) In view of the statement in the 1979-80 Annual Report of his Department (page 19) that there appears to have been an increase in deliberate attempts to smuggle plant material into AUstralia, which offences were prosecuted during 1979-80.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

( I) During 1979-80 229 successful prosecutions were launched against passengers deliberately attempting to smuggle plant material into Australia.
During the six months January-June 1980 there were 126 successful prosecutions. This compared with 73 over the corresponding period during 1979.
Multicultural Teaching Force
(Question No. 1732)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What action has been taken on the recommendation of the Commissioner for Community Relations contained in his 5th Annual Report for the year 1979-80 (page 88), that trainee teachers should remain at their studies for a further period to acquire some knowledge of a community language and culture, and thus take their place as members of a new multicul- .tural teaching force.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The recommendation in the Commissioner for Community Relations' 5th Annual Report (page 88) to extend the formal training period of trainee teachers was, in another form, considered by the National Inquiry into Teacher Education (NITE). The NITE Report recommended, inter alia, four years initial pre-service training for all teachers. This recommendation, in the light of developments in the most recent years, was not supported by the Ministers for Education meeting as the Australian Education Council in February 1981.
YMCA of Canberra Incorporated
(Question No. 1790)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Has a loan been made to the YMCA of Canberra Incorporated; if so, for what sum and why was it granted.
(2) What are the interest and repayment terms and what security is there in regard to the loan.
Mr Hodgman---The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) A loan was made to the YMCA of Canberra for $2,171,114.31, to finance the construction of a 200 bed young people's hostel at Belconnen.
The first payment of $45,000 against the loan was made on 2 June 1975 and subsequent payments were advanced as required during the course of construction. The final payment was made on 22 February 1977. Under the terms of the lease, the first repayment instalment did not become due until 23 February 1979.
(2) Interest was chargeable at the rate of 5 per cent per annum compounded half yearly with repayments to be made six monthly over a period of 48t years. If, however, payments were made by the due date, a rebate of 1 per cent per annum was allowable on the interest rate i.e., the effective rate became 4 per cent per annum. However, the YMCA's liability in respect of the loan was extinguished in full on 2 February 1981 upon the surrender of the lease.
Aboriginal Housing
(Question No. 1838)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2619

What action has been taken by his Department on the recommendation of the Commissioner for Community Relations in his 5th Annual Report, for 1979-80, concerning the provision of public housing appropriate to the needs, values and lifestyles of Aboriginal people in all States and the Northern Territory.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
There is only one aboriginal community within the jurisdiction of the Minister for the Capital Territory, located at Wreck Bay in the Jervis Bay Territory.
20 government homes were provided at Wreck Bay during the 1940s and are occupied by members of the community on a rental basis.
In 1973 the community formed the Wreck Bay Aboriginal Housing Company Ltd to negotiate with the Commonwealth for a lease of land for the community. In 1975 the Company accepted an offer of lease, but subsequently lodged a list of additional claims rejecting the previously accepted offer.
Negotiations have continued since that time but the matter is still unresolved. Two major obstacles are the community's claims for:
freehold title (which the Commonwealth is specifically prohibited by legislation from granting in the Australian Capital Territory or Jervis Bay Territory) and
exclusive fishing rights to waters adjoining the land offered for lease.
An Ordinance was made in 1977 to enable the grant of a perpetual lease to the Company.
The Department of Aboriginal Affairs has over the past few years provided funds to the Company for the construction of additional houses and other improvements. When negotiations for a lease are finalised I understand that Department will assume full responsibility for funding of the Aboriginal community at Wreck Bay.
Apart from housing at Wreck Bay Government housing as- 'sistance in the Australian Capital Territory in the form of rental housing, rental rebates for government tenants on low incomes, and finance to assist with the purchase of government or private dwellings is available to Aboriginal people who live or work in the Australian Capital Territory under precisely the same conditions as it is available to other members of the Australian Capital Territory community. It is considered that such assistance is appropriate to the needs, values and life styles of Aboriginal people in the Australian Capital Territory.
Aboriginal Land Fund Commission Land Purchases
(Question No. 1845)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What were the 216 individual properties throughout Australia listed by the Aboriginal Land Fund Commission following the Land Need Conference of August 1978.
(2) Does the list, as viewed by the Aboriginal Land Fund commission in its Annual Report for 1978-79, provide a basis for land purchase for a long time to come.
(3) Has the list been passed on to the Australian Aboriginal Development Commission; if so, how is it being viewed by the Commission.

Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) The Aboriginal Development Commission has asked that the individual properties listed at the Land Needs Conference of August 1978 should not be made public, because this could prejudice its negotiations to buy properties. A summary of the types of properties in each State which were listed at the Conference was published in the Annual Report of the Aboriginal Land Fund Commission for 1978-79.
(2) and (3) The documents from the 1978 Conference have been passed to the Aboriginal Development Commission. The Aboriginal Land Fund Commission and its successor body, the Aboriginal Development Commission, have regarded the needs identified by the Land Needs Conference of August 1978 as an important basis for the land acquisition program. The priorities established at the 1978 Conference have been modified, however, in the light of subsequent developments.
Excavation Work at Pella (Tabazat Fahl) in
Jorda~
(Question No. 1858)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What expenditure in each of the last 3 financial years was incurred by the Australian National Gallery in respect to the excavation work at Pella (Tabazat Fahl) in Jordan.
(2) What expenditure is proposed for 1980-81 and subsequent years.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) 1977-78-nil; 1978-79-$10,000; 1979-80-$15,000.
(2) 1980-81-$25,000.
No consideration has been given to the provision of funds beyond 1980-81.
National Sports Centre at Bruce, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 1861)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Why is an aquatic centre to be constructed as part of stage 3 of the National Sports Centre at Bruce, Australian Capital Territory.
(2) What is unsatisfactory in the use of the Commonwealth pool at Deakin, or any other Commonwealth pool in the Australian Capital Territory.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) There has been no decision to construct an aquatic centre at the National Sports Centre at Bruce, Australian Capital Territory.
(2) The Deakin Pool, currently being used by the Australian Institute of Sport for training of its swimmers has adequate facilities for this purpose. It is, however, some distance from the Institute and the support facilities. For this reason, it is viewed as unsuitable as a training venue in the long term. Furthermore, the Deakin Swimming Pool is a public swimming facility but at those times when the pool is in use by Institute swimmers, the public is denied access to it. The same

2620 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

situation would arise with any other pool in the Australian Capital Territory being used as a training facility by Institute swimmers.
International Cultural Corporation of Australia Ltd
(Question No. 1864)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Was the $250,000 provided towards establishment of the International Cultural Corporation of Australia Ltd. a grant or loan; if a loan, under what terms and conditions.
(2) Is future subsidising of the Corporation by the Commonwealth proposed; if so, at what levels.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) An amount of $250,000 was provided by the Commonwealth to the Corporation in 1979-80 as a contribution. A similar contribution was provided in 1980-81.
(2) Further funding of the Corporation is subject to annual Budget consideration. However, when the Corporation was established, it was announced that the Government expected that Lhe Corporation would gradually become self-supporting.
Australian Film and Television School: Liability for Pension Costs
(Question No. 1866)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Has the liability of the Australian Film and Television School to the ,Commonwealth by way of employer contributions for increased pension costs during the period 1973 to 1976 been determined; if so, what is the liability and how will il be met; Hnol, when is the liability to be assessed,
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am advised that the Australian Film and Television School meets its employer superannuation liability in accordance with the Superannuation Act 1976. Payments are made to the Commonwealth in respect of those employees who are contributors to the Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme. The rate of contribution paid by the Australian Film and Television School and a number of other Authorities does not take account of the cost of pension up-dating. An actuarial assessment is being obtained of the extent to which the present contribution rate differs from that required to meet the full accruing superannuation liability (including the cost of updating). This assessment is not expected to be available for sometime.
Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of the Treasury
(Question No. 1874)
Mr Bungey asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London metropolitan police reduces its telephone bill by $985,000, or about 20 per cent, by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone cal1s and the extension from which the call was made.

(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of his Department controlled; if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been givcn to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in his Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No.
(2) Yes. STD 'barring' on telephone extensions used by officers not having an essential or demonstrated need to make official long distance calls has been in operation in Treasury since July 1980. On these telephone extensions, officers wishing to make long distance calls must place them through switchboard operators. The officer is subsequently notified of the charges incurred in making personal calls and the cost is recouped by the Department. A large majority of Treasury telephone extensions have STD bars.
(3) Yes. It is considered that the present controls are adequate.
Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of Defence
(Question No. 1876)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London metropolitan police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000, or about 20 per cent, by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of his Department controlled; if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in his Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The existence of telephone call monitoring devices such as the one referred to in the West Australianofl8 July1979 is known to the Department and Telecom. Similar devices (eg "PETRA") are being used but are of limited usefulness because of insistence by the Telecom Unions on limiting the data provided by these devices to protect the privacy of the individual.
(2) Measures adopted by my Department to minimise use of departmental telephone services on private calls include:
granting of STD access only to a relatively few senior officers who have clearly recognisable functional requirement.
further restriction of STD access will occur following introduction of the Defence National Automatic Telephone System later this year. This system will allow direct dialling between Defence establishments using a hired tie line network;
control of trunk line and STD traffic through the Department's PABX operators in respect of the vast majority of personnel; ie those not having STD access;
frequent issue of circulars and reminders in telephone directories of the necessity to limit private calls to emergency situations. Where trunk calls are involved the costs are recovered from the callers; and

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2621

installation of STD public telephones at Defence establishments to enable personnel to make private calls at their own cost.
(3) If devices become available on the market that are more effective than those already available my Department will consider using them.
Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 1880)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London metrolpolitan police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000, or about 20 per cent by use of a monitoring device which recorded length time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of the Department of Social Security controlled; if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in the Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes.
(2) All staff of the Department of Social Security are advised by way of standing office instructions that personal telephone calls are to be kept to a minimum and only made with prior approval of a supervisor.
Officers wishing to make a personal long distance call do so by booking the call through their local switchboard operator and are required to reimburse the Department for the cost of the call.
Because of the decentralised nature of the Department (operating out of nearly 200 locations throughout the metropolitan areas and major country centres) there is a constant need for staff to use STD facilities in the normal course of their duties. This requirement considerably complicates the arrangements necessary to bar access to STD processes. Nevertheless the Department has installed STD access barring in those offices where it is administratively practicable and cost efficient and where the switchboard equipment is compatible. As non-suitable switchboard equipment is progressively replaced, access barring will be extended.
(3) Due to the decentralised nature of the Department, it is felt that the number of monitoring devices that would need to be purchased and the staff resources that would be required to co-ordinate, investigate and report on monitored details would not be cost effective and in some instances, particularly in remote regional offices, could prove to be counter-productive.
Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of Transport
(Question No. 1881)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London metropolitan police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000, or about 20

per cent, by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls; made by staff of his Department controlled; if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in his Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No I have not heard of the report mentioned by the honourable member; however, I will endeavour to obtain a copy.
(2) Personal calls made by officers of my Department are controlled by departmental Administrative Instructions which restrict local private calls to a minimum. Private trunk calls may be authorised and costs are recouped from the officer making the call. Central Office, Canberra, telephones generally are STD access barred with access being restricted to senior officers and special areas able to satisfy a rigorous test of essentiality, e.g. computer links and special operational areas. Those elements of Central Office presently located in Melbourne are accommodated in several buildings. Where technically feasible STD access has been restricted on the same scale as Canberra but some areas cannot be access barred because of the age of switchboard equipment. These areas are monitored with the Telecom Australia PETRA, (PBX Extension Traffic Recorder and Analyser) device which has been found to be effective in reducing unauthorised STD traffic.
Most Regional Offices of the Department are access barred on the same basis as Central Office. The exception is the South Australia/Northern Territory Regional Office in Adelaide where technical considerations make access barring impracticable. Monitoring equipment has been used from time to time and a new PABX due to be installed by September 1981 will allow permanent access barring on the same basis as Central Office.
(3) See answer (2) above.
Uniform Allowance: Naval Petty Officers
(Question No. 1898)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Is the purpose of the uniform allowance of 58 cents per day paid to Naval Petty Officers to meet the cost of cleaning and maintenance only.
(2) If so, is the replacement cost of new 8-button uniforms for Petty Officers to be borne by the Navy or by the Naval officer concerned.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Uniform maintenance allowance, which is paid at a rate of 58 cents a day to Petty Officers, is provided to defray the cost of periodic replacement of items of uniform so that the member's inventory is to the approved scale of items in good order and condition.
(2) As the new uniform does not change in design or colour from the uniform it is replacing, the change-over is being effected over a period that has regard to the normal life expectancy of a uniform. The members involved will therefore be required to meet the replacement cost of the new uniforms from their uniform maintenance allowance.

2622 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Aboriginal Medical Services
(Question No. 1910)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Is it a fact that his Department and the Department of Aboriginal Affairs have been co-operating to provide Health Program Grants to community-based, community-controlled Aboriginal medical services.
(2) Did the Director-General of Health say, in a letter dated 17 October 1978 to some community-controlled Aboriginal medical services, that the grants were offered to them as an alternative to bulk billing arrangements, that such an offer would be given as an option and further that there was no compulsion on a service to accept funding through the grants.
MI' MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.

Aboriginal Medical Services
(Question No. 1911)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

What are the criteria governing the availability of Health Program Grants to community-controlled Aboriginal medical services.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable

member's question is as follows:

'

On 17 October 1978 Health Program Grants were offered to the ten established Aboriginal controlled medical services
to meet the salary and associated costs of staff involved in the clinical activities. Other costs are met by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs. The arrangement was introduced against
the then possible non-continuance of bulk billing whicb would have adversely affected the Services concerned. Acceptance of a Health Program Grant precludes continuance of bulk
billing for medical services and avoids double payment which would otherwise be the case. Economic restraints preclude the expansion of the arrangement to other more recently established services.

Aboriginal Medical Services
(Question No. 1913)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What guidelines does the Government use with respect to the availability of Health Program Grants and how have they been applied in relation to 1980-81 funding from the Department of Aboriginal Affairs to community-controlled Aboriginal medical services.
(2) How will it affect funding to those services who choose to continue bulk billing funding in 1981-82.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) In October 1978 my Department offered Health Program Grants to each of the then 10 established Aboriginal Medical Services as an alternative to bulk billing. In 1980-81 Health Program Grant funds have been made available to 8 of these services, with negotiations continuing in respect of another. These grants are to meet the salary and associated

costs of staff involved in clinical activities, with the Department of Aboriginal Affairs providing the necessary funds to meet administrative and other residual costs.
(2) Services which continue to use bulk billing will need to negotiate with the Department of Aboriginal Affairs in regard to the residual funding required.
Radiation Hazards in Australia
(Question No. 1914)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the Australian of 8 April 1981, that Dr John MacKay has provisionally diagnosed radiation sickness in 16 persons connected with a plane crash on 4 December 1980.
(2) Has the NSW Director of Public Health Services discounted the diagnosis on the grounds that blood tests done on policemen who claimed exposure to contamination were negative.
(3) Is he able to say what tests were done, what were the results, what investigations should have been done and what tests should now be done to eliminate the possibility of radiation sickness developing.
(4) Is he able to say what evidence the policemen gave to substantiate their claims.
(5) Have steps been taken to standardise monitoring of radiation hazards in Australia and to centralise responsibility for enforcing radiation safeguards at Australian Government level; if so, what are they.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. However the incident referred to occurred on a highway in New South Wales when a semi-trailer carrying a mixed cargo was involved in an accident. The cargo included two radioactive sources. These sources were properly packaged, were not breached in the accident and did not constitute a radiation hazard.
(2), (3) and (4) The authority responsible for this matter is the New South Wales Health Commission which has investigated the incident thoroughly. I understand that the Commission is entirely satisfied that the radiation consequences were negligible.
(5) When radiation accidents do occur local radiation monitoring is always carried out by the appropriate State or Territory health authority. National radiation safety standards have been developed under the aegis of the National Health and Medical Research Council and are, in fact, applied uniformly throughout Australia under the relevant health legislation prevailing in each State or Territory.
My Department maintains a national registry of radiation incidents through the Australian Radiation Laboratory. Whenever a significant radiation incident occurs the relevant health authority provides a detailed summary of its history and consequences to the Australian Radiation Laboratory. The Laboratory arranges for its circulation to warn of potential circumstances which may lead to similar incidents in the future.

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2623

Defence Force Reserve
(Question No. 1919)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 28 April 1981 :

How many officers, and of what ranks, were in service with the Defence Force Reserve as at (a) 1 April 1979 and (b) 1 April 1981.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

OFFICERS SERVING WITH THE DEFENCE FORCE RESERVE WITH TRAINING OBLIGATIONS

1 April 1979

1 April 1981

Rank/rank equivalent

Air Navy Army Force Total

Air Navy Army Force Total

Major-General
Brigadier Colonel Lieutenant-Colonel
Major Captain Lieutenant 2nd Lieutenant

10

12

1

83

18

270

122

621

161

991

28

889

32

295

10

12

84

288

16

759

56 1,208

20

937

10

337

7

11

1

80

18

309

121

663

158 1,027

26

887

30

297

7

11

81

327

20

804

83 1,268

27

940

4

331

Total

362 3,171

102 3,635

354 3,281

134 3,769

Ministers: Shares in Companies
(Question No. 1926)
Dr Klugman asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(l) Which of his Ministers have (a) bought and (b) sold shares in (i) Central Pacific Minerals NL and (ii) Southern Pacific Petroleum NL since 1 January 1980.
(2) Is he able to say whether any of his Ministers currently have shareholdings in either of these two companies; if so, what are the details.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) See my answer on 29 April 1981 (House of Representatives Hansard, pages 1693-4).
Access for New Zealand Butter and Cheese to the Australian Market
(Question No. 1933)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 28 April 1981 :
(I) Has he been giving consideration to a submission by the Australian Dairy Farmers Federation in which they ask (a) that the Australian Government formalise at government to government level the presently existing informal agreement permitting access for New Zealand butter and cheese producers to the Australian market and (b) that the Commonwealth Government exclude dairy products from any phased reduction of trade barriers between Australia and New Zealand.
(2) If so, will he indicate (a) were and (b) in what way the Australian Government will act on those recommendations.
(3) If he will not provide this information, what is the reason.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) and (3) The Government is mindful of the concern which has been expressed by Australian dairy farmers about the implications of moves towards a closer economic relationship with New Zealand including for example, the potential

for trade in dairy products from New Zealand to undermine Australia's domestic marketing arrangements. Special attention is being given to such matters as the impact of dairy support and stabilization schemes in the two countries on trading opportunities for dairy products within the context of a closer economic relationship.
The Prime Minister emphasised in his statement to Parliament following his talks with Prime Minister Muldoon in March 1980 that no commitment to any specific proposal had been entered into at that stage and that no decisions would be taken until a detailed examination has been completed and there had been full consultation with interested parties including State Governments and industries.
Consultations with State Governments, farming and industry groups have been underway since April 1980 with views being sought by the Commonwealth on a number of occasions. The views of the Australian Dairy Farmers' Federation have been noted and are being borne in mind in the negotiations with New Zealand.
The guiding principle, enunciated by the Australian Government, is that it would not contemplate entering into any new trading arrangements with New Zealand except on the basis of equality of fair trading opportunities between industries in the two countries. The Prime Minister and myself have stated publicly on a number of occasions that the Government will not allow Australian agricultural industries to be adversely affected by unfair competition from New Zealand.
Senior Australian and New Zealand officials discussed closer economic relations in Wellington on 11 and 12 March 1981. This meeting was held against the background of recent consideration of the issues by Australian Ministers and separately by New Zealand Ministers. The objective of the discussions was to ensure a full understanding of ministerial attitudes on both sides and to clarify differences in position. Resolution of such differences will be necessary before details of any proposed new arrangements can be made public. I should like to emphasise that the Government has given an undertaking that no substantive decisions will be taken on this matter until full and meaningful consultations have been held with all interested parties.
Further discussions on closer trade and economic links were held 11-\3 May 1981 in Wellington, New Zealand between my colleague the Minister for Trade and Resources and the

2624 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

New Zealand Prime Minister and senior New Zealand Ministers.
Taxation: Contributions to Bjelke-Petersen Foundation Fund
(Question No. 1935)
Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(1) Did he state in reply to a question without notice on 28 May 1979 (Hansard, page 2429) that the National Party of Queensland or any other branch of a political party in Australia will not be given any privilege under the tax law.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to recent statements made in the Queensland Parliament that the Bjelke-Petersen Foundation Fund involves schemes whereby donations up to $100,000 are paid to the fund in return for which advertisements are featured in the Foundation's journal National Outlook.
(3) Are companies or businesses which contribute to such a scheme eligible for full tax deductions.
(4) If so, does this constitute a tax loophole by which donations to political parties might be tax deductible.
(5) Does this continued practice conflict with his statement that no political party would be given any privilege under the taxiaw.
(6) If so, will he act to close this tax loophole and advise the National Party in Queensland of his decision.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. (2) Not specifically, but I am aware that from time to time there have been statements linking donations to the Fund with advertising in the journal. (3) I am advised by the Commissioner of Taxation that, under the general deduction provisions of the income tax law, any amount out laid by a company or a business for more than one purpose is tax deductible only to the extent that it relates to a purpose of producing assessable income or is necessarily incurred in carrying on a business to produce assessable income. I am also advised that if the circumstances are that what is really, e.g., a non-deductible gift is merely characterised as being a business outgoing, no deduction is available. (4), (5) and (6) See answer to (3).
Publication of Employment Series 'Civilian Employees'
(Question No. 1938)
Mr Hawke asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(I) Was the publication of the employment series 'Civilian Employees', compiled by the Australian Bureau of Statistics, suspended as from April 1980; if so what is the reason.
(2) Has any decision been taken on the future publication of this series.
(3) Is there any review of this series currently being undertaken.
(4) If so, (a) what is the nature of this review and (b) when will it be completed.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Australian Statistician has advised that the suspended publication of the Civilian Employees series following

the release of the April 1980 issue, because the estimates, particularly on a year-to-year basis, showed a marked inconsistency with other available data.
(2), (3) and (4) A team of senior ABS officers has reviewed all aspects of the Civilian Employees series and an announcement is expected to be made in the near future.
Tax Avoidance
(Question No. 1944)
Mr Hurford asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 28 April 1981 :
(1) Is it a fact that, in addition to the problems caused by the growing tax avoidance industry, another main reason for high taxation rates under this Government is the cash economy, resulting in hundreds of thousands of transactions upon which tax should be payable not being recorded.
(2) Is the Government taking action to include the taxable income of these tax evaders in the assessable net so that other law-abiding citizens can have their tax obligations reduced; if so, what are the details.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) I think it must be accepted that tax evasion resulting from unrecorded transactions that go to make up the 'cash' or 'underground' economy has a bearing on the rates of income tax. The taxation laws are, of course, designed to raise a substantial portion of the revenue necessary to meet essential Government expenditure. As a general proposition, therefore, indulgence by some sections of the community in tax evasion practices, whether through participation in the cash economy or not, would increase the taxation burden borne by the general body of taxpayers who comply with the revenue laws.
I do not accept, however, the implication in the honourable Member's question that taxation rates under this Government are higher than those under previous Governments and draw his attention to the personal income tax reforms introduced by this Government since coming to power.
(2) The Commissioner of Taxation has informed me that Taxation Office enforcement programmes covering investigation and audit activities are directed essentially at the detection of unreported transactions. These activities entail examinations of the affairs of taxpayers, including those engaged in illegal activities, with a view to detecting income not disclosed in income tax returns. Special techniques are employed to detect unreported income, including a process under which the assets accumulated by a taxpayer over a period of time are quantified together with other amounts of expenditure. Such examinations have, the Commissioner said, been successful in recovering substantial amounts of tax which would otherwise have been lost to the revenue. Enforcement activities also include action to detect persons who are obliged, but who have failed, to lodge income tax returns. Experience has shown that persons found to be evading tax through non-lodgment of returns are, more often than not, participants in the cash economy.
A detailed account of the results achieved from all Taxation Office enforcement programmes was contained in the Commissioner's 59th Report to Parliament.
Red Gum Forests
(Question No. 1955)
Mr Lloyd asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 28 April 1981 :

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2625

(1) Following the construction of the Dartmouth Dam, Victoria, what arrangements have been made to protect the future of the Barmah and other major Australian red gum forests along the Murray River from (a) flooding in late summer and autumn when the controlled flow of the Murray is increased to provide water for South Australia, but which will endanger the future of the forests and (b) lack of natural flooding in late winter and spring when water is being stored for late summer and autumn release to South Australia, which will endanger the future of the forests.
(2) What quantity of water is required to satisfactorily flood the forests in New South Wales and Victoria, and if there is no natural flooding, from which States' quota will this water be obtained.
(3) When were the forests last satisfactorily flooded in spring and how often should these floods occur to maintain the health of the forests.
(4) Are the forests currently being flooded; if so, when were they last flooded in autumn.
(5) For how long and how often can this flooding occur in autumn before the forests are endangered.
(6) When and how will the Barmah Choke section of the River be partially by-passed or its capacity be increased to allow the post-Dartmouth autumn flows to be contained.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(l) (a) and (b) At the end of July last year, the River Murray Commission released for public comment a report which identifies river regulation and related forest management problems along the River Murray between Tocumwal and Echuca, associated with the Barmah-Millewa forests. The report examines a number of possible measures to alleviate the problems. Solutions to some of the problems fall outside the Commission's area of responsibility. However, I understand that submissions received from a number of individuals and organisations are under consideration prior to the Commission deciding on what future action it can take to remedy any problems.
(2) As indicated in the report, forest managers estimate that effective watering would require the maintenance at Tocumwal of a flow of at least 24,500 megalitres per day for about one month during the winter-spring period or a consumptive use of about 100,000 megalitres of water on each side of the river in anyone year; at this stage, this is a matter for the decision of the State concerned.
(3) According to River Murray streamflow records maintained by the Commission, the criteria suggested in (2) above were last met in the spring of 1978. Forest interests maintain that prior to intensive regulation of the Murray River for irrigation, winter and spring flooding over most parts of the forests occurred in about 4 out of 5 years and that this regime should be restored by artificial means.
(4) No; I understand that minor flooding of relatively small areas of the forests, but sufficient to limit access, has occurred on two occasions during the current autumn season due to temporary high river flows when irrigation diversions from Lake Mulwala were temporarily interrupted because of rain. Some foresters have stated that under the prevailing dry conditions such minor flooding is beneficial to the forests.
(5) and (6) I understand that the River Murray Commission is reasonably confident that significant containment of summerjautumn flooding can be achieved and such flooding is nOllikely to pose any great threat to the health of the forests. I also understand that a by-pass measure proposed in the Commission's report, Le., the use of Mulwala Canal to bypass water around the Barmah forest reach of the river, has

already been successfully put into effect. Investigations are also proceeding on the need for channel maintenance work to improve the channel carrying capacity.
Surveillance of North-west Coastline
(Question No. 1963)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(1) Is he satisfied that the granting of the contract for daily surveillance of the north-west coastline to the eastern Statesbased operator, H. C. Sleigh, will be in the best interests of both Australia's need for surveillance and the needs of north-west Australian residents for a complete aviation service.
(2) Was H. C. Sleigh told by an officer of Transport Australia early in January 1981 that they would be getting the contract.
(3) Was Trans-West told that there was still no decision on this tender process, as recently as Monday, 30 March 1981.
(4) Is it a fact that H. C. Sleigh have no agreement between themselves and Trans-West to obtain a maintenance service despite the fact that in the tender produced by H. C. Sleigh, such a service was said to be involved.
(5) Is H. C. Sleigh now endeavouring to operate the service out of Broome, WA, instead of Derby, WA, because of accommodation difficulties in Derby.
(6) If such a relocation is to be permitted will he call fresh tenders.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The criteria taken into account in the selection process were those relating to the performance of the specified coastal surveillance task. I am satisfied that the most suitable offer was accepted.
(2) No.
(3) Yes. The advice was accurate.
(4) I understand that at the time the tender was submitted by H. C. Sleigh such an arrangement was in existence, although it was not mentioned in the tender. I understand also that the arrangement was terminated by Trans-West after the coastal surveillance contract was awarded to H. C. Sleigh. The successful tenderer has now made satisfactory alternative maintenance arrangements at no additional cost to the Commonwealth.
(5) and (6) H. C. Sleigh did seek the consent of my Department to operate from Broome rather than Derby. This request was refused.
The Company was informed that there would be no objection to aircraft and crews being based in Broome and ferried to Derby for operations provided the Company met all expenses consequent upon such a decision.
I understand that H. C. Sleigh has now decided to continue to base its operations in respect of this portion of the contract at Derby.
Cost of Answering Questions on Notice
(Question No. 1969)
Mr Willis asked the Minister assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 28 April 1981 :
(1) Is he able to provide an estimate of the cost in (a) man hours and (b) wages and salaries of public servants that will be incurred in answering the 691 questions placed on the notice paper of9 April 1981 by the member for Canning.

2626 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) Were costs of a similar magnitude involved with a similar exercise by the member for Canning in 1978.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) See the answer given by the Prime Minister to Parliamentary Question No. 1173 (Hansard, 29 April 1981, page 1795-6).
Commonwealth Revenue
(Question No. 1977)
Dr Klugman asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 29 April 1981:
(1) Was Commonwealth revenue (a) SI8,276m in 197-5-76 and (b) S29,661m in 1979-80; if so, does this represent an increase of 62.3 per cent.
(2) What is the latest estimate for revenue for 1980-81 and by what percentage is this an increase on the 1979-80 figure.
(3) Was the increase in the Consumer Price Index 47.4 per cent between 1975-76 and 1979-80.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes. (2) The Budget estimate for total receipts in 1980-81 is S34,471m, an increase of 16.2 per cent over 1979-80. Collections to date do not indicate any significant variation from the overall Budget estimate. (3) The average level of the consumer price index for the seven capital cities in 1979-80 was 48.5 per cent higher than in 1975-76.
Cost of Reducing Age for Eligibility for the Male Age Pension
(Question No. 1979)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 29 April 1981:
(1) Further to the Minister's answer to my question No. 903 (Hansard, 29 April 1981, page 1782), why does the Minister refer to the estimated cost of paying an income test free pension to all men from age 60.

(2) Did my question at any stage suggest a change in the means test at present in force for age pensioners aged 65.
(3) Will the Minister attempt to answer my original question.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member member's question:
(1) to (3) I indicated in my answer to the honourable member's Question No. 903 (Hansard, 29 April 1981, page 1782) that it is not possible to estimate with accuracy the additional cost of paying an income tested age pension to men aged 60 to 64 years. Information was provided on the additional cost of paying an income test free pension to men aged 60 to 64 years as an indication of the maximum costs that could be involved. Given the lack ofdata on the income distribution of men aged 60 to 64 years and the unknown effect on workforce participation rates of lowering the pensionable age, it could be misleading to provide the estimate required by the honourable member and I am not prepared to instruct my Department to do so.
Coastal Trade: Operating Permits for Foreign Registered Ships
(Question No. 2002)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 29 April 1981:
(1) How many foreign registered ships operating in Western Australian ports were granted permits to operate during the last 12 months.
(2) Were any foreign vessels permitted to operate on the coastal trade without permits during the same period; if so, (a) why, (b) how many were given this permission, (c) which ports did they visit, (d) where were they registered and (e) what were the names of these vessels.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) During the year ended 30 April 1981, 14 permits were granted in accordance with section 286 of the Navigation Act 1912 for foreign vessels to engage in interstate trade to and from ports in Western Australia. Details of these permits are provided hereunder. Permits for foreign vessels to engage in trade within Western Australia are issued by the Western Australian Transport Commission.

Vessel
Turkmenia
Mobilita Bunga Angsana AlYasrah Boogabilla Magellan Sun Aster 3 Magellan Tourcoing Stolt Integrity SaikoMaru Mobilita Magellan Atlantic Princess

Registry USSR

Cargo/Passengers Passengers

Greece Malaysia Kuwait Norway Tonga Panama Tonga Norway Liberia Japan Greece Tonga Greece

Crude oil, gas oil and residue Passengers Passengers Motor launch Propane
Crude oil and residue Propane Motor launch Caustic soda Crude oil and residue Crude oil and residue Propane Crude oil and residue

From
Fremantle
Westernport Fremantle Fremantle Fremantle Westernport Westernport Westernport Townsville Port Botany Westernport Westernport Westernport Westernport

To
Melbourne Sydney Brisbane Kwinana Melbourne Portland Townsville Fremantle Kwinana Fremantle Fremantle Kwinana Kwinana Kwinana Fremantle Kwinana

Sailing date
12.5.80
20.6.80 1.7.80 11.7.80 2.9.80 7.9.80
23.9.80 25.9.80 29.11.80 5.12.80 12.12.80 3.1.81 24.3.81 6.4.81

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2627

(2) During the same period, no foreign vessels were permitted to operate in interstate trade without permits issued in accordance with section 286 of the Navigation Act 1912.
Fisheries Inspectorate
(Question No. 1014)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 5 May 1981:
(1) What are the inspectorate functions of the Northern Zone Export Section of the Fisheries Division of his Department.
(2) How many staff were being employed in the Northern Zone Export Section as at 30 June of each year since 1975 and in what capacity was each staffmember employed.
(3) How many boats were (a) inspected and (b) tested in each of the same years.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The functions of the northern zone of the export fish inspection service are the same as the other zones which together form an integrated administrative scheme designed to ensure the effective deployment and organisation of export fish inspection staff on a regional basis.
The overriding objective of export inspection service is to ensure that product subject to the Exports (Fish) Regulations meets prescribed conditions and restrictions. In particular, export establishments are required to be constructed and equipped to operate in an efficient and hygienic manner; and products are required to be of an acceptable quality and accurately described. Constant monitoring of registered land based premises and registered vessels is undertaken to ensure the maintenance of standards.
(2) Prior to the formation of the export fish inspection service in 1977, all fish exports inspection duties were undertaken by meat inspectors on an ad hoc basis. A northern zone as such did not exist. The position in respect of staff employed in the northern zone as at 30 June of each year since 1977, and the capacity in which they were employed, is as follows:

1977 1978 1979 1980

Fish Exports Inspector, Grade

3 ........ .

Fish Exports Inspector, Grade

2 ........ .

2

2

2

2

Fish Exports Inspector, Grade

I ........ .

3

3

6

6

Since 30 June 1980 one additional Grade 2 position and three additional Grade I positions have been created.
(3) The number of vessels which were inspected and registered as export establishments in the area comprising the northern zone as at 19 November of each year since 1975 are as follows:

Vessels

1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 34 44 65 112 169 180

Joint Venture Fishing Agreement
(Question No. 1015)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 5 May 1981:

(1) Have unlicensed foreign fishing vessels which have been prosecuted in relation to the bringing in of a foreign fishing vessel to an Australian port, used as a defence, under paragraph 13 (2) (b) of the Commonwealth Fisheries Act 1952 that the action was in accordance with a prescribed agreement between Australia and another country.
(2) Does the paragraph of the Act referred to in part (I) apply to existing agreements between Australia and other countries; if so, to which countries.
(3) Does the Joint Venture Agreement between Kaohsiung Fishing Boat Commercial Guild and Kailis Kaohsiung Fishing Company constitute a prescribed agreement as described in that section of the Act.
(4) Have unlicensed Taiwanese fishing vessels in the past been apprehended within the Australian Fishing Zone but evaded the penalties for summary conviction and conviction on indictment according to that section of the Act; if so, is there a need to amend this particular section of the Act to prevent unlicensed fishing vessels being sheltered in this manner.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No.
(2) The Subsidiary Agreement Between the Government of Australia and the Government of Japan Concerning Japanese Tuna Longline Fishing prescribed in Statutory Rules 1979 No. 235 makes provision for vessels licensed under section 9 of the Fisheries Act to enter specified ports. No other agreements have been entered into which permit the entry of vessels into ports under paragraph l3BA (2) (b).
(3) No.
(4) See (3). Also, in no prosecution of a Taiwanese fishing vessel has a defence under paragraph 13BA (2) (b) of the Commonwealth Fisheries Act 1952 been raised.
Joint Venture Fishing Agreement
(Question No. 1016)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 5 May 1981:
(I) Has the Commonwealth Government approved a joint venture agreement with the Kaohsiung Fishing Boat Commercial Guild of Taiwan, and the Kailis Kaohsiung Fishing Co., concerning the conduct ofdemersal pair-trawl and gillnet fishing operations in the Australian Fishing Zone effective for one year from 1 November 1980.
(2) If so, does this agreement state that the Kaohsiung Fishing Boat Commercial Guild and the Kailis Kaohsiung Fishing Co., shall remit promptly to the Commonwealth Government or State Government or Territory concerned, all fines imposed in respect of contraventions by fishing vessels licensed under the Agreement.
(3) Does the Agreement specify the amount of the fine payable by licensed or unlicensed vessels found to be contravening the terms of the Agreement; if not, what is the reason.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No. The Government has not approved a joint venture agreement between the Kaohsiung Fishing Boat Commercial Guild of Taiwan and the Kailis Kaohsiung Fishing Company.
Vessels of Taiwan are licensed to fish in the Australian fishing zone (AFZ) in the demersal pair-trawl and gillnet fisheries of the north-west shelf, under an Agreement between the Kaohsiung Fishing Boat Commercial Guild and the Commonwealth Government. The Agreement runs for 12 months from I November 1980. The Kailis Kaohsiung Fishing Company is the Australian representative of the Guild.

2628 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) The Agreement provides that the Guild be fully responsible for amongst otber things, the payment of fines and associated expenses incurred by the Australian Government or State or Territory Government in respect of both licensed and unlicensed Taiwanese vcssels convicted of offences in the AFZ.
(3) No. The Agreement does not specify fines payable. These are provided for in Commonwealth, State and Territory fisheries legislation and are matters for the courts to decide.
Voluntary }<'iremen: Taxation
(Question No. 2034)
Mr Hurford asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 5 May 19R1:
(1) Does the Income Tax Assessment Act exempt from heing included in taxable income, income derived by members of the Defence Force Reserve for their service as members.
(2) Are voluntary firemen taxed on income they derive from their service to fire brigades.
(3) H so, will the Treasurer extend the same exemption to voluntary firemen, as the service of the two groups in saving life and property is similar.
Ml' Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The pay and allowances of such members, other than pay and allowances in respect of continuous full time service, are exempt from income tax.
(2) Such income is not exempt from income tax.
(3) The real value of services provided to the community by volunteer firemen is appreciated, but the question of an amendment to the income tax law to exempt their remuneration from tax could not be considered in isolation from the circumstances of members of the many other worthwhile organisations and associations who would, no doubt, expect similar treatment. Nevertheless, this matter has been included in the list of items to be considered during the Budget deliberations.
35-hour Week Campaign
(Question No. 2048)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) Was a sum of $260,000 appropriated to his Department to provide for a publicity campaign to disseminate the Government's view on the 35-hour week campaign; if so, how far has this campaign advanced.
(2) Will his Department be co-operating with the Government Information Unit in the preparation and promotion of this campaign; if so, to what extent.
(3) What guidelines has he laid down to ensure that funds spent on this campaign provide factual information and are not used merely for the promotion of party political objectives.
(4) Will he give an assurance that the diversion of this appropriation away from the portfolio of Industrial Relations has nothing to do with any power struggles within the Liberal Party.
Sir Phillip Lynch--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes; the appropriation has been fully committed for expenditure during this financial year.
(2) No.

(3) Established government accounting procedures and practices are being followed.
(4) Appropriations were not diverted from the Industrial Relations portfolio as the Government's campaign is a new program for which funding responsibility was initially allocated to my Department.
The broad impact of the shorter working week proposals is reflected by the fact that the government's response is heing supervised by a committee of ministers rather than an individual Department.
Shackleton Hill, Mawson, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 2091)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) Have residents of southern Mawson, Australian Capital Territory, through the South Mawson Residents' Association, consulted, since 1972, with various Ministers having responsibility for the National Capital Development Commission and his Department as well as with the chief executives and senior officers of these bodies, in regard to a residential housing development on Section 40, Mawson, Australian Capital Territory, known as Shackleton Hill.
(2) If so, and as a result of this consultation with the two authorities, has the South Mawson Residents' Association received assurances from both the National Capital Development Commission and his Department that, inter alia, no more than 112 residential units would be permitted on Shackleton Hill.
(3) Following receipt of a submission from a prospective developer, were officials of this Department, at a meeting with the Committee of the South Mawson Residents' Association on 14 April 1981 and again at a public meeting of that Association on 23 April 1981, no longer prepared to assure the Association that earlier assurances, regarding the limit of 112 residential units at Shackleton Hill, would be honoured.
(4) Will he ensure that a lease is not granted to any prospective developer of Shackleton Hill or any part thereof, until such time as the South Mawson Residents' Association has had the opportunity to discuss with the Permanent Head of his Department and if necessary, with him, the honouring of assurances previously given.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) and (2) Yes.
(3) The Association has been assured by the Department since the meetings referred to were held, that no more than 112 units will be permitted to be built.
(4) A commitment has been entered into with the developer in respect of the granting of a lease. The Association has contacted me about mailers still causing its members some concern and I will respond shortly.
Education of Deaf Children
(Question No. 246)
Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 3 December 1980:
Does the Commonwealth Government support specific programs for the education of deaf children; if so, what programs?
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2629

The Commonwealth Government provides support for the education of deaf children through its Special Education Program, administered by the Schools Commission.
Through this Program the Government provides support for the education of aU handicapped children by supplementing the funding of government and non-government special schools and special classes in regular schools. In the case of Government schools, it does this by making block grants available to each State on condition that these grants be spent on the education of handicapped children. It leaves to the State concerned the determination of priorities within Special Education programs. Grants to declared non-government special schools, are recommended to the Commonwealth Education Minister by State Education Departments for approval. Thereafter grants are applied by the education authorities and schools concerned. Each State has programs related to the education of deaf children.
Expenditure priorities, and consequently the level of funding to be applied to supporting the education of deaf children are determined, therefore, by government and nongovernment education authorities in the States and the Northern Territory.
A further element of the Commonwealth Special Education Program under which deaf children may benefit is the program to assist the integration of handicapped children into regular schools. Under this program priority is to be given to the movement of as many children as possible from special to regular schools. Funds may also be used to enable isolated handicapped children to attend neighbourhood regular schools, to test new ways of fully or partially integrating handicapped children already integrated into regular schools and to facilitate the enrolment in regular primary schools of handicapped children who are beginning their formal schooling.
Tactical Air Defence System
(Question No. 561)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) Was Government approval given in August 1975 for the purchase of replacement radars for HUBCAP air defence radars and for a tactical air defence system.
(2) Did the Government defer procurement to TADS in 1978.
(3) When was ministerial approval for the deferment obtained.
(4) When does the Government propose to proceed with the purchases.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) and (3) In the context of the Budget considerations for 1978-79 the Department of Defence considered that procurement of the TADS should be deferred. A submission to that effect was put forward in December 1978 and was approved by Government on 9 January 1979.
(4) The Government has purchased and taken delivery of three Westinghouse radars-two for replacement of HUBCAP air defence radars and one for the TADS. The Government approved the acquisition of the remainder of the TADS in the context of the 1979-80 Budget. Tenders are now being evaluated, and the Government expects to place an order in mid 1981.

Coastal Surveillance: Expenditure by Department of Business and Consumer Affairs
(Question No. 572)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) What sum was (a) appropriated and (b) actually spent by his Department on coastal surveillance for (i) 1977-78; (ii) 1978-79 and (iii) 1979-80.
(2) What were the main items of expenditure and the cost attributed to each time.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) During the period 1977-78, 1978-79 and 1979-80 no specific sum was appropriated for coastal surveillance. Funds were included in appropriations to cover the total operations of my Department.
(b) The amounts actually spent on coastal surveillance are reflected in various items of Divisions 195/1 and 195/2, e.g, salaries, overtime, general expenses such as vehicles, launches, communications, aircraft.
(2) The main items of expenditure and the costs attributed to each item have not been det~rmined as the cost of coastal surveillance is not a specific item of Departmental expenditure. The method of assessment of costs of coastal surveillance will be considered as part of the Government's -review of the coastal surveillance program.
National Health and Medical Research Council
(Question No. 632)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
(1) Have any members of the National Health and Medical Research Council retired from, or ceased to be active on a full-time basis, in their respective fields of expertise.
(2) What remuneration and/or allowances are paid to Council members.
(3) By what process (a) are matters relating to public health brought to the attention of the Council and (b) is advice on these matters disseminated to the general public.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Only one member oftheNH & MRC has retired from, or has ceased to be active on a full-time basis, in his respective field of expertise. He is Emeritus Professor R. H. Thorpe, whose appointment to the Council is on the basis of his nomination by the Australian Federation of Consumer Organisations rather than by virtue of his expertise in his professional discipline. Professor Thorpe was formerly the Professor of Pharmacology at the University of Sydney.
(2) Members of Council, who are not public servants, are eligible for sitting fees and travel allowances for attendance at approved meetings, in accordance with Category 2 of the Remuneration Tribunal Determination No.9 of 1980. They are also entitled to air transport and reimbursement for incidental expenses, incurred in attending such meetings, approved in accordance with the Audit Act.
However, recently the Government decided that, as a general principle, remuneration will not be paid to advisory committee members unless certain criteria are met. The criteria are being developed for consideration by the Government and should be available for implementation by 1 July 1981.

2630 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(3) (a) The Council's attention is drawn to matters related to public health through its Public Health Advisory Committee to which several expert committees in a variety of fields report.
(b) In regard to public health, the Council has as its main rule. expressly provided in the order-in-Council under which it is established, to advise the Commonwealth and States on matters of public health legislation and administration. Its advice on these matters is also disseminated to the public through NH & MRC Session Reports and, where appropriate, by way of Press releases and specially published documents.
Transfer Pricing
(Question No; 746)
Mr Humphreys asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 10 March 1981:
(1) Is he able to say how many trans-national corporations are involved in inter-company transfer pricing between their Australian operations and operations abroad as reported in the radio program AM on 2 March 1981 and in the National Times of 1-7 March 1981.
(2) What is the extent of tax revenue to be recouped following the enactment of the proposed new version of section 260 of the Income Tax Assessment Act.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) It is not possible to provide the information sought with any acceptable degree of accuracy. However, during the year ended 30 June 1980, formal determinations in transfer pricing cases, in accordance with section 136 of the Income Tax Assessment Act and/or the relevant provisions of Australia's double taxation agreements, were made on nine occasions. At the end of that year, several other cases were under consideration for application of section 136 and/or the agreement provisions.
(2) No firm estimate can be placed on the tax revenue that might be recouped following the enactment of provisions to replace the existing section 260. It would necessarily require the passage of considerable time before the efficacy of such new provisions, once introduced, could be tested and determined. However, it has been estimated that taxpayer involvement in avoidance schemes that gave rise to claims for artificial losses and deductions resulted in revenue short-falls of $230m and $280m in the 1978-79 and 1979-80 financial years respectively. An allowance of $300m for tax a voidance has been incorporated in the estimates for 1980-81. These amounts relate to schemes against which specific legislative action has been or is being taken. I should add that the Commissioner of Taxation is contesting claims under these schemes and that the amount of revenue ultimately forgone because of them will only be determined upon resolution of the issues by the Courts.
Standards of Television Advertising for Children
(Question No. 754)
Mr Hodges asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(1) Does the Broadcasting and Television Act charge the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal with the responsibilities of preparing and enforcing standards of television advertising for children.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to a report of the National Health and Medical Research Council's Working Party on television advertising of foods directed to children.

(3) If so, is he able to say (a) when the Working Party was established and (b) when and to whom it reported.
(4) What is the current position in relation to the report and its recOmmendations.
(5) Did the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal refer the matter to the National Health and Medical Research Council; if not, who (a) initiated the inquiry and (b) was responsible for the drawing up of the terms of reference.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) The Working Party was established by the National Health and Medical Research Council in June 1979. It has yet to complete its final report on television advertising of foods directed to children. The Working Party has, however, reported to the National Health and Medical Research Council through the Nutrition Standing Committee on the preliminary findings of its study. These findings have been provided to the Minister for Health, to me and to the Chairman of the Senate Standing Committee on Education and the Arts.
(4) See answer to Part (3).
(5) The establishment of the Working Party was recommended by the Senate Standing Committee on Education and the Arts, which proposed that the Commonwealth Department of Health, the Australian Medical Association and the Australian Dental Association and the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal consult, with the object of drawing up a set of proposals similar to those of the Federal Trade Commission of the United States of America.
International Subscriber Dialling Service
(Question No. 845)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:
(1) Did Telecom Australia recently announce surcharges to be levied upon subscribers seeking (a) an unlisted number and (b) to be excluded from the International Subscriber Dialling Service.
(2) If so, is it intended to exempt (a) recipients of (i) age, (ii) invalid, (iii) service, (iv) widows' and (v) wives' pensions and (b) beneficiaries of (i) supporting parent benefits, (ii) unemployment benefit and (iii) student allowances.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) Telecom has decided to introduce a charge of $10 per annum for silent line services. to be applied from the publication date in respect of all telephone directories issued after 1st July f981. This charge is to help offset the costs being incurred in handling Directory Assistance enquiries in relation to this type of service; (b) Telecom is introducing on a progressive basis a Call Charge Record (CCR) system which will automatically record details of subscriber dialled international calls, including the time the call is made, the number called and the cost of the call. At present, the system is being introduced at selected exchanges in the capital cities. With the introduction of the CCR system at an exchange, ISD will be provided to all subscribers connected to that exchange as a standard facility and a separate total for any ISD calls made will appear on their telephone bills. This is distinct from the ISD facility which has been provided on a multi-metering basis, with the charges for ISD calls being recorded on subscribers' meters along with local and STD calls. Because of this bulk billing feature, the ISD facility has been provided only to those subscribers who specifically request it.

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2631

As mentioned ISDICCR is being progressively introduced as a standard facility and, should any subscriber wish to take less than full advantage of the telephone service, there is a standard fee of $3 per annum imposed by Telecom for restricting the service in the required way.
(2) No. The concessions made available at present to subscribers who qualify for pension entitlements are financed from appropriation to the Department of Social Security. It is considered that any further concession should be financed in a similar fashion.
Numerical Multifactor Assessment System
(Question No. 889)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
How many persons have (a) applied to migrate to Australia under the Numerical Multifactor Assessment System (NUMAS) scheme and (b) been rejected as immigrants under the scheme, since its inception in January 1979.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Statistics are not maintained of results of processing according to the nature of the migrant selection system. Nor do statistics include New Zealanders who enter AustriUia under the free-flow provisions of the Trans-Tasman Travel Arrangement or Indo-Chinese refugees who are selected by special task forces in Asia.
Preliminary statistics indicate that for the period January 1979 to December 1980.
(a) 405,210 persons have formally applied to immigrate to Australia; and
(b) In the period in question the results of applications processed irrespective of selection system were: applications withdrawn, cancelled, lapsed ( p e r so n s ) - 70,058 applications rejected (persons)-159,960 applications approved (persons)-123,978
It should be noted that migration applications customarily take several months to process. As a result, the persons in~ eluded in applications lodged in any period afe not identical with those included in applications finalised in that period.
Naturalisation of Migrants
(Question No. 892)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(I) How many certificates of naturalisation were conferred in Australia up to March 1981.
(2) What is the distribution of these figures in terms of Federal electoral divisions.
(3) From what countries had the newly naturalised citizens emigrated.
(4) How many migrants are entitled to be naturalised but have failed to do so in each State and from what countries have they migrated.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) 1,196,068 certificates of citizenship were issued in the period 1945 to December 1980. (latest available).
(2) Not available.

(3) The table below shows countries of former citizenship of persons granted Australian citizenship in the period 1945 to December 1980.
(4) Not available.

COUNTRY OF FORMER CITIZENSI-lIP OF PERSONS GRANTED AUSTRALIAN CITIZENSHIP
BETWEEN JUNE 1945 AND DECEMBER 1980

Country offormer Citizenship

No.of persons

Albania Arab Republic of Egypt
Argentina Australian Protected Persons Austria . . . . .
Belgium . . . . . British Protected PersonsBulgaria
Burma Canada Chile
China Cyprus Czechoslavakia Denmark Estonia Finland
France Germany Greece Hungary India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland
Israel Italy Japan
Jordan Korea La,tvia
Lebanon Lithuania Malaysia Malta Mauritius Netherlands
New Zealand Norway - Pakistan . Philippines Poland Portugal .
Roumania Singapore
South Africa Spain . Sri Lanka Stateless Sweden . Switzerland Syria Thailand. Turkey UK and Colonies Ukraine
Uruguay USA

1,260 12,413
2,974 2,773 13,454
2,011 151
1,588 3,237 2,135 4,482
13,363 12,799 17,397
4,139 6,209 5,756 8,256
63,196 162,411
34,9Q7 21,961 1,352
1,323 2,351 5,363
7,065 213,613
1,099 2,252 1,402 18,575
39,021 8,908
8,261 12,801 5,700 85,325 4,905 1,702
1,450 6,647 76,507
4,723 3,708
4,459 9,529 8,315 12,675 20,822 1,379 5,230 3,085
779 3,242 227,968 20,620
5,050 4,261

2632 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Country of former Citizenship
USSR Vietnam Yugoslavia Zimbabwe Other countries
Total

No. of persons
13,536 2,286 122,748
766 11,629
1,389,304

Department of Communications: Television Advertising
(Question No, 935)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(1) What sum was spent on television advertising by his Departmentand Instrumentalities under his control in 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred during the months of (a) December 1979 and (b) January 1980,
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Department ofCommunications-nil.
Statutory Authorities-
Australian Postal Commission-nil. Australian Telecommunications Commission$1,180,000. Overseas Telecommunications Commission-$711,000. Australian Broadcasting Commission-$54,042. Australian Broadcasting Tribunal-nil. Special Broadcasting Service-$164,708.
(2) Statutory AuthoritiesAustralian Telecommunications Commission-nil. Overseas Telecommunications Commission-nil. Australian Broadcasting Commission- (a) $26,393; (b)
$17,015.

Special Broadcasting Service-(a) $359; (b) $27.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs: Television Advertising
(Question No, 952)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(1) What sum was spent on television advertising by his Department and Instrumentalities under his control in 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred during the months of:
(a) December 1979 and (b) January 1980.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Nil.
(2) Nil.
Legal Aid
(Question No, 974)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(1) What sums have been made available by the Government in each State and Territory for legal aid during the last 10 years for which figures are available.
(2) Is he able to provide similar figures for funds received from (a) State Governments and (b) all other sources for the same years; if so, what are they.
Mr Viner-The Attoney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Commonwealth expenditure on legal aid for the financial years 1971-72 to 1980-81 is summarised in the following table:

LEGAL AID-EXPENDITURE BY THE COMMONWEALTH 1971-72-1980-81

Year/Description

NSW

Vic.

Q1d

SA

WA

Tas. ACT

NT Other

Overall total Comments

1971-72~
Payments in special circumstances
Legal Service Bureaux
Legal Aid ACT
Total

14,085 14,085

.. 59,100 198,000
.. 257,100

59,100 Not dissected 198,000 Dissection
unavailable 14,085 271,185

1972-73Payments in special circumstances Legal Service Bureaux Legal Aid ACT Total

.. 107,600 .. 107,600

29.019 229,390 258.409

29,019 Not dissected 229,390 Dissection
unavailable lO7,6oo 366,009

1973-74Australian Legal Aid Offie<;

Payments in special circumstances
Grants to supplement existing schemes
Legal Aid ACT Legal Aid NT

731,000

558,000

296,000

187,000

166,000

62,00.0. 120,000

.. 339,961
27,691
59,532

339,961 Dissection unavailable
27,691 Not dissected 2,000,000 Rounded figures
120,000 59,532

Total

731,000 558,000 296,000 187,000 166,000 62,000 120,000 59,532 367,652 2,547,184

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATlVES 2(j33

Year/Description

Overall

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas. ACT

NT Other

total Comments

1974-75-

Australian Legal Aid

Office

- 1,029,739

Payments in special circumstances

Grants to supplement

existing schemes

413,907

Legal AidA.C.T.

LegaIAidN.T.

592,340 430,682

406,491 160,468

296,182 273,212

232,588 164,418

228,231 107,313
..

130,355 219,000

112,288 62,794

747,015 19,724

3,775,229
19,724
1,550,000 219,000 62,794

Total

- 1,443,646 1,023,022 566,959 569,394 397,006 335,544 349,355 175,082 766,739 5,626,747

1975-76-

Australian Legal Aid

Office

- 3,550,980 2,506,982 1,517,149

Grants to supplement

existing schemes

330,619 276,422 131,284

Legal Aid A.C.T.

657,958 888,957

844,286 124,045

688,709
48,55.3.

688,081 320,000

336,292

502,889

11,208,326
999,880 320,000

Total

- 3,881,599 2,783,404 1,648,433 746,915 968,331 737,262 923,081 336,292 502,889 12,528,206

1976-77-

Australian Legal Aid

Office

- 5,520,414 3,623,063 2,430,950 1,088,213 1,557,695

Grants to supplement

existing schemes

357,618 258,662 131,284 84,336 140,044

LegaIAidA.C.T.

Aboriginal Legal Aid 930,000 400,000 817,828 410,000 592,500

889,853
28,05.6.

753,750
225,000 1,046

456,358 560,000

580,032 16,900,328

1,000,000 225,000
3,711,374

'Included in Victoria

. Total

- 6,808,032 4,281,725 3,380,062 1,582,549 2,290,239 917,909 979,796 1,016,358 580,032 21,836,702

1977-78-

Australian Legal Aid

Office

- 5,958,174 4,288,818 2,865,654 1,415,599 1,751,745 1,040,786

State Legal Aid Commissions

654,100

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission

A.C.T. Legal Aid Commission

Reimbursement to States

80,000

Legal Aid A.C.T.

Aboriginal Legal Aid 950,000 420,000 822,978 440,000 . 679,000

906,255
104,000 75,000 1,280

499,737 516,347

459,838 77,844

19,186,606

654,100

77,844

104,000

80,000 75,000 3,889,605

'Included in Victoria

Total

- 6,908,174 4,788,818 3,748,632 1,855,599 3,084,845 1,040,786 1,086,535 1,016,084 537,682 24,067,155

1978-79-

Australian Legal Aid

Office

- 5,933,886 4,854,955 3,169,985 1,010,086

2,693 1,128,120

..

State Legal 'Aid Com, missions

922,600 2,300,100

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission

A.C.T. Legal Aid Commission

.. 1,289,000

Grants to Voluntary Schemes

21,000

Special Appropriations

Aboriginal Legal Aid 983,000 451,000 956,470 430,000 704,000

472,505 683,500

450,300 350,291 84,157

17,022,530

3,222,700

350,291

1,289,000

21,000 84,157 4,207,970

'Included in Victorian total

Total

- 6,916,886 5,326,955 4,126,455 2,362,686 3,006,793 1,128,120 1,289,000 1,156,005 884,748 26,197,648

1979-80-

Australian Legal Aid

Office

- 5,752,140 4,595,395 1,481,635

1,217,164

State Legal Aid Commissions

250,000 2,380,379 1,992,500 2,987,800

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission

A.C.T. Legal Aid Commission

., 1,396,800

Grants to Voluntary

Schemes

29,000 112,500 12,000 21,500

Special Appropriations

559,788

281,922 13,888,044

7,610,679

557,489 557,489

1,396,800

73,417

175,000 73,417

2634 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Year /Deseription

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Aboriginal Legal Aid . 1,142,000 528,960 1,047,499 400,000 828,149

Overall

Tas.

ACT- - - -N-T - -O-th-er- - - -t-ota-l -C-om-m-e-nts-

.' 1,036,818

4,983,426 'Included in

Victorian total

Total

. 6,923,140 5,486,855 4,921,513 2,414,000 3,815,949 1,217,164 1,396,800 1,596,606 912,828 28,684,855

1980-81 (estimated)~

Australian Legal Aid

Office . . . . . 6,395,000 6,134,300

.. 1,637,500

. . 777,600

State Legal Aid Com-

missions

.. 769,100 3,843,700 2,721,200 3,289,200

Commonwealth Legal

Aid Commission .

A.C.T. Legal Aid Com-

mission

.. 1,479,700

Grants to Voluntary

Schemes Special Appropriations

.. 94,000 147,50.0. 11,000 17,500

Aboriginal Legal Aid 1,158,500 584,100 1,232,000 515,300 923,500

., 1,002,242

365,000
700,400
62,600 23,558

15,309,400

10.623,200

700,400

1,479,700

270.000 62,600 5,439,200

'Included in Victorian total

Total

. 7,647,500 7,635,000 5,086,700 3,254,000 4,212,700 1,637,500 1,479,700 1,779,842 1,151,358 33,884,500

(2) This information is not available for the financial years 1971-72 to 1978-79. Information concerning the income of major legal aid schemes in 1979-80 is contained in the third Annual Report of the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission at Appendix A. Information concerning 1980-81 is not yet available.
Immigration: East Timorese
(Question No. 984)
Mr Howe asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 1 April 1981 :
(1) Has he reviewed progress in achieving family reunion for the 600 East Timorese people who it was agreed could come to Australia in 1978.
(2) How many persons have actually arrived in Australia under that program.
(3) Is it a fact that almost all of the persons who have arrived are ethnic Chinese and not indigenous Timorese.
(4) Is it also a fact that most persons who leave do so only because they are able to afford to pay bribes to Indonesian Officials.
(5) Is he able to say if and when the remaining persons in East Timor will be permitted to leave.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) and (2) I draw the honourable member's attention to my reply to Question No. 986.
(3) My Department does not inquire into the ethnic origins of applicants for admission to Australia and no definitive answer to this question could be provided. However, an examination of the names of those arriving from Timor over recent years would suggest that while some are ethnic Timorese, the majority are of Chinese ethnic origin. (A similar examination of names suggests that about two thirds of the people on the agreed list were of Chinese ethnic origin--this reflects the ethnic composition of the original evacuees to whom these people are related.)
(4) Timorese require permission from the Indonesian authorities both to travel to Jakarta and later to leave Indonesia for Australia. Allegations have been made to my Department that bribes were sought and accepted by Indonesian officials in return for these permits. These allegations have been drawn to the attention of the Indonesian authorities by the Australian Embassy, Jakarta, with expressions of official concern.

(5) The movement of Timorese on the list agreed between the Australian and Indonesian Governments resumed last October, and since then a total of 38 has arrived in Australia, bringing the total arrivals to date to 343 persons. The Indonesian authorities arc aware of the importance the Australian Government attaches to a speedy completion of this program and the Government will continue to pursue this aim.
Metabolic Testing
(Question No. 1071)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :
(1) Are there any plans to discontinue urine testing through baby health centres, and the New South Wales Metabolic Reference Laboratory at North Ryde NSW; if so, why.
(2) Are any other techniques for metabolic testing, being considered by his Department.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) The honourable member may wish to redirect his question to the Minister for Health in the New South Wales Parliament within whose portfolio lies responsibility for this matter.
Air Travel: Department ofIndustry and Commerce
(Question No. '1128)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
L How many travel warrants have been issued for his Departmental officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77 (b) 1977-78 (c) 1978-79 (d) 1979-80 (e) 1980 to 31 March 1981.
2. What was the total cost of this travel.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The number of travel warrants issued to officers, members of advisory councils and other personnel eligible to travel at departmental expense to and from Canberra for the periods involved is:

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2635

Travel Warrants

Cost of Travel

Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

No.

1976-77

$
650 61,180* Recruitment: Department of Aboriginal Affairs

1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

900 85,263 900 85,192 1,050 111,922

(Question No. 1307)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the

tl980 to 31 March 1981

1,233 133,034

-------------~~--~-

* Estimate only. The Department of Manufacturing Industry abolished and the Departments of Industry and Commerce and Productivity created on 22 December 1975 and 8 November 1976 respectively.

t The figures include the elements of the former Depart-
ment of Productivity which were transferred in November

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
Were any staff of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs or statutory authorities under the Minister's acgis recruited through private employment agencies in 197980; if so, for what position and at what cost.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs

1980 to the Department of Industry and Commerce.

has provided the following answer to the honour-

Health Insurance Premiums
(Question No. 1200)

able member's question:
In 1979-80 a senior administrative clerk for the Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies was recruited through a private

Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
( I) Has he approved retroactive increases in health in-

employment agency at a cost of $538.70. No other staff were recruited through private employment agcncies in 1979-80 for my Department or any other statutory authority under my aegis.

surance premiums so that the period of cover contracted for has been reduced unilaterally.

Recruitment: Department of Housing and

(2) Do advance long term premiums have a loan value at

Construction

present rates of interest which brings their value close to that

(Question No. 1308)

of later short term premiums adjusted for inflation; if so, will he correct this retrospective levy.
Mr MacKelIarThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Were any staff of his Department or statutory authorities under his aegis recruited through private employment

(1) Increases in contribution rates charged by a registered agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.

health benefits organisation are generally approved to finance higher benefit payments, thus ensuring the continued financial viability of the organisation. Increases in contributions are

Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

based on the whole membership of an organisation and not on

(I) No staff of the Department of Housing and Construc-

an individual contributor basis, as is the case in other forms of tion or statutory authorities under my aegis was recruited

general insurance. Accordingly, the date of application to all through private employment agencies in 1979-80.

contributors of any contribution increase becomes an important factor because higher benefits usually become payable to

Industrial Action: Department of Housing and

all contributors from the same date. It is not uncommon for organisations to adjust automatically contributions paid several months in advance to take into account any increase in

Construction
(Question No. 1386)

contribution rates. It is generally simpler for organisations to

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Housing and

reduce the period for which advance contributions have been paid than to seek a lump sum adjustment.

Construction, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(2) Organisations usually provide discounts on contributions paid in advance of up to four weeks in a year. This discount takes into account the advantages accruing to organisations from advance contributions i.e. savings in collection costs and interest earned. In the circumstances, the point

(1) How many officers or employees in his Department have been, (a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations, or other restrictive work actions, in each of the last 2 years.
(2) How many manhours were involved in these actions.

raised by the honourable member should be considered in this light. The matter of the treatment of advance contributions is basically determined by organisations themselves and I would not propose to vary this arrangement.

(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the stike; if so, on what occasions.
(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regu-

Recruitment: Department of Business and Consumer Affairs
(Question No. 1304)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

lations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what occasions.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) During the 12 months from April 1979 to April 1980 there have been 2530 instances of officers engaging in

Were any staff of his Department or statutory authorities strike action.

under his aegis recruited through private employment agen-

During the 12 months from April 1980 to April 1981, there

ciesin 1979-80; ifso, for what position and at what cost.

have been 1320 instances of officers engaging in strike action.

2636 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(b) During the 12 months from April 1979 to April 1980, there have been 150 instances of officers and employees engaging in go slow, work to regulations, or other restrictive work actions.
From April 1980 to April 1981, there have been 61 instances of officers and employees engaging in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions.
Some officers and employees have been involved in more than one action.
(2) During the 12 months from April 1979 to April 1980, manhours lost due to strike action or other restrictive work actions totalled 13,119.
During the 12 months from April 1980 to April 1981, manhours lost totalled 24,953.
(3) No officers or employees of the Department were paid while on strike.
(4) No pay reductions or disciplinary actions were taken in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions.
Engagement by officers in Outside Employment: Department ofHousing and Construction
(Question No. 1412)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Have any officers and employees of his Department been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many.
(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment approved in each case.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Thirty-two officers and employees of the Department have been granted permission to engage in outside employment.
(2) The division, approximate salary level and nature of outside employment of each officer and employee granted permission to engage in outside employment, is as listed below.
Third Division Engineer Class 3; $22,423-24,725; Part-time Teacher Engineer Class 4; $25,876-27,428; Part-time Lecturer Engineer Class 3; $22,423-24,725; Part-time Teacher Architect Class 3; $22,222-24,591; Member of ACT Design and Siting Review Committee Architect Class 3; $22,222-24,591; Part-time Lecturer Architect Class 3; $22,222-24,591; Part-time Lecturer Project Manager; $25,876-27,428; Part-time Lecturer Quantity Surveyor Class 2; $18,942-20,918; Part-time Lecturer Architect Class 3; $22,222-24,591; Violinist Science Grade 1; $13,041-18,233; Part-time Lecturer Clerk Class 7; $19,453-20,618; Part-time Lectl1rer Clerk Class 7; $19,453-20,618; Casual Taxi Driver Clerk Class 5; $15,981-17,280; Part-time Lecturer Clerk Class 5; $15,981-17,280; Part-time Teacher Clerk Class 2/3; $12,272-13,807; Bookmaker Clerk Class 2/3; $12,272-13,807; Part-time Office Cleaner Clerk Class I; $10,157-11,895; Licensed Jockey.
Fourth Division Senior Draftsman; $17,646-18,531; Hire Car Driver Senior Draftsman; $17,646-18,531; ParHime Lecturer

Senior Technical Officer Grade 1; $17,646-18,531; Parttime Lecturer
Works Supervisor; $16,581-17,514; Part-time Lecturer Technical Officer Grade 2; $16,328-17,203; Community
Representative on TAFE College Council Stores Supervisor; $12,578-13,007; Petrol Bowser
Attendant Clerical Assistant Grade 4; $11,584-12,061; Hire Car
Driver Clerical Assistant Grade 4; $11,584-12,061;
Photographer Photographer; $11,150-12,668; Cameraman Clerical Assistant Grade 3; $10,647-11,350; Cash Pay-
ments Enveloper Clerical Assistant Grade 3; $10,647-11,350; Part-time
Teacher Clerical Assistant Grade 2; $9,946-10,417; Member of
Rock Band Typist Grade 1; $9,664-10,255; Gas Cylinder Deliverer Clerical Assistant Grade 1; $9,541-9,788; Avon
Representative
Exempt Electrician; $12,440; Casual Cleaner
Air Travel in Australia: Department of Aboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 1489)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What sum was paid by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs, or by Departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by that Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The total amount paid by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs to each airline for air travel in respect of scheduled airline services within Australia during 1979-80 was:

Airline
Air Tasmania . . . . . Airlines of New South Wales Airlines of South Australia Ansett Airlines of Australia Bizjets Bush Pilots Airways Connair Davey Air East Coast Air East West Airlines Hazelton Air Services MacRobertson Miller Airlines Masling Commuter Services Opal Air Pagas Airlines Rossair Aviation South Coast Airlines Trans-Australia Airlines Thorpes Transport Williams Aviation

Amount
$ 232 13,649 1,958 193,494 46 5,813 16,500 5,269 122 7,313 106 25,223 49 2,612 449 248 98 178,856 6,859 560

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2637

Head Office, Department ofIndustry and Commerce
(Question No. 1494)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Are any sections of the Head Office of his Department not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many staff are in each?
(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so, when.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1 ) Yes. The sections concerned, and present staffing (shown in brackets) are:
Shipbuilding Production Section (9) Shipbuilding Administration Section (8) Ship Design Section (26) Project Australia Secretariat (6) Accounting Policy and Systems (12) Administration (7) Aircraft (6) Automatic Data Processing (58) Buildings and Property (10) Cataloguing (22) Consultative Services (7) Electrical Engineering (12) Industrial (15) Internal Audit (2) Security (5) Staff Development (4).
(2) Decisions to relocate units of Government employment to Canberra are taken by Government on the advice of the Location of Australian Government Employment Committee (LAGE), an IDC chaired by the PSB. The advice tendered to Government by the LAGE Committee is based on submissions by the relevant Department, and consultations with interested bodies such as staff organisations. Any plans to relocate the sections in Canberra is a matter for LAGE consideration and subsequent decisions by Government.
Home Telephone Rentals: Department of Communications
(Question No. 1521)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) How many officers and employees of his Department have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully or (b) partially paid by his Department.
(2) What was the cost to his Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) Nil, (b) 69.
(2) $7,937.87.
Recycling of Paper: Department of Defence
(Question No. 1579)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(I) Has any action been taken by his Department to recycle paper; if so, what action.

Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Department of Defence uses paper re-cycling services for unclassified waste where these are arranged by the Department of Administrative Services. This is the system presently in use in the Defence Regional Offices in NSW and Victoria.
(2) Generally unclassified waste paper not covered by the process in (1) above is disposed of by cleaners contracted through the Department of Administrative Services.
(3) Under no circumstances will classified waste be made available for fe-cycling. Classified waste is sealed in marked bags and burnt under surveillance.
Recycling of Paper: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 1587)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
Has any action been taken by his Department to recycle paper; if so what action.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Where possible obsolete forms and other non-classified paper are reused within the Department.
In other cases, used paper is disposed of through Commonwealth waste disposal contracts under the Supervision of the Department of Administrative Services. I understand that non-soiled waste paper is recycled through the Canberra Paper and Cardboard Recycling Company.
Recycling of Paper: Department ofHousing and Construction
(Question No. 1594)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Has any action been taken by his Department to recycle paper; if so, what action.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The following procedures have been established by the Department of Housing and Construction and are operational for the recycling ofwaste paper:
Out of date minute paper, letterhead and other usable clean waste paper is made into pads and used for note paper.
Bulk pre-printed paper, forms and unusable material is collected by officers of the Department of Administrative Services and delivered to a recycling depot for pulping.
Cardboard and similar clean paper waste is collected by a recycling firm.
Classified material is disposed of by burning or pUlping.
Radio Australia
(Question No. 1634)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Have studies been made to assess the suitability of Christmas Island for location of transmitters for Radio Australia; if so, what were the major conclusions of the studies.

2638 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Detailed submissions prepared by Telecom Australia concerning the suitability of Christmas Island for use as a transmitting station by Radio Australia were considered by the Independent Inquiry into Radio Australia chaired by Sir Keith Waller CBE. In Section 12.2 of its Report of December 1975, the Inquiry found that this site offered transmission advantages over Darwin and Carnarvon to certain prime target areas; however, in the light of Radio Australia's priorities,
high cost, and the difficulties of operating such a station, it
concluded that these advantages were not great enough to justify establishment at Christeas Island.
The Inter-Departmental Committee which considered the recommendations of the Waller Report, found that these reasons were still valid. Eventually it was decided to restore the Radio Australia facilities at Cox Peninsula.
Fire extinguishers
(Question No. 1635)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What action has been taken by his Department concerning the finding by the Department of Housing and Construction reported in the 1979-80 Annual Report of the Commonwealth Fire Board, that self-contained automatic halon gas fire extinguishers installed in fume cupboards where acid chemicals are used deteriorate rapidly.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
My Department does not have any self-contained automatic halon gas fire extinguishers installed in fume cupboards where acid chemicals are used.
Soviet Union Warships in the Indian Ocean
(Question No. 1656)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(l) How many warships of the Soviet Union were sighted in the Indian Ocean in (a) 1979 (b) 1980.
(2) What is the estimated number of ships days spent in the Indian Ocean by each Soviet warship.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) 34 (b) 39.
(2) The table below shows the estimated number of ship days spent in the Indian Ocean by each Soviet ship. Each reference to a class of ship represents a separate visit by a ship of that class.

Class of ship
Carriers Kiev
Cruisers Kresta Kresta Kresta Kynda Kara Kara Sverdlov

1979 1980

63

213

202

164

58

247

39

150

120

63

20

Class of ship
Destroyers Kashin Kashin Kotlin Kotlin
Frigates Krivak Krivak Krivak Krivak Krivak Krivak
Krivak Krivak Petya Petya Petya Petya Riga Riga Minesweepers T-58 T-58 Natya Natya Natya Natya Landing Ships Rogov . Alligator Alligator Alligator Alligator Polnoeny Ropueha Ropucha Ropucha Submarines Foxtrot Foxtrot Foxtrot Foxtrot Echo II Echo II Echo II Echo II Echo II
Total

1979 1980

213 39
27 80 56 57 140
6 169 166 169 25
6 6 164 213
63 6
124
120 234 164
liS 44
143 28 103 25
3367

70 88 83 213
69 270 190
II 4 218 22 139 66
138 82
238 88 92 249
182 142 268 99 60 56 102
182 194 178
182 1<)0 113 23
2 4980

Servicing of Jet Engine used in 'Spirit of Australia'
(Question No. 1663)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9Apri11981:
Is the jet engine used by Mr Ken Warby in his record breaking boat 'Spirit of Australia' serviced by Defence personnel; if so, (a) under what arrangements, (b) at what cost to the Commonwealth and (e) who else is receiving similar assistance.
Mr KiUen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
In 1978 agreement was reached between Mr Warby and my Department to a 'one-time' Service of the J34 engine fitted to the 'Spirit of Australia' in preparation for his attempt on the world water speed record. In recent years the J34 type engine

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2639

has been used as the major training engine for engine fitters at the RAAF School of Technical Training, Wagga. These engines are stripped, rebuilt, test run, and calibrated by trainees as part of their training. As Mr Warby's engine was the only one in Australia fitted with an afterburner it provided an excellent opportunity to demonstrate and teach afterburner operations to trainees whilst at the same time directly benefiting RAAF morale.
(a) Mr Warby signed a form of indemnity in which he agreed to provide all materials required to service the engine and to indemnify the Commonwealth and its Servicemen or servants against any claims that might arise as a result of the servicing.
(b) The servicing was provided at no additional cost to the Commonwealth.
(c) Although it is RAAF policy to look for training projects of this nature to provide motivation and interest to trainees, no similar assistance of this magnitude is currently being provided.
Plant, Pest and Disease Survey of Norfolk Island
(Question No.I7ll)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) What results were obtained from the plant, pest and disease survey of Norfolk Island conducted by officers of his Department in 1980.
(2) What was the total cost to the Commonwealth of the survey.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The results of the survey are not yet available. A preliminary report has been prepared and submitted to the Norfolk Island Administration on material collected on the first pest and diseases survey undertaken during February 1980. Material collected on the second survey conducted during November 1980 is currently being processed and it is anticipated that the final report will be available by July 1981 for presentation to the Norfolk Island Administration.
I do not propose to make known any results until the Administration has had the opportunity to examine the final report.
(2) Approximately $5,000.
Health Care Consumers' Association: Grant from the Capital Territory
(Question No. 1720)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
What is the Health Care Consumers' Association and what qualified it for a grant of $450 from the Capital Territory Health Commission in 1979-80.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Health Care Consumers' Association of the ACT is a community based organisation that aims to assist in the improvement of health and health care through consumer involvement by:
Promoting goodwill and understanding between those who render and those who use health care;
investigating the availability of health care; educating the public on the availability of health care;

assessing from the consumer point of view, the adequacy of the health care available and drawing such assessments to the attention of appropriate individuals or groups. The Capital Territory Health Commission made a Community Health Grant of $450 in 1979-80 to the Health Care Consumers' Association for the purpose of conducting a survey of children's experiences in hospital. This survey was considered by the Commission to be of value to the community and to the Commission. The program was under the auspices of the International Year of the Child Committee.
The grant from the Commission covered part of the cost involved in preparation, printing and distribution of a multilingual questionnaire sent to parents with children in the two Commission hospitals.
Deportation of New Zealand Citizen
(Question No. 1734)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(1) Was a New Zealand citizen by the name of Collins recently deported to New Zealand; and if so
(2) Can such a deportation be effective and what safeguards exist to prevent re-entry to Australia.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) It is assumed that the person referred to is Brett Anthony Collins.
On 4 July 1980 I signed an order under Section 13 of the Migration Act 1958 for the deportation of Mr Collins. Subsequently Mr Collins applied to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal for the order to be reviewed. On 22 January 1981 the Tribunal affirmed my decision. The following day Mr Collins lodged an appeal with the Federal Court. A stay of deportation was granted on 23 January 1981 pending the hearing of the appeal.
(2) If Mr Collins is deported, administrative action will be taken to prevent his return. Past experience has shown that, by adopting false identities and abusing the travel facilitation arrangements agreed between Australia and New Zealand, some criminal deportees have attempted, or have been able, to re-enter Australia. This is one of a number of reasons which influenced the Government to decide that persons claiming the benefits of'the Trans-Tasman Travel Arrangement will be asked to identify themselves and to satisfy officials at points of entry that they are entitled to enter Australia. Passport checks have been introduced for this purpose.
Immigration Control Functions
(Question No. 1735)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
What actions have been taken to overcome the limitations on manpower and financial resources for immigration control functions hindering efforts to take advantage of information available on the whereabouts of prohibited immigrations as reported on page 52 of Review '80 published by his Department.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs is engaged in a study of prohibited immigrants in Australia and of methods and procedures by which it can more effectively use its resources to control prohibited immigration. It is not desirable that details of methods and procedures be made public.

2640 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

I can say, however, that I have asked the Department to take vigorous action to achieve a substantial reduction in the number of overstayed visitors, to ask potential or actual prohibited immigrants to leave Australia and, as a last resort, to effect deportation when so ordered. 1 have written to the State and Northern Territory Ministers responsible for immigration and ethnic affairs matters and have discussed with them the possibility of denying prohibited immigrants access to certain services provided free to Australian residents or heavily subsidised by Australian taxpayers.
During the period of the Regularisation of Status Program which operated throughout the second half of 1980 the Department's staff was directed to that program rather than to seeking out prohibited immigrants. As I have made clear, people illegally in Australia who did not take advantage of that last opportunity to regularise their immigration status or who were ineligible to apply cannot expect to be allowed to remain in Australia after the program concluded. Action to detect, apprehend and deal with prohibited immigrants has again been stepped up. The rate of detection has increased in recent weeks. In April it was a monthly record. Prosecutions for working without authority have been instituted successfully. It is expected that as a result of the action taken and under further examination it will be possible to reduce the number of prohibited immigrants in Australia.
Deportations
(Question No. 1737)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Will he expand the table Deportation Orders Made on page 52 of Review '80 to show the causes for the substantially different figures in the table Deportations Carried Out on the same page of that publication.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The difference between figures in the table Deportation Orders Made on page 52 of Review '80, and the table Deportations Carried Out, is attributable to the time lag incurred in many deportations, mainly due to the following factors:
(i) deportation orders made include people whose whereabouts were not known at the time and as it takes a considerable time to locate many of them, their deportation is not necessarily carried out within the same statistical period;
(ii) orders made against criminals are not executed until the deportees complete the custodial portion of their prison sentences; and

(iii) some deportees contest the decision to order their deportation by legal challenge through the courts or through review of the decision by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
A further reason for the difference between orders made and deportations carried oui is that it is normal practice for any fresh information or new circumstances to be considered before an order in force for some time is executed. As a consequence some deportation orders are revoked. Precise statistics are not kept.
Visa Documentation
(Question No. 1738)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many persons were carried to Australia during the year 1 November 1979 to 31 October 1980 without the required visa documentation, and how many were carried by each carrier.
(2) What carriers were prosecuted in respect of these breaches during the same period.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Two thousand seven hundred and one persons are recorded as having arrived by air in Australia during the period 1 November 1979 to 30 October 1980 without visas, who required visas. The table below provides details. It should be noted that the figure includes persons to whom approval was given to travel without a visa in emergency circumstances. It also covers certain exempt persons e.g. transit passengers who are not required to hold a visa for a stay of up to 72 hours, but who on arrival are assessed as non-bona fide and refused entry. Separate statistics of these categories are not maintained.
(2) While evidence existed that some carriers had brought in immigrants without visas, action against these carriers could not be taken because of defects in the relevant provisions of the Migration Act. These defects were removed by amendment of the Migration Act which came into effect on 1 July 1980. Since that date information has been laid against one carrier and other possible prosecutions are being examined.
(3) Airline companies generally have closely co-operated with the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs with a view to eliminating the carriage of unauthorised persons. Their efforts are reflected in the fact that arrivals without visas in the period about which you inquired amount to 0.13 per cent of the total arrivals.

ARRIVALS WITHOUT VISAS NOVEMBER 1979-OCTOBER 1980

Code Name

Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Sep. Oct. Total

Airline AI Air India
AN Ansett
AZ Alitalia
BA British Air
CO Continental
CP Canadian Pacific CX Cathay Pacific EW East West
EJ Air Pacific
GA Garuda JL Japan Air JU Jugoslavenski KL KLM
LH Lufthansa

9

435222

2

2 34

1

1

2

10 7 5 4 2 3 4 4 6 2 8 7 62

29 48 32 32 37 11 22 15 30 20 19 29 324

15 3 1 5 3 4 1 4

5 2 3 46

6 2 5 5 2 2 1 2 1 7 3 3 39

10

3

2

6

7

4

6

1

4

4

4

4

55

3 14 1 4 2 1

1 1 3 30

5 7 2 4 9 5 7 6 2 5 12 3 67

5

2 33 3 1 1 3

2 5 28

32

2

5

1

5

3

2

3

1

1 28

4861

2 1 2 2 3 2 2 33

14 9 5 8 4 2 4 2

5 7 9 69

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2641

Code Name
MH Malaysian MZ Merpati Nusantara ON Air Nauru PA Pan American
R Philippine PX Air Niugini
QF Qantas SA South African SQ Singapore TE Air New Zealand TG Thai Air TN TAA UG Norfolk Island UT UTA
General Aviation
Total

Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May June July Aug. Scpo Oct. Total

10 24 13 23 10

8 17 to

8

13 4 145

I

I

1

3

30 41 26

3 21 14 24

9 21 14 14 i8 235

4

2

16

4

4

1

4

4

3 3 36

66

18 2 2 2

I

132

I 35

92 89 66 81 70 54 43 62 81 47 56 49 790

10

7

8

6

6

8

5

6

7 \I

6 9 89

23 19 12 21

8

6

9 11 11 10

8 11 149

25 30 30 30 24 21 18 26

7 24

9 20 264

6

4

4

5

I

3

3

2

7

2 11

2 50

1

I

2

I

1

2

2752 333

I

2

30

6

1 22

5

2

7

2

5

2

2

1

55

322 332 232 290 236 165 187 178 205 176 187 191 2,701

Ryegrass Toxicity
(Question No. 1747)
!VIr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What sum has been spent from all sources on research into ryegrass toxicity in the last two financial years?
(2) Will the Minister supply information showing:
(a) the amounts spent each year;
(b) the sources of these funds; and
(c) the areas of research in which the funds were spent?
!VIr Thomson-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(1) $477,001 was spent on research into annual ryegrass toxicity during 1978-79 and 1979-80.
(2) (a) and (b).

1978-79 1979-80

Appropriation Funds Reserve Bank Fellowship

$ 208,760

$ 248,271
19,970

Total

208,760 268,241

(c) The areas of research were:
the isolation and identification of the toxic agent in the infected ryegrass;
the source of the toxin and the role of the infecting organism;
the basis of the toxicity; the host-parasite relationships of the disease.
Government Housing: Solar Water Heating
(Question No. 1852)
!VIr Bungey asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many houses are owned by the Commonwealth Government in each State and Territory, and what proportion of these in each State and Territory are equipped with solar water heating systems.
(2) Have any Commonwealth Government homes in each State and Territory been converted to solar water heating in the last 2 years; if so, how many.

!VIr !VIcVeighThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2)-

State and Territory

Number
of houses owned by Commonwealth Government

Number of

Commoowealth

Government

Proportion

homes

with solar

converted

water to solar water

heating heating in the

systems

last 2 years

NSW Vic. Qld SA WA Tas. ACT NT

per cent

2,200

0.5

I

1,600

0

0

1,600

4.0

29

400

3.0

0

1,000

50.0

50

130

0

0

7,400

.04

3

1,800

99.0

0

It should be noted that the above numbers are an approximation, drawn from the records and knowledge of the Department of Housing and Construction. Tbey arc, however, sufficiently accurate to provide a reawnablc assessment in each area.
To provide precise figures would necessitate an exhaustive survey of all departments.
National Capital Development Commission: Projects
(Question No. (853)
!VIr Bungey asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
1. What are the details of the amounts of cost adjustment in respect of the following projects completed by his Department for the National Capital Development Commission: (a) Charnwood High School, (b) Health Services Centre (Stage 2), Mitchell and (c) Conversion of Dickson College (Stage 2).
2. How were the adjustments resulting from the rise and fall provision of the contracts calculated.
3. What specific items were included to make up the amounts shown as adjustment to provisional items and minor on-site variations.

2642 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

4. On whose initiative were the items referred to in part (3)

3. Specific items making up the amounts shown as adjust-

added to the works.

ments to provisional items cover specialist sub-contractors

5. Can better planning obviate the need to make adjustments for provisional items.
6. Does his Department regularly make adjustments for provisional items in construction projects elsewhere in Australia; if not, why not.
7. Were the amounts payable under the rise and fall provision of the contracts in the works referred to in part (I) calculated on the same basis as used by his Department for construction projects outside the Australian Capital Territory; if not, what is the difference.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable

such as mechanical (mainly air conditioning), electrical, fire alarm, landscaping and built-in furniture. Minor on-site variations are adjustments to quantities of materials, client requests for alterations, excavation in rock and documentation errors.
4. After investigation of claims by the Department of Housing and Construction all adjustments to the contract sum are referred to the National Capital Development Commission for approval before the contract is formally adjusted.
5. The inclusion of provisional items in contract documents is an accepted practice covered in the National Public Works Conference General Conditions of contract. It is a practice

member's question is as follows:

which is normally undertaken in the public tendering field.

1. The National Capital Development Commission has authorised the Department of Housing and Construction to adjust the following contracts in the amounts shown:
Charnwood High SchoolRise and FaII-$228,087. Variations-$100,741. Adjustment to Provisional Sums.

All provisional sums form part of the contract. The majority of works covered by them are undertaken by specialist sub-contractors who tender separately and are required on acceptance by the Principal to enter into a contract with the prime contractor. Other provisional sums may be included for unforeseen work to be carried out where the contract calls for alteration works in existing premises and for items included in the works but for which the design documentation is not com-

Thermal Fire Alarms, Provisional Sum-$50,000, Accepted Price-$32,900.
Mechanical, Provisional Sum-$360,000, Accepted Price-$480,000.
Electrical, Provisional Sum-$190,000, Accepted Price-$ln,n7.
Graphics, Provisional Sum-$IO,OOO, Accepted Price-$7,304.
Botany and Animals Building, Provisional Sum-$13,OOO, Accepted Price-$20,346.

plete at the time of calling tenders. 6. Yes. 7. There is no significant difference in the basis used by the
National Capital Development Commission to that used by the Department for projects outside the Australian Capital Territory.
Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of Industry and Commerce

School Name, Provisional Sum-$3,000, Accepted Price-Nil.
Mitchell Health Services Centre (Stage 2). Rise and Fall-$218,570.

(Question No. 1869)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

Variations-$I57,165. Adjustment to Provisional Sums.

(1) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London metropoli-

Fire Protection, Provisional Sum-$83,000, Accepted Price-$94,2I7.
Mechanical, Provisional Sum-- $470,000, Accepted Price-$443,700.

tan police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000 or about 20 per cent by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.

Electrical, Provisional Sum-$183,OOO, Accepted Price-$132,949.
Dumb Waiter, Provisional Sum-$I2,OOO, Accepted Price-$9,147.
Landscaping and Irrigation, Provisional Sum-$40,000, Accepted Price-$32, 155.
Internal Signs, Provisional Sum-$5,000, Accepted Price-$1,180.

(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of his Department controlled; if so, inwhatway.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in his Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honour-

Conversion of Dickson College (Stage 2).

able member's question is as follows:

Rise and Fall-$133,002. Variations-$21 0,779. Adjustment to Provisional Sums.
Thermal Fire Alarms, Provisional Sum-$20,000, Accepted Price-$31 ,950.

(1) No. (2) Yes. Staff are made aware that trunk and STD calls may be made for official purposes and that where personal calls are made the cost must be met by themselves.

Mechanical, Provisional Sum-$170,OOO, Accepted

(3) Consideration is being given to the introduction of

Price-$I43,902.

monitoring devices as part of the refurbishment program of

Electrical, Provisional Sum--$100,000, Accepted the ANZAC Park West Building where it is anticipated all cen-

Price-$105,861.

tral office staff of the Department will be collocated by early

Si te Works and Lan dsca pi n g, Provisional 1982.

Sum-$180,000, Accepted Price-$174,997. 2. Rise and fall adjustments were calculated in accordance

Immigration

with the standard National Capital Development Com-

(Question No. 1901)

mission Special Conditions of Contract which provide for adjustments to contract price in line with movements in award wages and materials indexes as calculated by the Australian Bureau of Statistics.

Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2643

(1) Did he say in answer to my question No. 751 (Hansard, 26 March 1981, page 1071) that 328,730 persons arrived in Australia between 1975 and 1979 with the stated intention of settling.
(2) if so, how many of these persons would have been eligible to apply for Australian citizenship, given the requirements of the Australian Citizenship Act.
Mr Macphee--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(J) Yes.
(2) Settlers are residentially eligible for the grant of citizenship after 3 years' residence in Australia. Persons with three months' service with the permanent armed forces of Australia are exempted from this general provision. There is discretion to waive the residence requirement in the case of spouses, widows or widowers of Australian citizens, or spouses of persons approved for the grant of citizenship, former Australians, and persons under 21 years of age.
Without a breakdown of the 328,730 settlers arriving between 1975 and 1979 in categories such as the foregoing, it is not possible to give an accurate answer. However, it is likely that about 150,000 of the settlers who arrived between January 1975 and June 1979 would have become residentially qualiflcd to apply for Australian citizenship during that period. Most of those who arrived before April 1978 would have met the residential requirements by now.
Disruption to Australian High Frequency Radio Communication
(Question No. 1932)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice,on 29 April 1981:
(1) How many complaints have been received by him and from what quarters have they originated in regard to disruption to Australian high frequency radio communication.
(2) Is it a fact that this interference (a) comes from an over-the-horizon radar system which can track objects such as aircraft which cannot be detected by conventional radar and (b) is making communications extremely difficult and sometimes impossible where (i) air to ground, (ii) ship to shore and (iii) land mobile radar links are concerned and (c) could blot out mayday distress calls and thereby threaten lives.
(3) If so, (a) what action has been taken to establish the origin of the interference and (b) has he notified the International Telecommunication Union of the United Nations Organisation of the problems being experienced in communications.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Since I March 1981 there has been a total of 41 complaints received of interference to services, other than amateur, in the HF bands, 4 of which can be attributed to Over the Horizon Radar and the remainder to other sources such as electrical interference, unlicensed stations and other overseas services. The complaints were received from the operators of the licensed services affected.
In addition, fifteen Amateur Stations reported interference to the amateur bands indicating the source to be from an over the horizon radar transmitter at Kiev, USSR. A further twelve amateurs reported interference to amateur bands from a variety of sources, and in some cases, the interference described could well be from other amateur stations.
My Department has received no complaints from responsible authorities concerning interference from over the horizon radar to air-to-ground, ship to shore or land mobile radio

links. No interference has been observed on or near any of the safety channels which are recognised by international agreement.
2 (c) It is possible that difficulty could be experienced with distress calls if these radar transmissions are made on or adjacent to frequencies assigned for distress calls at the time a distress call is made. However, there is no evidence available within my Department to indicate that any distress calls have been impaired to the extent that a call has been lost as a result of such interference.
Departmental monitoring stations have observed OHR signals on 27.880 MHz, the frequency used for distress in the Australian Inshore Boating Radiocommunication Service (IBRS).
3 (a) My Department is aware of the general belief that the OHR signals are coming from a site or sites near Kiev in Russia. My Department's monitoring of these transmissions while not being conclusive, does not conflict with this belief.
3 (b) No. However, my Department has initiated communication with the USSR seeking their co-operation in avoiding interference to the 27.880 MHz safety channel used by the IBRS.
Refitting of Yacht 'Anaconda II'
(Question No. 1995)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 29 April 1981:
(1) Was any repair or refitting of the Yacht Anaconda II associated with her participation in the Parmelia Race in 1979, carried out at the expense of the Government, other than that indicated in his answers to questions No. 4225 (Hansard, 7 June 1979, page 3168) and No. 4544 (Hansard, 12 September 1979, pages 1062-3).
(2) If so what work was carried out and at what cost.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) Repair of refrigeration equipment, $196.06.
Non-government Business Colleges
(Question No. 1998)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 29 April 1981 :
(I) Are privately owned and operated business colleges required to submit to the Tertiary Education Commission a statutory declaration at the end of each quarter setting out enrolments in approved courses.
(2) What are the total enrolments in non-government business colleges for each State and Territory for the quarter ended 31 December 1980.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Financial assistance provided to non-government business colleges under the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act, 1978, is administered by the Department of Education. All approved colleges are required to submit to the Department of Education a list of students enrolled in approved courses under cover of a statutory declaration at the end of each quarter. The list indicates the students enrolled for each month of the quarter.
(2) The numbers of full-time students enrolled in approved courses at non-government business colleges in each State and

2644 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Territory, in respect of whom financial assistance was provided for the quarter ended 31 December 1980 were:

October November December

1980

1980

1980

New South Wales Victoria Western Australia
South Australia Queensland Tasmania Australian Capital
Territory Northern Territory

2,040

1,474

416

1,789

1,582

139

606

515

138

492

467

36

372

320

140

42

31

16

Total

5,341

4,389

885

Financial assistance is not provided in respect of part-time students or full-time students enrolled in non-approved courses. The Department of Education does not maintain statistics of such enrolments.

Hydrogen-powered Car
(Question No. 2005)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 29 April 1981 :
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a letter published in the Bulletin, Rockhampton, Queensland, on 18 April 1981, reporting that (a) the Consumers' Solar Electric Power Corporation in Culvar City, California, United States of America, has a hydrogen-powered car using an easily stored ammoniabased liquid hydride produced from hydrogen provided by electrolysis using solar power through photovoltaic cells available at one-tenth of the usual commercial cost, making local fuel production by service stations a feasible proposition, and (b) engine conversion similar to that done for this car cost approximately $US350 at present.
(2) Will he investigate the report and, in particular, seek the views of the Australian National University Research School of Physical Sciences, Department of Engineering Physics, where alternative catalytic processes have been developed using solar heat concentration for producing ammonia and hydrogen.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes.
(2) Representations by the Consumers' Solar Electric Power Corporation concerning their solar-hydrogen production process have been receiving departmental consideration since August 1979. The economic basis of this process is the ability to mass produce photovoltaic cells at less than one tenth the cost of current cells. At present this is only an ambitious goal which the United States Department of Energy Program hopes to realise by 1986. Realisation of this goal would enhance the commercialisation of many technologies which are based on solar cells.
Liquid hydrides as a means of storing hydrogen for use as a fuel are a new concept. This has been bought to the attention of the ANU. They advise that they would require more technical information before they could assess the claims made in the letter for these liquid hydrides. However, I understand that the chemical composition of the ammonia-based liquid hydride called Hy-Fuel by the Consumers' Solar Electric

Power Corporation is confidential pending the granting of patent protection.
Defence Computer Program
(Question No. 2236)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(1) Have reports by the Auditor-General often criticis~d the management of the Defence computer program and Its capabilities; if so, have the problems been remedied.
(2) What stage has the installation of the Univac computer system reached.
(3) Have the Univac computers now being installed by his Department already been superseded by changed technologies.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Auditor-General over the past five years has cri-' ticised the management of the Defence computing program and its capabilities in relation to:
(a) Honeywell Computer Operations-Criticism of Honeywell operations centred on reliability and maintenance of Honeywell machines and, the ability to maintain an essential service until systems were transferred to Univac. These problems were addressed by the installation of an additional Honeywell H8200 in June 1978.
(b) System Development-In 1976-77 the Auditor General commented on an apparent lack of an approved plan detailing a timetable for the transfer of systems from Honeywell to Univac. This area has since been subjected to rigorous estimating, resource and project control procedures. A Schedule of Activity and Achievement was approved in September 1977 and has been updated regularly to reflect the current position. This schedule is endorsed yearly by a high level Policy Committee. In his 1979-80 report the Auditor General noted the continued improvements in project control and that miw systems development and design methodology is planned for introduction in 1981; this is expected to result in further improvement.
(c) Mini Computers-Criticism in this area referred to slippage of target dates, apparent over manning of data preparation operator positions at the larger RAAF bases and problems of site works and accommodation. Development and implementation of systems on mini computers is now progressing substantially according to target dates. More work is being done on data preparation establishment criteria. Site modifications are done as funds allow.
(d) Micrographics-In 1977-78 the Auditor-General referred to Defence placing work with outside contractors instead of the Micrographics Service Bureau of the Australian Government Publishing Service. All micrographic output produced by Defence Computing Division is now processed by AGPS.
(2) Two mainframe computers, models 1100-82, are installed in separate locations. Each is working 10 shifts per week. A third mainframe, also an 1100-82, approved in January 1981, is expected to be installed at a third location by mid 1982.
(3) No. All hardware is current, with the exception of two leased communication controllers which are in the process of being updated. Similarly, all manufacturer's software in use is the current version.

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2645

Ord River Scheme
(Question No. 2270)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(1) What was the specific purpose of the Western Australian Agreement (Ord River Irrigation) Act.
(2) What funds are still available under the Act.
(3) Are the funds in the form of a non-repayable grant or a loan.
(4) For what purpose will the money be used in relation to the Ord River Scheme.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) To provide funds to the State for the development of Stage 2 of the Ord River Irrigation Project.
(2) and (3) $23.8m of loan funds provided for under the Agreement are currently unexpended.
(4) Funds will now only be provided for already approved grain handling and storage facilities.

As a result of these arrangements, shippers of refrigerated meat had the benefit for six months of a 5 per cent lower freight rate than otherwise would have applied. Additionally, there will be no further increase in the Conference base rates during 1981.
(b) The Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation has kept the matter of available capacity and alternative carriers under constant review. The Corporation has from time to time met with representatives of lines serving the Middle East region other than those of the Australia Middle East Gulf Conference. It is understood that these non-conference lines have achieved a reasonable degree of success and have attracted a sizeable proportion of the refrigerated meat volume being lifted to Middle East destinations.
(3) The AMLC has responsibility under its enabling legislation, the AMLC Act 1977, to negotiate freight rates and other conditions of carriage on behalf of the meat industry with Conference Lines and other carriers. The Act provides for Ministerial approval for shipping arrangements made by the Corporation. In the Government's view the AMLC has discharged this responsibility satisfactorily to date.
In addition, the Government is represented at freight rate negotiations between the Australian Shippers Council and Conference Lines under the provisions of Part 10 of the Trade Practices Act 1974.

Freight Charges for Exports to Middle East and Gulf Countries
(Question No. 712)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 5 March 1981:
(I) Is he able to say whether a period of 12 months has elapsed since the formation of the Middle East and Gulf Shipping Conference; if so, have freight charges for the export of frozen meat from Australia to the Middle East and Gulf countries increased since the establishment of the Conference.
(2) Has the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation been (a) negotiating reduced freight rates to those countries or (b) seeking alternate carriers; if so, with what success.
(3) Has the Government taken any action on the matter beyond that undertaken by the Corporation; if so, what has been achieved.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes; yes.
(2) (a) Alignment of freight rates upon formation of the Australia Middle East Gulf Conference on 1 March 1980 resulted in a substantial effective increase in the freight rate being applied by the shipping line carrying the bulk of meat cargoes to the Gulf area. Subsequently, the Conference reached agreement with the Australian Shippers Council on a 17t per cent increase in freight rates from 10 July 1980. Meat shipper representatives did not accept this increase negotiated in the Shippers Council and the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation (AMLC) , on behalf of meat shippers, conducted separate negotiations with the Conference. No agreement emerged from those negotiations.
The outcome was that the AMLC, with the approval of the Minister for Primary Industry, invoked powers available in its Act and set a maximum freight rate providing for a l2t per cent increase in meat freight rates from 4 July 1980. Subsequent discussions between AMLC and the Conference on 8 December 1980 resulted in agreement by both parties to a further 5 per cent increase in meat freight rates to apply for one year from 1 January 1981.

Underspending of Estimates: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 1103)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division (a) 165~Administrative, (b) 172-Courts administration, (c) 173-- Family law, (d) 175-Australian Legal Aid Office, (e) 177-Legal Aid Commission (Australian Capital Territory), (I) I78-Administrative Appeals Tribunal, (g) 179-Administrative Review Council, (h) 190-0ffice of Parliamentary Counsel and (j) 191Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission.
(2) Has there been an underspending in these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, Statement of Savings Expected in Annual Appropriations made by Acts Nos. 141 and 142-- Appropriation Acts (Nos. 1 and 2) 1980-81; ifso, what are the reasons.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Treasurer to House of Representatives question on notice No. 1101 Hansard, 13 May 1981, page 2374.
East Timor Military Exercises
(Question No. 1152)
Mr Howe asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(1) Is he able to say what is the scale of the current military exercises in Indonesia.
(2) Are there any Australian observers present.
(3) Are there any Australian observers in East Timor observing the military exercises there.

2646 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(4) Is he also able to say whether, as reported in the Indonesian Press, the East Timorese exercises represent the preliminaries to a major offensive against Fretelin forces.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The recent major Indonesian joint exercise, which was held in eastern Indonesia from 18 March to 1 April, involved the deployment of some 35,000 men together with naval ships and aircraft. The exercise was conducted in three separate locations in eastern Indonesia-Timor, Maluku, and Irian Jaya. The exercise was part of a continuing program of exercises being held throughout Indonesia aimed at upgrading the defensive capability of Indonesia's armed forces. The previous exercise in 1980 was conducted in the First National Defence Area Command which covers Sumatra and West Kalimantan.
(2) and (3) The Australian Defence Attache, together with a number ofother military attaches from other countries resident in Jakarta, observed al1 parts of the exercise at the invitation of the Indonesian Government.
(4) Matters relating to security in the Indonesian province of East Timor are the direct domestic responsibility of the Indonesian Government, and it is not for me to speculate on Indonesian Government intentions. I am able to say, that the Defence Attache's report of the Timor segment of the exercise contained no indication that the exercise was anything more than an exercise. However, it is possible that Fretelin guerilla remnants continue to be active in parts of the province and it would be expected that Indonesian forces conduct operations against them.
Recruitment through Private Employment Agencies: Department of National Development
and Energy
(Question No. 1288)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Were any staff of the Department of National Development and Energy or statutory authorities under the Minister's aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Yes. The Pipeline Authority recruited four stenosecretaries through private employment agencies in 1979-80 at a total cost of $2,477.
Industrial Action: Department ofAdministrative Services
(Question No. 1381)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers or employees in his Department have been (a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions, in each of the last 2 years.
(2) How many manhours were involved in these actions.
(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike; if so, on what occasions.

(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what occasions.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) Officers or employees on strike were as fol1ows: Year ending 31 March 1980-2,829 Year ending 31 March 1981-6,202.
(b) Officers or employees engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions were as fol1ows:
Year ending 31 March 1980-1 Year ending 31 March 1981-175.
Officers or employees involved in more than one stoppage are included for each individual stoppage.
(2) (a) Manhours involved were as fol1ows: Strikes Year ending 31 March 1980-24,457 Year ending 31 March 1981-31,265.
(b) Go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions
Year ending 31 March 1980-31 Year ending 31 March 1981-845.
(3) No employees on strike were paid during the strike.
(4) Two officers were stood down for failing to carry out the ful1 range of their duties during industrial action in respect of the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Bill.
Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 1389)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Have any officers and employees of his Department been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many.
(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment approved in each case.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) Yes. One.
(2) A Third Division officer receiving $24,083 p.a. To provide piano tuition in the officer's own time.
Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 1400)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) Have any officers and employees of the Attorney General's Department been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many.
(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of each officer or' employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment approved in each case.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answers to the honourable member's question:
(1 ) Yes currently 15.

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2647

(2) Details in respect of those with current approval are as follows-

Head Office, Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 1504)

Division

Nature of Outside Salary employment

Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981 :

Third Third Third Third Third Third Third Third Third Third Third Third Third
Fourth Fourth

$ 20,770 18,406 26,297 22,025 19,336 25,184 25,184 9,243 28,799 27,085 27,903 22,025 12,500
12,061 12,061

Musician Musician Lecturer Lecturer Lecturer Lecturer Musician Barmaid Tutor Lecturer Tutor Tutor Modelling and promo-
tional Work Waiter
Musician

Overseas Travel: Department ofTrade and Resources
(Question No. 1441)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances, etc.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) One hundred and sixty five.
(2) $554,957.29.

(1) Are any sections of the Head Office of the Attorney-
General's Department not located in Canberra; if so what are the sections and how many staff are in each.

(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so, when.

Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(!) The Head Office of the Attorncy-General's Department is located in Canberra. Certain elements of the Department perform functions of a regional nature in the States
although organisationally attached to the Head Office. Their locations and staff numbers are:

Management and Special Services Division, Special

Services Branch

Film Censorship Section, Sydney . . . . . 29

Literature Review and Policy Section, Sydney

3

Literature Review and Policy Section, Mel-

bourne . . . . . . . - - . . ..

3

Literature Review and Policy Section, Brisbane

1

Literature Review and Policy Section, Adelaide

1

Operations Branch

Internal Audit Section, Sydeny .

2

Internal Audit Section, Melbourne

2

Internal Audit Section, Brisbane

I

Internal Audit Section, Adelaide

I

Crown Solicitor's Division, Melbourne

Postal Sub-Office . . . . . .

I

Telecom Sub-office . . . . .

2

Industrial Relations Bureau Sub-Office

I

(2) There are no plans to relocate these sections in Canberra.

Home Telephone Rentals: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 1522)

Air Travel in Australia: Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 1467)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:

What sum was paid by his Department, or by Departments formally encompassing the functions now performed by his Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia
during 1979-80.

Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

TAA Ansett Qantas Hazelton Air Services SAATAS MacRobertson Miller Airline Services Stilwell Airlines . . . . . . .

$ 258,904 127,763
480
1,493 690 748 143

390,221

(I) How many officers and employees of the Department of National Development and Energy have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully or (b) partially paid by . the Department.
(2) What was the cost to the Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) (a) Nil. (b) 43.
(2) $6,086.06.
Home Telephone Rentals: Department of Finance
(Question No. 1528)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

2648 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(1) How many officers and employees of the Department of Finance have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully or (b) partially paid by the Department.
(2) What was the cost to the Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.
Mr Howard~The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) (a) None. (b) 65. (2) $7,214.66.
Home Telephone Rentals: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 1537)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully or (b) partially paid by his Department.
(2) What was the cost to his Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) One. (b) 439. (2) $69,258.23.
Recycling of Paper: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 1582)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
Has any action been taken by the Attorney-General's Department to re-cycle paper; if so, what action?
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The majority of waste paper collected within my Department comes within cleaning contracts under the control of the Minister for Administrative Services. Apart from this, some waste paper is given to charitable organisations and some re-cycled.
Post Offices in Western Australia
(Question No. 1632)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What official Post Offices in Western Australia have been (a) closed and (b) converted to unofficial status, since formation of the Australian Postal Commission.
(2) What new Post Offices have been opened in Western Australia during the same period.
Mr SincJair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Since formation of the Australian Postal Commission, official post offices in the following areas in Western Australia have:
(a) Closed-East Fremantle.
(b) Been converted to non-official status-Balingup, Broomehill, Coorow, Cue, Dumbleyung, Medina,

Nungarin, Tammin, Trayning, Wickepin, Wittenoom, Yalgoo, Yarloop.
(2) During the same period, post offices have opened in the following areas:
Official-Greenwood, Hillarys.
Non-official-Beckenham, Beldon, Booragoon, Bull Creek, Cervantes, Kardinya, Kenwick*, Koondoola, Leeman, Leinster, Mirrabooka, QEII Medical Centre (Nedlands), Rockingham South, Telfer, Tone River Mill**, Withers.
* Kenwick Non-official Post Office re-opened on 1 July
1977 following a brief temporary closure.
*' Tone River Mill Non-official Post Office re-opened on 1
May 1978, following a brief temporary closure. The office was closed permanently on 28 December 1978.
Powers of Delegation
(Question No. 1668)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 ;
(I) What statutory authorities or officers possess powers of delegation similar to that requested by the Commissioner for Community Relations in his 5th Annual Report, for 1979-80, at page 9, enabling them to grant legislative protection to persons in the community who give them assistance.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) In his 5th Report the Commissioner for Community Relations lists briefly recommendations made in earlier reports. In his 4th Report the Commissioner set out more fully the recommendation to which the honourable member refers, as follows:
The Commissioner for Community Relations should have power to delegate his functions as required to Consultative Committees on Community Relations, other organisations, and individuals whom he considers capable of assisting him to inquire into and to settle complaints of racial discrimination lodged with him in writing.
The Racial Discrimination Act as it then stood empowered the Commissioner to delegate powers to members of his staff but not to other persons.
The recent amendments to the Racial Discrimination Act will permit the Human Rights Commission to delegate its functions under the Act to any person and the Commissioner for Community Relations to delegate his functions to any person approved by the Commission.
PVC Workers
(Question No. 1704)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Has the attention of the Minister been drawn to a report in the United Kingdom newspaper Daily Mirror of II July 1980, claiming that workers in PVC factories are especially susceptible to an often fatal disease, angiosarcoma.
(2) If so,is there any substance in the report.
(3) What action has been taken in Australia to ensure that PVC workers are working in a safe environment and are not in danger from this disease.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2649

(I) Yes.
(2) and (3) The National Health and Medical Research Council (NH & MRC) has, for some years, been aware of the human carcinogenic properties of vinyl chloride and of health hazards to workers engaged in the production of vinyl chloride and its conversion to polyvinyl chloride (PVC).
Accordingly, the Council has produced documents recommended for application in the vinyl chloride industry, including--
Statement to employees in the vinyl chloride industry
Vinyl Chloride- -Australian Code of Safe Practice.
These documents, endorsed by the Council at its Eightyfirst Session in 1975 and updated since then, have been widely distributed.
It should be noted, however, that the NH & MRC acts in an advisory capacity only to governments in Australia on matters relating to public health. The question of implementation of the Council's recommendations is, therefore, primarily one for consideration by the individual governments concerned in the context of their own legislative and enforcement requirements.

Australian Capital Territory Agents Board
(Question No. 1794)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

Did Mr J. J. O'Neill and Mr A. V. Curtis, members of the Agents Board of the Australian Capital Territory, and Mr
R. J. Butler, Registrar of Agents, attend the 13th Annual Conference of Australian (Auctioners and Agents) Licensing Authorities in Adelaide in October 1979 as an official expense; if so, what was the cost of this attendance.

Mr Hodgruan--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

I am informed by my Department that the attendance of Mr J. J. O'Neill, Mr A. V. Curtis and Mr R.I. Butler at the 13th Annual Conference of Australian (Auctioneers and Agents) Licensing Authorities in Adelaide in October 1979
was an official expense.

The cost of their attendance was $1,215, made up as follows:

Fees to Board Members Travelling Allowances Fares (economy class travel)

$ 432.00
318.00
465.00

Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 1871)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian on 18 July 1979, page 37, that London metropolitan police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000 or about 20 per cent by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of the Department of National Development and Energy controlled; if so, in what way.

(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in the Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) No, but my Department is conversant with the range of monitoring equipment available.
(2) Direct access to STD facilities is restricted to senior officers by the barring of most extensions. Private trunk calls may, in emergencies and with the approval of supervisors, be booked through the switchboard on a cost re-imbursement basis. Some personal local calls are made by staff.
(3) No.
Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of Finance
(Question No. 1877)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(l) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London metropolitan police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000 or about 20 per cent by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone cans and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of the Department of Finance controned; if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in the Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr HowardThe Minister for Finance has supplied the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes, by this question.
(2) Department of Finance officers are instructed that telephones are provided for official purposes and that private trunk line calls are not to be made without the specific prior approval of a supervisor. Such calls are placed through the switchboard operator and staff are required to pay the costs. STD facilities are restricted to officers who have a demonstrated need for regular long distance official calls.
(3) The Department of Finance Central Office switchboard has previously incorporated call analysers which could carry out random checks on STD calls. Since the widespread barring of extensions to STD facilities this equipment has not been used.
Telephone Calls by Staff: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 1879)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) Has the Attorney-General's attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London metropolitan police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000 or about 20 per cent by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.

2650 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by statT of the Attorney-General's Department controlled; if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in the Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) In many offices a number of telephones are STD barred. Access to STD in these offices is restricted to approved officers. In some instances telephones with access to STD are fitted with control keys to prevent unauthorised use. The PABX systems in some offices are unsuitable for access barring. Staff in all offices have been informed that they are not permitted to make STD calls for private purposes. Excessive local personal calls are controlled by normal supervision. Private trunk calls may be made through the switchboard operator and payment subsequently made for the call.
(3) No.
Cost of Fuel Purchases by Commonwealth Government
(Question No. 1895)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What was the cost of fuel purchases by the Commonwealth Government during 1979-80.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
My Department does not have figures available for the cost of actual purchases made during this period. Such information may be available from the various departments and authorities having access to the period contracts arranged by my Department for fuel.
Based on estimates of purchases when these contracts were arranged, it is estimated that fuel purchased between 1 July 1979 and 30 June 1980 was about $90m.
Australian Technology Corporation Pty Ltd
(Question No. 1921)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(I) What is the nature of the Australian Technology Corporation Pty Ltd, described in the Canberra Times of 20 March 1981 as a Government funded organisation.
(2) When was it set up.
(3) What are its terms of reference.
(4) What is its corporate structure.

Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Australian Technology Corporation Pty Ltd is a private company incorporated in the Australian Capital Territory and funded entirely by private capital.
(2) to (9) Since Australian Technology Corporation Pty Ltd is a private company the information sought in questions (2) to (9) would be available from the company.
Micronesia
(Question No. 1928)
Mr Howe asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 28 April1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the concern being expressed by Micronesian leaders over the Reagan Administration's delay in considering an agreement on the future political status of Micronesia.
(2) Has his attention also been drawn to the fact that this concern has been intensified because of the Reagan Administration's failure to re-appoint Mr Peter Rosenblatt, the head of the United States of America negotiating team for 3t years, thus delaying the notification of the formula known as the Compact of Free Association.
(3) What is the Australian Government's attitude towards Micronesian independence and is it prepared to place pressure on the Reagan Administration to speed up the process towards independence.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) I am aware that a number of Micronesian spokesmen have expressed concern that the Compact of Free Association might be delayed following the decision of the United States Administration to review United States policy on ending the Trusteeship.
(2) I am also aware that Mr Rosenblatt submitted his resignation as Head of the United States Delegation to the Micronesian Political Status Negotiations to the incoming President. This action is normal procedure for holders of executive office in the United States after the election of a new President. A successor to Mr Rosenblatt has not yet been appointed by the new Administration, and the negotiations remain suspended for the time being. However, the failure to appoint a new Head of the United States Delegation need not necessarily delay the endorsement of the Compact of Free Association, although it does appear probable that termination of the Trusteeship this year will not be achieved.
(3) The Australian Government looks forward to the successful conclusion of the long process of negotiation which will settle the political status of the Micronesian entities. We have noted that the process has involved, and will continue to involve, extensive consultation with the peoples of the islands. I see no reason for Australia to make the sort of representations to the United States on this issue suggested by the honourable member.

(5) Who are the members of its board. (6) What Minister takes responsibility for it. (7) Was it establishment notified to the Commonwealth Parliament; if so, why.
(8) Is the ATC the private venture corporation referred to in recommendation 22 of the Myers Report.
(9) Will steps be taken to advise the Australian community of the nature and purpose of the ATC; if so, what steps.

Job Bank
(Question No. 1937)
Mr Hawke asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(1) Does his Department still anticipate having Job Bank, its proposed automated system of vacancy receipt and dissemination, operational on a national basis by August 1984. as indicated in the Request for Tenders issued for the supply of equipment for the Job Bank system.

Answers to Questions

26 May 1981 REPRESENTATrVES 2651

(2) If not, what changes have been made to the timetable, and why have these been made.
(3) Is Job Bank to be introduced initially in Adelaide on a trial basis.
(4) Do the tenders for the supply of computer equipment for job Bank so far received by his department include separate quotes for the supply of equipment for the Adelaide operation and for the complete national system, or do they refer only to a national system.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) See (1).
(3) No.
(4) The tenderers have responded to the request for tenders for a national system, as described in the specification of Job Bank.
Medical Alert Systems: Taxation Deduction
(Question No. 2083)
Mrs Kelly asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 6 April 1981 :
Will he give consideration to allowing the cost of personal medical alert systems such as Vital Call to be made tax deductible in the interests of achieving effective savings in the provision of hospital or nursing home beds by allowing patients to be supervised effectively at home.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The cost of medical alert systems such as Vital Call which, it is understood, are primarily designed for use by elderly persons, is expenditure of a private or domestic nature which is not deductible for income tax purposes.
While the advantages of such a system for use in many situations are appreciated, the benefit that a taxation deduction might provide would depend upon the taxable income of the person involved. Persons in receipt of higher incomes and least in need of financial assistance would benefit from a deduction while, for example, elderly persons with incomes below the amount at which tax becomes payable would obtain no benefit at all. In view of this, it is doubtful whether the income tax system is an appropriate means of providing relief to the users of such systems.
Reduction of Staff and Functions: Department of Communications
(Question No. 2122)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) WiJI he provide a detailed list of the (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of his Department that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions are implemented.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) There were no functions eliminated from the Department in the Australian Capital Territory. However, one of the Committee's recommendations was that a review should be undertaken by the Public Service Board to examine the scope for staff savings in rationalising areas of the Department responsible for policy advice in the field of broadcasting. This review is yet to be undertaken.

Defence Aircraft Requirements
(Question No. 2148)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, . upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(1) Is he able to say whether the performance of the McDonnell Douglas F-18 has been significantly downgraded because of design deficiencies.
(2) Is is a fact that the F-18 is no longer capable of a sig. nificantly higher level of performance than the General DynamicsF-16.
(3) Has the price dift'erence between the 2 aircraft remained constant despite the narrowing of the performance gap.
(4) Do either of the aircraft currently meet the requirements set out by the Australian Defence Force.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) to (4) On 4 December 1980 I informed the House that the Government had reluctantly decided, on the hasis of sound professional and technical advice, to postpone selection of the new tactical fighter aircraft until further data on both contending aircraft was available for evaluation. Until analysis of all the necessary information is completed, and the Government's decision on final selection made public, it would be premature for me to answer these questions or others like them.
Tactical Fighter Program
(Question No. 2237)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(1) What is the nature of the additional travel to the value of $.245m provided for in the 1980-81 supplementary estimates.
(2) Does this figure represent a further assessment visit to the United States of America in relation to the new tactical fighter (NTF) program.
(3) What new developments have occurred in the development of the 2 remaining contenders for this role which were not able to be assessed by previous assessment teams.
(4) Have any modifications been made to the F-16's radar and all weather performances.
(5) Has the F-18 program been suspended pending a review of the program by the United States Secretary of Defense as has been publicly reported in the USA.
(6) How many senior personnel who were involved with earlier assessment teams have been replaced or are no longer with (a) the project or (b) his Department.
(7) Are any additional funds to be used to provide new team members with familiarisation briefing in the USA with respect to the 2 aircraft.
(8) Has there been any increases or reduction in civil and RAAF personnel attached full time or part time to the NTF project in (a) Australia and (b) the USA.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) On 4 December 1980 I informed the House that the Government saw no alternative but to await evaluation of further data around mid 1981 before adopting any view as to the relative merits of selection of either aircraft, the F-16 or F IA-18 for Australia's new Tactical Fighter. That position has not changed. Additional funding for travel by officers of

2652 REPRESENTATIVES 26 May 1981

Answers to Questions

my Department was required to enable the necessary further evaluations to be carried out.
(2) Yes. (3) and (4) Until analysis of all the necessary information is completed and the Government's decision on the final selection made public, it would be premature for me to answer these questions or others like them. (5) No. (6) On the assumption that senior personnel equate to Group Captain (Clerk Class ll/equivalent) and above, the answer is as follows: (a) Assessment Team Members
(1) replaced-one Group Captain, (Note that the replacement has had previous experience with the Project).
(2) no longer with the project-one Group Captain (post disestablished).
(3) no longer with the Department of Defence-Nil. (b) Higher Defence Staff-following the 180 evaluation
Deputy Secretary C, Mr D. H. Eltringham was

appointed the Permanent Head of the former Department of Productivity.
(7) No. All visits to the United States by officers responsible for assessment are for purposes of evaluation, not for purposes of familiarisation.
(8) (a) There has been a reduction of two RAAF personnel and an increase of one civilian attached full time to the NTF project in Australia. However, one of the two RAAF posts was transferred to the USA for full-time project activities. This produced an increase of one full-time RAAF post in the USA. There were no increases in full-time civilian posts in the USA.
(b) With regard to part time activities related to the NTF project there have been a number of specialist teams involved in the 1981 phase of the evaluation. While the same total number of people as in 1980 have been and will be involved in part-time duty in the USA, the requirement for specialists in particular areas of investigation has resulted in an increase in the requirement for what may be broadly termed scientific specialists. For this reason there will be an increase of three civilians and a decrease of three RAAF personnel when compared to the 1980 evaluation mission.


