House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 125, 1981 Tuesday, 17 November 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--THIRD PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-THIRD PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the
Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House "Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry "Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas AnthQny
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.c.
Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee - The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.c.
The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senatonhe Honourable Anthon~ John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, K.e.M.G., QC. Chairman a/Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deput)' Chairmen a/Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Dona.ld Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader a/the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader a/the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden DeplIl)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader oJthe Liberal Party oJ Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. Deput), Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAllstralia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G. Leodera/the Nalional Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony DepulJ' uaderofthe NatiollalCountry Par/yofAustra(ia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Lobor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor PartJ'-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony, Rt Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewell. Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.e. Brown, Robert James Bungey, Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Hon. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest
Child,Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Han. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley
Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, e.H. Free, Ross Vincent Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey Q'Halioran Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John
Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.e. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles
Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allen Clyde Howard, Han. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunnet Hurford, Christopher John Hyde, John Martin Innes, Utquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher,Qld
Richmond, N.S.W. Chiftey, N.S.W. Macatthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. Bonython, SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith, N.S. W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qld Parramatla, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic.
Hunter, N.S. W. Canning, WA. Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden, Qld
Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
Henty, Vic. Robertson, N.S. W.
Wentwotth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne,N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld McMillan, Vic.
Lilley, Qld Fremantle, WA. Herbert, Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. ,
Holt,Vic. Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Faner, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S.w. Fraser, A.e.T. Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas. Braddon, Tas. Boothby, SA Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qld. Riverina, N.S. W.
Petrie,Qld Denison, Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Griffith,Qld Gwydir, N.S.W.
Adelaide, SA Moore,WA. Melbourne, Vic.

NCP
NCP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP LP
ALP LP LP LP LP LP
NCP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP ALP ALP LP
LP NCP ALP
ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP
ALP LP ALP
Ll' LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP
LP LP ALP ALP NCP LP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP NCP
ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles Killen, Hon. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
K.e.M.G. MacKellar, Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., e.H.
McVeigh, Hon. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Han. William Lawrence Mounlford,John Graham Newman, Han. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Han. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Han. Andrew Sharp Parler, James Robert Robinson, Han. Ian Louis Rocher, Allen Charles Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scoll, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden, Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., Q.e. Spender, John Michael, Q.e. Street. Han. Anthony Austin TJlmbling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.e.
Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Han. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George West, Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.e.
Willis,Ralph Wilson, Han. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker,S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle, N.s.W. Bowman,Qld Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S. W. Canberra, A.e.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Watringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S. W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S. W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld La Trobe, Vic. Ryan,Qld Shorlland, N.S.W. St George, N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid, N.S.w. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S. W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. Sturt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP' LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Counlry Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins (to 8 September), Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Scott (from 8 September), Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY -Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Oonald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATloNs-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERs-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges,Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKs-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman (from 25 August), Senator Kilgariffand Senator Martyr (from 25 August), and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston (from 9 September), Senator Georges, Senator Hamer (from 8 September), and Senator Robertson (to 9 September), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman (from 20 August), Mr Dean (t020 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen (from 23 September), Senator Elstob, Senator Hill (from 23 September), Senator Kilgariff (to 23 September), Senator McIntosh, Senator Martin (to 23 September), Senator Martyr (from 23 September), Senator Sibraa, Senator Teague (from 23 September), and Senator Young (to 23 September) and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOusE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Mi~ister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin (from 25 August), Senator Missen, Senator Sibra. and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE A: Parliament-Mr Speaker, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Hurford, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Barry Jones, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister assisting the Prime Minister), Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Holding, Mr Hurford, Mrs Kelly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Foreign Affairs-Mr Street (Minister for Foreign Affairs), Mr Beazley, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Fry, Mr Jacobi, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Defence-Mr Killen (Minister for Defence), Mr Burr, Mr Campbell, Mr Connolly, Mr Kerin, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Morrison, Mr Peacock, Mr Scholes, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE B: Department of Social SecuritY-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport and Minister representing the Minister for Social Security), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Harris, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mildren, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.

Department of Health-Mr MacKellar (Minister for Health), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Cunningham, Mr Harris, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Veterans' Affairs-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology and Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mrs Darling, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Mr Macphee (Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs), Mr Adennann, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs), Mr Adermann, Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Milton, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE C: Department of the Capital Territory-Mr Hodgman (Minister for the Capital Territory), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Dr Cass, Mr Coleman, Mr Fry, Mr Harris, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lusher and Mr Scholes.
Department of Home Affairs and Environment-Mr Wilson (Minister for Home Affairs and Environment), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Howe, Mr Lusher, Mr Uren and MrWest.
Department of Science and Technology-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mrs Darling, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Mildren.
Department of Communications-Mr Sinclair (Minister for Communications), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Wallis.
Department of Administrative Services-Mr Newman (Minister for Administrative Services), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Humphreys, Mr Lusher, Mr Milton and Mr Scholes.
Attorney-Genera!'s Department-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister representing the Attorney General), Mr Birney, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Coleman, Mr Dean, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Holding and Mr Lusher.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE D: Department of the Treasury-Mr Howard (Treasurer). Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Mr Willis.
Department of Finance-Mr Howard (Treasurer and Minister representing the Minister for Finance), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Hurford, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Mr Shack and Mr Tambling.
Department of Transport-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Jull, Mr Morris, Mr Scott, Mr Shack, Mr Tamblingand Mr Wallis.
Department of Primary Industry-Mr Nixon (Minister for Primary Industry), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Kerin, Mr Mildren, Mr Tambling and Mr Wallis.
ESTIMA TES COMMITTEE E: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs-Mr N. A. Brown (Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Mildren and Mr Peacock.
Department of Industrial Relations-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations), Mr Burr, Mr Charles, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Dr Theophanous.
Department of Education-Mr Fife (Minister for Education), Mr Beazley, Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Dawkins, Mr Fisher, Mr Free, Mr Barry Jones, Mr McLean and Mr Peacock.
Department of Housing and Construction-Mr McVeigh (Minister for Housing and Construction), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Howe, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Mr Uren.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE F: Department oflndustry and Commerce-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs acting for the Minister for Industry and Commerce), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hicks, Mrs Kelly, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Trade and Resources-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of National Development and Energy-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources representing the Minister for National Development and Energy), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Howe, Mr Keating, Mr Milton, Mr O'Keefe, Mr Porter and Mr Uren.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. O. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (TableJ-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (ProceduraIJ-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk Assistant-A. R. Browning Clerk Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-I. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-I. C. Cochran Procedure Office-J. K. Porter
Table Office (ProgrammingJ-B. C. Wright (Acting) Table Office (Bills and PapersJ-J. W. Pender (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaJJ(HouseofRepresimtativesJ-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaJJ(SenateJ-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. de S. C. MacLean (Acting)
JOINT HOUSE
Secrelary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 123 of 1981)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Apple and Pear Export Charge Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 147 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Export Ch~rge Act 1976.
Apple and Pear Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1460f 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Levy Act 1976.
Appropriation Act (No.1) 1981-82 (Act No. 1640f 1981)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 165 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year endingon 30June 1981.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 145 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 124 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 126 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 125 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 130 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (lnsurance Bus;ness) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Life Insurance Business) Act 1981 (Act No. 128 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of certain life insurance business having a connection with the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981 (Act No. 129 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of the registration of certain vehicles in the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian CapitalTerritory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 127 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 150 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 50 of the Austrillian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1977.
Australian National University Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1660f 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Natiollal University Act 1946.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 168 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 177 of 1981)An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905, and for related purposes.
Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 151 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act 1905 in relation to the exportation of food.
Commonwealth Grants Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 173 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973.
Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 153 of 1981)- An Act to amend laws relating to companies and securities and for related purposes.
Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 182 of 1981)An Act to amend the Continental Shelf(Living Natural Resources) Act 1968 to facilitate the collection of levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and of amounts payable under certain agreements, and for certain other purposes.
Crimes (Currency) Aat 1981 (Act No. 1220f 1981)An Act to make provision with respect to offences connected with the counterfeiting of money or certain kinds of securities and other activities injurious to Australian currency, and for related purposes.
Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 152 of 1981)- An Act ~to amend the Cllstoms Act 1901 in relation to the exportation of food.
Customs (Valuations) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 157 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.
Defence Acts Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 178 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relat,ing to defence.

Derence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 144 or 1981)- An Act relating to retirement and death benefits in respect or members or the Derence Force.
Departure Tax Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 131 or 1981)An Act to amend the Departure Tax Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Departure Tax Collection Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 132 or 1981) An Act to amend the Departure Tax Collection Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981 (Act No. 148 or 1981)An Act to provide ror confidentiality in relation to certain epidemiological studies.
Export Grants Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 119 or 1981)- An Act relating to export grants.
Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1800r 1981)- An Act relating to payments under certain fisheries agreements.
Fisheries Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 181 00981)An Act to amend the Fisheries Act 1952 to racilitate the collection or levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and or amounts payable under certain agreements, and ror certain other purposes.
Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 (Act No. 179 or 1981)An Act to impose a levy on the grant or certain licences in respect or roreign fishing boats.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1750r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1981 (Act No. 156 or 1981)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes or companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation runds.
Income Tax (Indi dduals) Act 1981 (Act No. 15500981)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes or companies, or corporate unit trusts and or superannuation runds.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 143 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Internationa! Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act(No. 3) 1981 (Act No. 1540r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Judges' Pensions Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 158 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Judges' Pensions Act 1968.
Meat Export (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 149 or 1981)An Act to provide penalties ror certain offences against the Exports (Meat) Regulations.
National Health Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 163 or 1981)- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953.
Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 174 or 1981)- An Act to amend section 3 or the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966.
Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 161 or 1981)An Act to amend the Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1977, and ror related purposes.
Norrolk Island Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12000981)- An Act to amend the Norfolk Island Act 1979.
Queensland Grant (Special Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 172 or 1981)- An Act to grant financial assistance to Queensland.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 198i (Act No. 121 00981)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16000981)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.1) 1981 (Act No. 1330r 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 13400981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1981 (Act No. 13500981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1981 (Act No. 13600981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1981 (Act No. 137 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1981 (Act No. 138 or 1981)-
An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.

Sales Tax Amendme~t Act (No.7) 1981 (Act No. 1390f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1981 (Act No. 1400f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1981 (Act No. 141 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1420f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Services Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 159 of 1981)An Act to amend the Social Services Act 1947, and for related purposes.
Social Services Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 170 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 105A of the Social Services Act 1947.
States Grants (Capital Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 171 ofl981)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure of a capital nature and to authorize the borrowing of certain moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 1620f 1981)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act(No. 2) 1981 (Act No. 167 of 1981')- An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1760f 1981)An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 169 of 1981)An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Crimes Amendment Bill 1981__ )nitiated in the Senate. First Reading.
-Domicile Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Domicile (Consequential Amendments) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Dried Sultana Production Underwriting Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Read...g.
Freedom of Information Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. IA-9A) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.

Petitions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2831

Tuesday, 17 November 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Sales Tax on Publications
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: We, the undersigned, wish to protest against the Federal Government's proposed 2+ per cent sales tax on books, newspapers and magazines.
This proposed tax is a tax on knowledge and an impediment to the free flow of information. We respectfully request that these items be exempted from the sales tax provisions.
. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
bySir William McMahon and Mr Hicks.
Petitions received.
Sales Tax on Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Government's decision to impose a tax on books, magazines and newspapers, particularly educational publications and books of a religious nature, is abhorrent to the notion of the right to information, a clear infringement of our democratic freedom, and that no such tax is levied in any other country with which Australia is usually compared.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will withdraw its announced intention to impose a sales tax on books, magazines and newspapers.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Sinclair, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Hodges, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Millar.. Mr O'Keefe and MrPeacock.
Petitions received.
Sales Tax on Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the proposed sales tax of 2.5 per cent on books, magazines and newspapers represents a tax on knowledge which should not be contemplated in a civilised country. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that this proposed sales tax be withdrawn from the Budget proposals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bungey, Mr Campbell, Mr Drummond, Mr McLean, Mr Rocher, Mr Shack and Mr Viner.
Petitions received.

Sales Tax on Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That Librarians and library users throughout the nation call for the exemption of books, periodicals and newspapers from the imposition of sales taxes.
The tax exempt status of libraries and schools will not protect them from general cost increases which sales tax and its collection will cause. Indeed, exemption claims on millions of items per year will themselves add to the cost burden of both libraries and suppliers.
This tax is socially injurious and unworkable, and a burden on education, science and culture.
Your petitioners therefore pray that your honourable House will exempt books and periodicals including newspapers from the proposed sales tax.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kerin and Mr Young.
Petitions received.

Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Eildon Post Office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ewen Cameron.
Petition received.

Postal Services

To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The
humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:

That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to in-

vestigate downgrading or closure of Broadford Vic. 3658 Post

Office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services

to our community.

.

Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will' take immediate action to prevent the Aus-
tralian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our commuhity.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Ewen Cameron.

Petition received.

Postal Services
To tile Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Heathcote Post Office

2832 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Petitions

places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our commumty.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ewen Cameron.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Kooweerup 3981 Post Office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled, the humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade postal and mail services throughout Australia will place in jeopardy the existing services and the security of the
mailsby~
downgrading a large number of official post offices reducing the number of post offices open for business during the lunch period reducing the number of street posting boxes delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified staff using private contractors for mail cartage.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will downgrade the postal and mail services of the citizens of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lloyd, Mr Milton and Mr Nixon.
Petitions received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Foster Post Office places in jeopardy the existing rostal and Mail services to our community.

Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the Postal and Mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrNixon.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of RAAF. Sale East Post Office places in jeopardy the existing Postal and Mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the Postal and Mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrNixon.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Kalgoorlie respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of Coolgardie Post Office places in jeopardy the existing Postal and Mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the Postal and Mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Campbell.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Farrer respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of Howlong Post Office places in jeopardy the existing Postal and Mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the Postal and Mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrFife.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The

Petitions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2833

humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Braddon respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of Rosebery Post Office places in jeopardy the existing Postal and Mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the Postal and Mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Groom.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Sydney respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade Postal and Mail services throughout Australia, will place in jeopardy the existing services and the security of the mails by:
downgrading a large number of official post offices; reducing the number of post offices open for business during the lunch period; reducing the number of street posting boxes; delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices; downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified staff; and using private contractors for mail cartage.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will down grade the Postal and Mail services of the citizens of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon.
Petition received.
Sales Tax Legisiation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the proposed imposition of Sales Tax on items concerned with home building, clothing, footwear, books and newspapers, wrapping for food.
Your petitioners therefore humbly call upon the Federal Parliament to exempt these items from the proposed Sales Tax as requested by the Senate to avoid such taxes on necessities of life becoming a further burden on home builders, families and children or inhibiting the free flow of inFormation through books and newspapers or reducing employment opportunities for people in the industries concerned and beyond.
Your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Falconer, Mr Lloyd, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Scholes and Mr Viner.
Petitions received.

Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That your petitioners are gravely concerned by the proposed imposition of Sales Tax on items concerned with home building, clothing, footwear, books, newspapers and Food wrappings, as these sales taxes impose a further burden on home builders, families and children; inhibit the Free flow of information through books and newspapers; and reduce employment opportunities in the industries concerned.
Your Petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should-
Exempt these items From the proposed Sales Tax legislation, as requested by the Senate.
And your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Carlton.
Petition received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That your petitioners are gravely concerned by the proposed imposition of Sales Tax on items concerned with educational books, clothing, footwear, newspapers, buildings and Food wrappings, as these sales taxes impose a Further burden on home builders, families and children; inhibit the free flow of information through books and newspapers; and reduce employment opportunities.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should-
Exempt these items from the proposed Sales Tax legislation, as requested by the Senate.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Ian Cameron.
Petition received.
Taxation and Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
We, the people who have signed this petition ask all parties, Labor, Liberal, Democrats and others, to stop the latest increase in taxes and the forever increases in taxes which hit all people of the country of Australia in all goods and consumer goods and we caH for a referendum on taxes and interest rates.
And your petitioners in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham and Mr Howe.
Petition received.
Pornographic Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we the undersigned, having great concern at the way in which children are now being used in the production of pornography call upon the government to introduce immediate legislation:

2834 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Petitions

I. To prevent the sexual exploitation of children by way of photography for commercial purposes;
2. To penalise parents/guardians who knowingly allow their children to be used in the production of such pornographic or obscene material depicting children;
3. To make specifically illegal the importation, publication, distribution and sale of such pornographic childabuse material in any form whatsoever such as magazines, novels, papers or films;
4. To take immediate police action to confiscate and destroy all child pornography in Australia and urgent appropriate legal action against all those involved or profiting from this sordid exploitation of children.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honourable House will protect all children and immediately prohibit pornographic child-abuse materials, publications or films.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howard and Mr O'Keefe.
Petitions received.
La Boite Theatre, Brisbane
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. The decision by the Australia Council to discontinue the General Grant of $20,000 (which is in the nature of recurrent funding) to La Boite Theatre, Brisbane, will jeopardise the continued viability of the theatre, and in particular, the Main House Theatre; Adult Theatre Workshops; Youth Theatre activities and the existence of the professional core of the theatre.
2. The decision has been taken without sufficient consultation and without giving sufficient notice to La Boite Administration.
3. The absence of the Federal Government funding will mean the loss to Brisbane of genuine community-oriented and community-based projects and of the regular presentation of Australian plays.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to cause the Theatre Board's General Grant of $20,000 to La Boite Theatre to be reinstated without delay.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys and Mr Jull.
Petitions received.
Trans Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans Australia Airlines would inevitably result in-
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans Australia Airlines.
by Mr Humphreys and Mr Morris.
Petitions received.
National Roads Construction Program
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth that your petitioners believe that:
The decision to subject the National Roads Construction program to the tendering system will:
(a) threaten the jobs of 790 workers employed in 17 main road depots in New South Wales.
(b) impair the day labour system and undermine the capacity of Departments of Main Roads to train staff and test road construction concepts
(c) have a disruptive effect on the employment opportunities available in small communities
(d) reduce the flexibility of the Department of Main Roads to handle emergencies caused by flood or fires.
(e) ultimately increase the cost of road construction at Taxpayers' expense.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Federal Government withdraw this disruptive proposal.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys and Mr West.
Petitions received.
HeaIth Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members ot the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits for the uninsured and the introduction of a means test for free public hospital care;
That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programmes will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and fUl]ding.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce a system of health care based on ability to pay, and access to health care based on medical need.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.
Aboriginal Land Rights
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Federal Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the humble petitioners respectfully believe that the recent report of the World Council of Churches team which visited Australia, June 15 to July 3, 1981, emphasises the central importance ofland rights to the Aboriginal people.

Petitions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2835

And nDting that allattemps by white Australians to. manage Aboriginal affairs fDr them have failed.
YDur petitiDners therefDre pray:
That the Federal GDvernment will accept its respDnsibility and use its pDwers under the CDnstitutiDn to. Dverride racist State legislatiDn, particularly to. provide Land Rights with freehDld title, and
That in additiDn the GDvernment fulfil its stated pDlicy of self-determinatiDn and self-management fDr AbDriginal peDple, by funding all hDusing, health, educatiDn,legal, emplDyment strategy and welfare matters cDncerning AbDriginal peDple directly through AbDriginal CDmmunity-based CDmmunity-cDntrDlied DrganisatiDns.
And YDur petitiDners as in duty bDund will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To. the HDnDurable the Speaker and Members of the HDuse of Representatives in Pa-rliament assembled. The humble petitiDn of the undersigned shDweth that YDur petitiDners are gravely cDncerned that the GDvernment is not protecting family hDme buyers frorn the severe effects of increased and increasing rates by interest on hDme mDrtgage IDans.
YDur PetitiDners, therefDre, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and pDsitive actiDn through tax relief and Dther measures to. avert any further effects of increases in interest rates on hDme mDrtgage lDans which cause detrimental financial, sDcial and psychD1Dgicai pressures on families, and in many cases, pDsitive hardship.
And YDur petitiDners as in duty bDund will ever pray.
by Mr N. A. Brown.
Petition received.
Defence Service Home Loans
To. the HDnDurable the Speaker and Members of the HDuse of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petitiDn of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully shDweth:
That the members of the WDmen's Services of the 1939-45 War not at present cDnsidered eligible fDr Defence Service HDme LDans shDuld qualify as 'Australian SDldiers' under the Defence Service HDmes Act. They vDlunteered fDr service with the Naval, Military and Air FDrces, serving wherever they were sent in whatever capacity they were required and yet are refused Defence Service HDme LDans.
They tDDk the Dath to. resist His Majesty's enemies which meant to. fight His Majesty's enemies, and althDugh not used in actual cDmbat in war zones, they were available fDr that use and had a sufficiently grave need arisen wDuld have been used, to. serve with distinctiDn as have WDmen of Dther lands.
In accordance with the Acts and RegulatiDns of the periDd, the WDmen of the Military FDrces had enlisted fDr service anywhere, SDme of the Naval WDmen to. sail in any waters, Dthers with service on warships DptiDnal, while the WDmen of the Air FDrce cDuld have been sent to. Papua New Guinea Dr Dther territDries under the cDntrol Dr care of Australia.
Ex-servicemen of the RDyal Australian Navy, the Australian Imperial FDrce and the RDyal Australian Air FDrce who. vDluntereed in the 1939-45 War but were not sent to' War ZDnes are granted hDme lDans. NDt to' grant eligibility to. all Ex-servicewDmen of 1939-45 War is unjust and unfair.
YDur petitiDners therefDre humbly pray that YDU favDurably cDnsider amending the Defence Service HDmes Act by repealing Sub-sectiDn 4 (2A) (b) (c) (d) of the Principal Act

as amended by No.. 137 of 1978, and grant eligibility to. all members of the WDmen's RDyal Australian Naval Service, the Australian WDmen's Army Service; the WDmen's Auxiliary Australian Air FDrce, the Australian Army Medical WDmen's Service, amI the VDluntary Aid Detachment of 1939-45 War.
And YDur petitiDners as in duty bDund will ever pray.
by Mr Ewen Cameron.
Petition received.
Diabetics: Insulin
To. the HDnDurable the Speaker and Members of the HDuse of Representatives in Pljrliament assembled, the petitiDn of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully shDweth:
That in view of the recent standardisatiDn of insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect of increasing the CDst of bDth items to. the Diabetic in general, and as every insulindependent Diabetic must use the same, daily Dr twice daily accDrding to. medicatiDn.
YDur petitiDners therefDre humbly pray that syringes be made available on the N.H.S and that insulin prescriptiDns revert to. 10 bDttles as previDusly supplied.
And YDur petitiDners as in duty bDund will ever pray.
by Mr Campbell.
Petition received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To. the HDnDurable the Speaker and Members of the HDuse of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petitiDn of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully shDweth:
I. That the GDvernment's Sales Tax legislatiDn impDses an unreasDnable burden on the cDmmunity generally, especially pensiDners, families, thDse in receipt of smaller incDmes and small businesses.
YDur petitiDners therefDre humbly pray that the GDvernment will withdraw Dr repeal its Sales Tax LegislatiDn.
And YDur petitiDners as in duty bDund will ever pray.
by Mr Cross.
Petition received.
Health Care Services
To. the HDnDurable Speaker and Members of the HDuse of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the pe-titio.n o.f the undersigned citizens o.f Australia respectfully sho.weth:
That the decrease in Federal Government funding fo.r health, transfer o.f Co.mmo.nwealth respDnsibility to. the States, applicatio.n of the 'user' pay principle to. health services and encDuragement o.f private business and profits in the health sphere will inevitably lead to. a do.wngrading o.f health services and increasing health risks amo.ng peo.ple who. canno.t affo.rd health insurance or private payment o.f do.cto.rs and hDspitals.
That the cuts in Federal Government spending reSUlting frDm the reco.mmendatio.ns o.f the Cabinet Sub-Co.mmittee o.f Review of Government Functio.ns (Razor Gang) will lead to. an increase in unemplo.yment and a general deterio.ratio.n in co.mmunity services and living standards:
Therefo.re yo.ur petitio.ners urge that:
I. The GDvernment co.ntinue Co.mmDnwealth funding o.f health services at an improved, and certainly not a lesser, level than that o.perating prio.r to. 1 September 1981.

2836 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Petitions

2. That recommendations of the Cabinet Sub-Committee of Review of Government Functions (Razor Gang) be not proceeded with.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrDobie.
Petition received.
Unemployment Benefits
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully calls for:
The immediate and unconditional withdrawal of any proposals to deny Unemployment Benefits to unemployed people under 18 years old.
That the level of benefits for all unemployed people, and including people receiving sickness benefits and pensions, be raised to at least 120 per cent of the poverty line.
That future employment policies be devoted to job creation and the restoration of full employment rather than the evasion of this responsibility by hiding the unemployed in short term training and education schemes.
Public acknowledgement of the fact that unemployment is the result of insufficient jobs and not the fault of any minority group, the education system or the unemployed themselves.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Malcolm Fraser.
Petition received.
Retail Trading Hours in the Australian Capital Territory
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we wish to express our strongest opposition to any deregulation of trading hours in the Australian Capital Territory.
That if trading hours are deregulated in the Australian Capital Territory, the present restrictions on trading hours in other parts of Australia may be lifted.
Past performances have proven that longer trading hours do not lead to increased sales. However, they do increase costs, because shops have to be staffed for longer periods. To cover these increased costs, retailers are forced to increase prices and reduce staff levels. This means that longer trading hours increase both prices and unemployment.
I. There is no real consumer demand for longer trading hours in the Australian Capital Territory.
2. The deregulation of trading hours would force small retail companies out of business.
3. Extended trading hours would gravely disrupt weekend recreation and family life of shop assistants.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should: Ensure that retail trading hours in the Australian Capital Territory continue to be regulated by Ordinance as happened in the past.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrFry.
Petition received.

Self-goyernment for the Australian Capital Territory
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that;
I. Residents of the Australian Capital Territory are the only Australians who have taxation without representation at State and local government level;
2. Australian Capital Territory residents are amongst the highest per capita income taxpayers in Australia yet do not participate in the Commonwealth Government's tax sharing arrangements with the States and the Northern Territory (including local government grants);
3. Responsibility for raising and spending State-type and municipal taxes and charges should be vested in elected local representatives;
4. It is inappropriate for members of the Federal Parliament to continue to deal with local matters in the Australian Capital Territory-members of the governing body responsible for such matters should live in the Australian Capital Territory and be accountable to the residents of the Aus~ tralian Capital Territory.
Accordingly, your petitioners call upon their legislators to-
Confer on the Australian Capital Territory State-like self-government established on a sound financial basis which is to be agreed between elected representatives of the Australian Capital Territory and the Commonwealth Government.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrFry.
Petition received.

Broadcasting and Teleyision Act

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:

The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That because television and radio-

(a) affect our social and moral environment,
(b) are family media watched and heard by many children at all times, and
(c) present too much explicit violence and sex.

They therefore need stronger control than other media and the existing standards need stricter enforcement in both national ABC and commercial sectors.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Government will amend the Broadcasting and Television Act, in relation to both national and commercial broadcasters, to legislate-

(a) for adequate and comprehensive programs in the best

interests of the general pUblic,

(b) for a "Dual System of Regulation" enforced by the

Australian Broadcasting Tribunal by internal regulation and

external control,

'

(c) For an independent consumer body to present the best

interests of the general public, and

(d) for immediate and effective penalties to be imposed

for breaches of program and advertising standards.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Howard.

Petition received.

Petitions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2837

Epping North Post Office
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the Non-Official Post Office at Epping North is under threat of closure and the Postmaster, Mr R. Rowley, has been told by Australia Post that if he retires in order to transfer the office to another person, that the office would be closed. He has also been informed that even if he remains as Postmaster the matter of closure will be reviewed in twelve months' time.
We submit that the office has been serving a community need for many years. The area.is in a cul-de-sac so that the residents only alternative would be to travel three kilometres by bus to the nearest Post Office at Epping. At least four schools in the area use the office for banking and the office is not far from the group of small shops used by the community who would be inconvenienced by the loss of postal and banking facilities. There are many pensioners in the area using the Post Office and plans have been approved for a hostel to be built nearby to house 100 aged people who would certainly require an accessible Post Office.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Epping North Post Office be retained and that the office be reclassified as one to remain in the Post Office Network.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Howard.
Petition received.
Proposed Casino in Canberra
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the establishment of a gambling casino in Canberra would debase the National Capital and increase crime in Canberra.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, should seek to preserve the dignity of the National Capital by disallowing any ordinance to authorise the establishment of a gambling casino in Canberra.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howard.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is not fulfilling its responsibility in ensuring an adequate standard of living for all Australians, which is causing untold hardship on relief agencies' limited resources, and require the following steps to be taken as a matter of urge.ncy:
I. That the Commonwealth Government raise the level of all pensions and benefits at least to the poverty line.
2. That the Commonwealth Government reconsider its recent decisions in relation to the health system and cuts to Commonwealth activity.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert further poverty and suffering in our community by implementation of the above measures. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howe.
Petition received.

Labelling of Cosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of Cosmetic Companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were subjected to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet pre'parations to indicate:
(1) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.
(2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Use of Live Animals in Research
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
2. That no central records exist on such inhumane use of live animals for experimentation purposes, yet research institutions in several Australian States engage in such a practice.
3. That there exists no uniform legislation between the States concerning responsible standards of research conduct, indeed, in some States there is a complete lack of legislation altogether.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will enact legislation to require:
(a) the Australian Bureau of Statistics to produce annual statistics on the numbers of live animals involved in research, and provide information as to research purpose; and
(b) the National Health and Medical Research Council to develop humane and responsible standards of conduct for researchers using live animals in all Government, Industry and Educational Research Laboratories.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Export of Live Animals
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(a) the export of live animals for slaughter overseas and (b) the shipment of live horses to Japan sentences such
animals to cruel and inhumane treatment in the export process and at the hands of foreign importers.

2838 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Petitions

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to ban the export of live animals for food and allow only carcass trade.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Sales Tax Legislation
The Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That the Budget imposition of additional sales tax to both existing sales taxed items and to previously exempt goods
(a) will add to the regressivity of the tax structure by imposing a similar butden on all sections of the community-regardless of the capacity to pay tax;
(b) will be highly inflationary and a distincentive to economic performance in key sectors of industry
(c) is yet another breach of Government promise, given the Treasurer's undertaking in the Parliament on March 12 of this year that there would be no increases in indirect taxation (without at the same time giving personal tax relief)
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to repeal the budget amendments to sales tax legislation and to withdraw its sales tax amendment bills which add sales tax to presently exempt goods as from January I, 1982.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned Citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the interim list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed a further mining lease against the advice of conservationists.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petitions received.
Brisbane Airport
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia showeth:
(a) That residents of densely populated suburbs in the vicinity of the airport and residents of other suburbs in the flight path of international and domestic jets are experiencing an unr -lsonable degree of aircraft noise.
(b) Further, that these same residents will be subjected to prolonged bouts of such aircraft noise if a decision is

taken to extend the curfew at both the domestic and international airports. (c) That this decision has been foreshadowed on two occasions as follows:
(i) In submissions to the Public Hearing held by the Public Works Committee of this Parliament in regard to Stage One-Redevelopment of Brisbane's International Airport; these submissions proposed an extension of the existing curfew when the new runway is completed (approx. 1986). This proposal received the full support of the Queensland Government.
(ii) TAA's request for an extended curfew to coincide with the introduction of the Airbus.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will refuse to extend the existing curfew and will reconsider its siting plans for the proposed new runway so as to minimise noise pollution over high density suburbs.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the decision of the Federal Government to discontinue the Community Youth Support Scheme (CYSS) will further reduce the prospects of young Australians For employment, and place additional undue hardship on the unemployed.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Government continue the CYSS program and support the voluntary Community Management Committees in their valuable work to assist the unemployed.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully showeth: That the serious youth unemployment problem is a direct result of the community's failure to create sufficient jobs.
In these circumstances the decision to abolish Community Youth Support Schemes (CYSS) is a socially retrogressive step. The CYSS Projects provide valuable support services and work training for many unemployed.
We, the undersigned, are concerned that the closure of CYSS Projects may lead young unemployed to become involved in anti-social behaviour such as crime, vandalism, prostitution, rebellious behaviour and mob action. There is the even more Frightening prospect that many more young people will give up hope of obtaining a job, become idle and even contemplate suicide.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government reverse its decision to abolish CYSS Projects and provide sufficient Funds to enable the various CYSS Centres to" continue their valuable work with the young unemployed in the future.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Barry Jones. Petition received.

Petitions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2839

Interest Rates
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the continual increases in mortgage interest rates in Australia has unduly caused a reduction in the standard of living and this is reflected in the severe difficulty experienced by Australians in meeting household budgetary commitments.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will freeze home loan interest rates and provide income tax rebate on interest paid to home loan finance.
And your petitioners as ifl duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Jacobi.
Petition received.
Timorese Refugees
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That in Australia there are hundreds of Timorese who have been separated from their families. This is a result of the 1975 Civil War and the Indonesian invasion of later that year which displaced and divided many Timorese families. Some came to Australia some went to Portugal and others are still in East Timor. The continued separation of many Timorese families from their relatives in Timor and Portugal is the cause of much anguish and hardship.
Therefore we humbly request that the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia:
(I) to bring from East Timor for family reunion in Australia:
a. the rest of the 600 on the agreed list drawn up between Indonesia and Australia in 1978.
b. the parents of isolated children already in Australia. c. the rest of the 2,668 nominated in 1977.
(2) to bring from Portugal and elsewhere those Timorese refugees who wish to immigrate to Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrJull.
Petition received.
Import Ban on Seal Products
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we deplore the annual slaughter of Canadian Harp Seals, and believe that they should not be massacred in this way. We feel that while the Australian Government allows the import of seal products into this country it is in ract conponing the matter.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government immediately places an'import ban on all seal products to aid the abolition of the pitiless Harp Seal slaughter.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Keating.
Petition received.

Taxation and Pensions
The Right Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. Through the Federal Leader of the Opposition, the Hon. B. Hayden, M.H.R., we the undersigned citizens of Australia:
Wish to strongly condemn the great decrease in Federal Government funding to the States and as a result, the serious downturn in employment, hospitalisation, medical care, housing, hospitals, schools, education, student opportunities and in public utilities generally.
This, together with increased interest rates, indirect taxes and rising prices, is causing untold hardship.
We demand of Government that there be an immediate easing of fund restrictions and the imposition of a Resources Tax and Wealth Tax to meet these national needs.
Further, we demand of Government there be an immediate substantial increase in pensions, allowable income above pensions, rise in tax ceiling and extended issue of Health Benefit Cards to the 2,000,000 underprivileged aged, incapacitated and unemployed Australians.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Keating.
Petition received.
Aid to Socially Disadvantaged
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia and parishioners of Christ Church Dingley respectfully showeth-that in view of recent actions of your Government distress is being caused to the socially disadvantaged e.g. senior citizens, young unemployed, dependent mothers. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your Government will actively work to aid these people rather than make their burden heavier.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Sir Phillip Lynch.
Petition received.
Taxation: Volunteer Firemen
To the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
For many years volunteer firemen in the State of New South Wales 'have given loyal and selfless service, fighting fires and saving life and property, on behalf of the community. In so doing they personally risk their lives and deprive themselves of precious relaxation time.
The voluntee firemen believe that they are serving in the interests of their country in a similar way to the members of the Citizens Military Forces.
For this reason they are most critical for having to pay Income Tax on income derived from such services which they render to the New South Wales Fire Brigades.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled will take immediate steps to: Grant volunteer firemen in the State of New South Wales serving in the New South Wales Fire Brigades, tax exemption on earnings of volunteer firemen in a similar basis to that granted to the members of the Citizens Military Forces in accordance with the Income Tax Asse'ssment Act, 1936-1970, Part iii, Division I, Section 23.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.

2840 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Petitions

Sales Tax
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
The proposed increase in sales tax on the white goods and shelf goods industry, if implemented, would have a devastating effect on employment in South Australia.
The white goods industry in South Australia is one of the largest industries the economy of this State relies on.
Any increase in sales tax would depress the industry further and throw thousands of workers out of work, also dependent companies would go out of business.
We therefore call upon your Government not to increase sales tax in' this industry for the good of the workers employed and the economy in South Australia.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to increase sales tax on white goods and shelf goods.
by MrScott.
Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of childrens services, which has been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 Budget. And further, that annual Budget allocations in the area of childrens services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Sinclair.
Petition received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
Taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other business expenses.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Viner.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and the Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
We, the undersigned, condemn the thrust of the recommendations of the Lynch Razor Committee. In particular we condemn the implementaiion of the 'user pays' dogma in education, health and welfare, which are treated like commodities and denied to those who cannot pay.
We condemn: I. the proposal to introduce fees for higher and second
degrees.-Access to post-graduate and recurrent education will be limited to the rich; Australian research and ability to cope with technological change will

suffer; this proposal must be seen as a step in the introduction of fees for all tertiary students; 2. the proposed introduction of a loans scheme-to students this will mean graduating with a heavy debt burden or being denied a tertiary education if loans are refused because a student is seen as a 'poor risk' (particularly affecting women and those doing nonvocational courses); only the rich will be able to get a tertiary education without course restrictions and the burden of indebtedness; 3. the proposal to restrict eligibility for TEAS and the foreshadowing of reviewing TEAS levels only in the light of the availability of loans-any further downgrading of TEAS, which is already inadequate, can only further limit access to education; 4. the proposed restriction of Adult Secondary Assistance to those needing qualifications for employment-this will severely restrict access to a full high school education and necessary bridging education to tertiary education for those who left school early; 5. the proposal not to fund 30 colleges of advanced education if they are not rationalised-this attack, aimed at teacher education, will create a teacher shortage in the mid 1980's and restrict access to education now.
We, the undersigned, call upon the government to reject these proposals!
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Wilson.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives, Federal Parliament, Canberra. The humble petition of the undersigned residents of Salisbury in the State of South Australia.
Petition that: Competition between banks and finance companies by giving ever increasing interest rates to obtain the investors' capital, is against the nation's best interest. It penetrates every form of activity by constant demands for higher wages to meet these explosive conditions.
It is an intolerable burden to the younger generation of family life, that by necessity are the recipients of these excessive interest rates that are catastrophic to house purchase and natural living. We therefore respectfully petition for an urgent annual realistic controlled reduction right "across the board" on all existing and future interest rate agreements. With a maximum interest percentage ceiling on investors' capital, and a scale of interest charges for loans as appropriate.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honourable House will give effect to our submissions.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.
Income Tax Zone Allowances
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of the eastern goldfields in the State of Western Australia respectfully petition:
That the Government reverse its zone allowance policy as outlined in the recent Budget and:
(i) Abandon its attempt to exclude residents of large country towns from receiving zone allowance benefits.
(ii) Substantially increase the income tax rebate from the proposed $36 plus 20% of the dependent allowance for Zone B residents and $216 plus 50% of the dependent allowance for Zone A residents.

Petitions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2841

Your petitioners humbly pray that the House of Representatives take steps to ensure that Government policy on income tax zone allowances as outlined in the Budget is substantially amended.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Campbell.
Petition received.
Sales Tax
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives as in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Queensland respectfully showeth:
That your Petitioners are aware that the proposed Sales Tax is only one aspect of a Budget needed to support the growth and development of our Country.
And that every Australian, whether. rich or poor must aid this aim.
But that the social conscience of a country must be judged by the way in which it responds to the needs of its poorest, most helpless citizens.
And that this latest imposition will be responsible for Australia being judged not oilly by its own people but by the rest of the world.
We, the citizens of Queensland most humbly pray that: In the cause of justice and equity, your Honourable Members will reject any attempt to impose a Sales Tax on all essential goods including packaging of foods, shoes, clothing, literature and building materials.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrCross.
Petition received.
Wynyard Airport
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth that your petitioners resident in the Tasmanian North-West Coast and West Coast municipalities of Circular Head, Wynyard, Burnie, Penguin, Waratah, Zeehan, Strahan, Queenstown and Gormanston are desirous of retaining first class air service through the major airport serving the area, namely the Wynyard airport.
Since the Government has agreed to provide $5.5 million for Devonport which serves a smaller population and area, we ask the Government as a matter of urgency to also provide sufficient funds to upgrade Wynyard airport to the standard required for it to accommodate medium size jet aircraft.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled will give urgent consideration to this request.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Groom.
Petition received.
Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable Speaker and the Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This humble petition of citizens of the Geelong region in the.State of Victoria respectfully request the Federal Parliament not to accept the lAC recommendations on the motor vehicle industry as they

would, if accepted, have a disastrous economic effect on the region and would create massive unemployment.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Scholes.
Petition received.
TAXATION: VOLUNTEER FIREMEN
Notice of Motion
Mr MORRIS (Shortland)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House(I) expresses its appreciation to the volunteer firemen of
New South Wales for the valuable public life saving and property protection services they perform; (2) notes the petition from 3,700 citizens of New South Wales presented by the member for Shortland on 17 November 1981 requesting that tax exemption be granted in respect of payments made to volunteer firemen as members of the New South Wales Volunteer Fire Brigade; and (3) is of the opinion that the Federal Government should urgently amend the Income Tax Assessment Act to meet the terms of the petition.
The motion will be seconded by the honourable member for Hunter (Mr Robert Brown).
APARTHEID
Notice of Motion
Mr PORTER (Barker)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House affirms its opposition to apartheid and welcomes the decision of 83.4 per cent of the residents of Constantia, a suburb of Cape Town, who voted in a recent poll to open their own area to all races.
VIETNAM VETERANS
Notice of Motion
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House(I) notes the Government's failure to debate general busi-
ness notices of motion No. 81, in the name of the member for Melbourne Ports and given on 25 November 1980, and No. 103, also in my name and given on 10 June 1981; (2) further notes with concern that the Minister for Veterans' Affairs has been advised to expect an increasing number of suicides by Vietnam veterans during the forthcoming summer months; (3) recognises that the Vietnam veterans have been calling for a judicial inquiry into the use of chemicals in Vietnam for at least 2 years, and that such an inquiry is supported by the Senate and 27 ex-service organisations; and (4) therefore calls on the Prime Minister to accept his personal responsibility for Australia's military operations in Vietnam as stated by him in this House on 9 March 1971, and announce immediately the establishment of the judicial inquiry which Vietnam veterans have been seeking so that justice will be, and be seen to be, done without any further delay.

2842 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Questions Without Notice

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
PROFESSIONAL RADIO AND ELECTRONICS INSTITUTE OF AUSTRALASIA: INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE
Mr HAWKE-I address my question to the Minister for Industrial Relations. I refer the Minister to the report dated 21 October 1981 by Commissioner Vosti to the Full Bench of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission dealing with the industrial dispute involving members of the Professional Radio and Electronics Institute of Australasia employed by the Department of Transport on the maintenance of radar facilities. Will the Minister comment upon the findings by Commissioner Vosti condemning the Public Service Board for, amongst other things, 'constant harassment of the PREIA advocate whilst putting the Institute case' and 'displaying a lack of industrial integrity'? The commissioner's finding states:
If the tactics adopted in this inquiry are a true rellection of the standard of industrial relations and integrity established by the Board in its handling on industrial relations generally then it leads me to the conclusion that those necessary ingredients for successful employer, union relationships are almost non-existent at Board level or, to put it more charitably, are at a very low ebb.
Will the Minister also comment on that finding? Finally, I ask the Minister: In view of this totally damning indictment of the Public Service Board by an independent member of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, what steps does the Government intend to take on its side as the employer to create these necessary ingredients for successful employerjunion relationships in the Commonwealth Public Service? Will it now cease its persistent attempts to apportion blame solely to the trade unions for problems in that important area?
Mr VINER-I will investigate the matter to which the honourable gentleman refers and give him a reply as appropriate.
HOME MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES
Mr McLEAN-My question is directed to the Treasurer and relates to the Treasurer's statement of 8 November that a survey of major lending authorities indicated that they had not foreclosed any mortgages and taken possession of any homes as a result of interest rate increases. I ask: Does the Treasurer accept that this kind of survey result does not adequately or even partially reflect the difficulties currently faced by home buyers? Is the Treasurer aware of the time lag between interest rate increases and mortgage foreclosures

as home buyers undertake a wide range of financial arrangements and sacrifices to maintain their capacity to meet increased mortgage repayments? Can the Treasurer assure the House that, notwithstanding the comments made in his statement, he is aware of the difficulties presently being experienced by home buyers as a result of high interest rates? Can he assure the House that the Government is aware of, and is prepared to take action to alleviate, the increasing difficulties now confronting present and prospective home buyers?
Mr HOWARD-The short answer to the honourable gentleman's question is yes. I inform the House that I made those statements in the context of some fairly ill-informed remarks by the Victorian Minister of Housing, who sought to suggest that the Commonwealth Government was totally responsible for the problems being experienced by Australian home owners at present and that all that was needed to solve the problems was the injection of a few hundred million dollars more by the Commonwealth Government. The fact of the matter is that State and local governments are at least as responsible as, if not more responsible than, the Commonwealth Government for the cost of housing and land in Australia. In fact; all the information which comes to me indicates that by far the most disabling factor for potential home buyers in recent years has not been increases in interest rates but rather increases in the price of a house and land throughout Australia, particularly in the metropolitan area of Sydney where, because of the very rapid escalation in prices in that city, partieular problems have been created for home buyers in that part of Australia. That information indicates that, except in relation to people who have very recently taken out loans, the great majority of people now paying off their homes would be paying less, as a proportion of their weekly earnings, notwithstanding the interest rate increases, than they would have been paying, say, back in 1978. That is because of the fairly obvious fact that, although interest rates have gone up since 1978, in the generality of cases wages l1ave gone up ilt a faster rate.
, GREAT BARRIER REEF MARINE PARK
Mr WEST-My question is directed to the Prime Minister. Is it a fact that under the Coastal Waters (State Powers) Act the Queensland Government will be able to issue oil drilling .licences in the 70 per cent of the 3-mile territorial sea in the Great Barrier Reef region where the Cairns section has not been declared? Why did the Prime Minister not declare the whole Cairns

Questions Without Notice

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2843

section to the low water mark instead of just 30 per cent? Does the Prime Minister still believe that current research may show that drilling may be possible on or near the reef in future? Finally, I ask whether the Queensland Premier was correct when he stated this morning:
We will run the whole thing. We--
That is, the Queensland Government-
will make the zones, the regulations and neutralise the Commonwealth proposals. We will write the rules, we can write them all ourselves.
Will the Queensland Government, as stated by the Premier this morning on AM and in the media, be in a position to impose its own regulations and zoning plans involving yet another Commonwealth capitulation to the belligerent Queensland Premier?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I am not at all sure that the honourable gentleman has interpreted correctly what was said this morning, but in any case I had not heard it. The basis of the proposal, the understanding, that had been worked out between my colleague and Mr Ahern, the Queensland Minister, was the advice of the Great Barrier Marine Park Authority so that the ecologically sensitive areas that impinge on the coastline would be protected. Tomorrow we expect to get the formal advice in terms of the Act from the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, and proclamations will proceed on the next day, Thursday. So the boundary is based on the advice of the Authority, which is charged with that responsibility and which is in the best position to make proper judgments in relation to it. The protections for the reef come not only from the declaration of marine parks but also from the overriding power and authority of the Commonwealth-from the Commonwealth Act, the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act. That is something that we need to understand and remember. A Commonwealth Act provides the backdrop to our total capacity to protect the reef, and in any circumstances in which its use is necessary it will be used.
I think it would be a good thing to understand precisely what has been agreed. The understandings between my colleague and Mr Ahern are basically those that were put to the Premier last Friday, which he was unwilling to accept then and which I understand he is now willing to accept, although I have not heard that from him. I understand that the Queensland Government has accepted the propositions which were put to the Premier last Friday and which at .that time, as honourable gentlemen probably understand, were not accepted in full by the Premier.

Once the proclamations have been made on

Thursday a number of steps need to be under-

taken by the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park

Authority. It will call for submissions for a man-

agement plan. Those submissions can be made by

a great variety of people-by conservationists, by

people who are interested in undertaking activi-

ties such as tourism, fishing, or whatever else they

might be. Then it is for the Authority to develop

and publish a draft plan which will be the subject

of further comment. That comment can come

from any party, including the Queensland

Government or the Commonwealth Government

or people in Queensland who might be in the con-

servationist arena or the commercial arena. Once

there has been further comment as a result of the

initial draft plan, the Authority will submit a plan

to the Minister, together with representations that

have been made to the Authority. The Minister

can either accept the plan or refer it back with his

own suggestions.

.

Once the Minister accepts the zoning plan, which obviously will have gone through a number of stages involving public comment but which basically will have been in the hands of the Authority to determine-that is the important point for this House to consider-the plan will then be
put to both Houses of this Parliament and within 20 days either House may reject the plan. So there is ultimately a parliamentary process which the zoning plan also has to pass. In all of this the public can be involved, the State Government can be involved, and the Commonwealth Government is involved, but it is the powers of this Parliament under the Acts of this Parliament that ultimately provide our total capacity to do what needs to be done.

These are the procedures that were worked out in relation to the Capricornia Section of the park. The procedures in relation to the Cairns Section are similar except in one respect and, again, this was part of the Ahern-Wilson understanding. When .the regulations are made through the processes I have outlined-managed by the Authority, determined by the Authority, recommended to the Minister, and all the rest of it-if in relation to the 5-kilometre limit, where it comes into the coastline, the Queensland Parliament wants to pass some complementary legislation applying precisely what has been agreed through the processes I have outlined, of course it can do so to put a back-up to the processes. That is the only difference between this section and the Capricornia Section, which did not come into the 5-
kilometre limit. However, at that point no

2844 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Questions Without Notice

changes to what had been agreed would be accepted by the Commonwealth in any sense, shape or form. That needs to be understood.
Mr West-That is not what he said.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-J am just telling the House what the position is, what the position was last Friday, what the position was when the Minister was negotiating an understanding with Mr Ahern, and what the position was last Thursday, as stated by the Deputy Prime Minister and me. If Queensland wants to pass some legislation in that area to back up the five kilometres it may do so, and we would welcome that. Obviously we hope that there will be co-operative arrangements so that it is the Queensland ranger service and all the rest that apply the rules and regulations of the park. There is really no point in the Commonwealth being forced to establish a separate service to do that. Again, it is the Authority that would have the overall responsibility of reporting to this Government and of making sure that any zoning plan had been properly complied with. If it were not, something would have to be done about it. That is the position. J think it would be useful for honourable members if I could have leave of the House to incorporate in Hansard the joint statement by the Deputy Prime Minister and myself of last Thursday, 12 November.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-

For Media

Thursday, 12 November 1981

JOINT STATEMENT BY PRIME MINISTER AND DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER
Cairns Section of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park
The Great Barrier Reef is one of the wonders of the world. It is a focus of national pride, and all Australians treasure it. There is deep concern in the community for the welfare of the reef, and a universal conviction that proper care of the reef is a priority responsibility of governments.
Since 1975, the whole of the reef has been protected by the Commonwealth Government under the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act. Australia is indeed a world leader in conservation management of the marine environment. The policy of the Commonwealth Government is to proclaim the various sections of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park progressively. The Capricornia section was proclaimed in 1979.
The Cairns section has been the subject of negotiation for more than 12 months, the one outstanding issue being whether the western boundary should be the low water mark on the mainland or a line some distance off the coast.
The view of the Commonwealth Government is that the low water mark on the Queensland coast must form the boundary where features of ecological significance are involved.
The Commonwealth Parliament has full jurisdiction and responsibility right up to the low water mark. The Commonwealth Government was willing to allow discussions with the Queensland Government to be extended to a very considerable length in the interests of achieving co-operation and

agreement. But despite the length of the discussions, agreement has not been reached.
Accordingly, the Commonwealth Government has decided to move at once towards proclamation, and the enabling action leading to the proclamation of the Cairns section will be started immediately.
The Minister for Home Affairs and Environment will immediately request the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority to identify precisely the boundaries involved and report to him on its recommendations to allow him to recommend to the Governor-General that the area be proclaimed.
The total length of the Western Boundary will be some 550 kilometres, and for about 30% of this distance the boundary will be the low water mark on the coastline.
Among the ecological features included, will be the sea grass beds north of Cape Flattery, which are an important habitat for dugong~an internationally recognised endangered species; high quality reefs fringing the mainland and islands; and marine areas adjacent to Queensland-proclaimed national parks which extend down to the shoreline.
The Cairns section of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park will be some 36,000 square kilometres. When this is added to the 12,000 square kilometres in the Capricornia section, the park will then be many times larger than any existing or proposed marine park anywhere in the world.
The Marine Park concept and the way it is being implemented will ensure the conservation of the Reef ecosystem. It is the Government's policy that regulation should be the minimum necessary to conserve the Reef. As with the Capricornia section, there will be perfectly satisfactory provision for recreation, shipping, tourism, commercial and amateur fishing and other activities. The Park boundaries will exclude port and other marine areas adjacent to intensive industrial or agricultural developments on land, unless conservational reasons dictate otherwise.
The selection of the boundaries of the Cairns Section of the Marine Park has been made only after the most careful consideration of alternatives by the Government and by the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority.
The eastern boundary of tlie new Cairns section will follow the eastern boundary of the Great Barrier Reef Region itself. In the south, the boundary will be a line commencing at low water mark and coincident for most of its length with the line adopted for State purposes between the Cardwell and Johnstone Shires and thence passing immediately south of Taylor Reef to the eastern boundary of the Regions. In the north, the boundary will be a straight line commencing at low water mark on the mainland at 14 degrees 40 minutes south and passing through Two Mile Opening to the eastern boundary of the Region. Lizard Island is within the new Section of the Marine Park.
Once the Cairns Section is formally proclaimed, the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority is required under the Act to develop a zoning plan for the Section and, in this context, will be seeking public submissions. All submissions which the Authority receives will be examined carefully and will be takbn into account in preparing a draft Zoning Plan. The draft plan will then be published so that members of the public are aware of the detailed nature of the Authority'S proposals and are able to comment on them. The draft Zoning Plan will be open for comment for at least one month.
I regret that the Queensland Government has not come in with us on the western boundary of the Cairns Section. But I believe there is support throughout the whole of Australia for the course of action being followed. I hope that now a decision has been made, co-operation between the two Governments in Park matters will proceed.

Questions Without Notice

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2845

BRISBANE AIRPORT: NEW WORKS
Mr HODGES-My question, which is directed to the Minister for Housing and Construction, concerns works associated with the construction of Brisbane's new international airport and terminal. Is the Minister aware of complaints of flooding from Nudgee residents living in the vicillity of the recently constructed Schultz Canal? Have new works in the area caused ponding of areas which would increase mosquito breeding? Have recent heavy rains and flood run-off causederosion of the banks of the Schultz Canal? If so, what action is proposed to rectify the damage?
Mr McVEIGH-I am aware of concern expressed some months ago by people who live in the general area of Nudgee beach. But, following the fall last week of 330 millimetres of rain-the sort of fall which can cause considerable flooding in areas of Brisbane-those fears have been largely allayed. A fall of that order l2 months ago caused a flood of 1t metres in the Brisbane Airport area. Last week, because of the protective works undertaken, there was no such flooding. It is now reliably estimated by engineers from Commonwealth and State government departments that the present works will withstand a flood six times larger than that of last week. To indicate to the honourable member for Petrie the severity of a flood of that order, the floods in Brisbane in 1974 were only five times larger than the flood of last week. The honourable member has drawn to my attention what could cause a problem with regard to mosquito breeding. I assure him that the Department will continue to monitor that so that any inconvenience will be limited.
In reply to the last part of the question, I advise the honourable member that, following representations made by him earlier in the year, the length of the rock wall was increased by 110 metres to 260 metres. That has withstood all the problems in the flooding last week, and Nudgee Road was not flooded. Another protective measure which it was fortunate we adopted was the erection of a man-proof fence around the lower reaches of Schultz Canal, because people were using the banks for fishing purposes and were not allowing the mangroves to be established to stabilise the banks. All in all, last week was a good test and the honourable member can assure the residents about whom he is concerned that the proposals adopted and the plans and procedures carried out can allay any fears that they may have had six months ago.
PERFORMING ARTS
Dr JENKINS--Will the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment recommend that the

urgent request by the Confederation of Australian Professional Performing Arts for a supplementary grant of $1.18m to the Australia Council be met in order to alleviate the crisis facing the performing arts? If the Minister does not propose to support this request, what steps is he prepared to take to restore funding to the Australia Council at a level that will allow it to maintain all artistically viable companies?
Mr WILSON-The amount of funds allocated by the Government for the arts, in particular that section of the development of the arts dealt with by the Australia Council, is determined at the time of the Budget. The amount provided to the Australia Council is provided to it on the basis that, except in the case of the Australian Opera, the Australian Ballet and the Elizabethan Theatre Trust, it is in the hands of the Australia Council to determine how it will divide its funds between, firstly, administration and, secondly, general support for the arts. Having made that determination, it is a matter then for the Australia Council to determinedistribution between its boards and the allocation within each of its boards to provide assistance and encouragement to artistic endeavour in this country.
It should be pointed out, however, that the Commonwealth Government is not the only sphere of government that has some significant responsibility for providing support to the arts. It is a matter also for State and local governments, the corporate sector and individuals. The Australia Council allocated the resources available to theatres and performing arts companies so as to give them encouragement by way of a reward for expanding the resources available to them. It was a matter for the Australia Council to determine whether it simply cut the amounts across the board in respect of an increased number of performing arts companies or whether it adopted a different approach so as to help others who should have and do have an interest in the development of our performing arts.
WAGE FIXING: NATIONAL INQUIRY
Mr PEACOCK-My question is directed to the Minister: for Industrial Relations. I refer the Minister to the proposed national inquiry into the wage fixing system, foreshadowed back in May. Will the Minister indicate what progress has been made to date and, in particular, when the membership and the final terms of reference will be announced?
Mr VINER-I can inform the honourable gentleman that this matter is now before the Government and I expect a decision to be taken

2846 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Questions Without Notice

by the Government shortly. I will then be in a position to announce the membership, form and composition of the inquiry.
DOUBLE DISSOLUTION
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I refer the Prime Minister to his statements of last Sunday concerning the possibility of a double dissolution. Is the Prime Minister aware of the dicta of Sir Garfield Barwick in Western Australia v. The Commonwealth in 1975 where he said that double dissolution Bills may not be stockpiled or laid aside until a later date which might be more suitable for an election? Is the honourable gentleman also aware of advice given by Mr Menzies and earlier by Sir Samuel Griffith that the Governor-General is not bound to follow the advice of the Prime Minister in relation to section 57 of the Constitution? I therefore ask: Will the Prime Minister advise the Governor-General that he has an independent discretion in relation to section 57 and, in view of the comments of Sir Garfield Barwick, will he advise a double dissolution at the earliest opportunity?
MrMALCOLM FRASER-I thank the honourable gentleman for his legal advice. I am glad to see that he now recognises and concedes on behalf of the Australian Labor Party that in certain dire and extreme circumstances the Governor-General has an independent discretion.
URANIUM EXPORTS
Mr TAMBLING-My question is directed to the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Resources. Can the Minister advise the House of the current state of uranium exports from Australia?
The honourable member continuing to ask his question-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The first part of the question is in order; the second part is not.
Mr ANTHONY-Some members of the public, and of the Opposition, are trying to give the impression that there is not a future in the Australian uranium industry. It might be interesting to know that, since the Prime Minister announced that the Australian Government would permit the development and export of uranium, 102 shipments have been made out of this country, consisting of 6,000 tonnes of uranium which has come from the Mary Kathleen mine in Queensland, the Nabarlek mine in the Northern Territory and the stockpile which was owned by the Commonwealth. Since 1977, 10 new contracts have been entered into entailing 46,000 short tons of uranium which will be delivered between 1982

and 1996. This is a considerable amount of uranium--
Mr Holding-Yellowcake.
Mr ANTHONY-Uranium oxide, or UJOS, if the honourable member likes.
Mr Hayden~It is UJOgI am standing in for Barry Jones while he is away.
Mr ANTHONY-I am sorry, UJOgI hope the honourable member is a bit wiser than the honourable member for Lalor. This is a very considerable amount of uranium and it guarantees the future of mines around Australia and the jobs of many people. Certainly those unions involved in this development support it conclusively.There seems to be some difference of opinion within the Australian Labor Party or at least members have differences of opinion in different parts of Australia. I will quote what the Leader of the Opposition said to the Australian Broadcasting Commission when he was in the Northern Territory last Tuesday. He said:
We have never sought to encourage the trade unio~s to apply industrial prohibition, industrial action, and we still don't. We don't endorse any such action.
Of course, he knows that in the Northern Territory the Labor Party's uranium policy is an absolute disaster. With a by-election coming up in. the Northern Territory he had different words to say from the words he uses in this House. But we all know that the development of uranium is very important for the world's energy needs. Certainly, it is a very significant part of Australia's future development. This Government supports it and will see that it succeeds.
DEFENCE PURCHASES
Mr SCHOLES-I ask the Minister Jor Defence: In view of the fact that the Government has announced that it has added the Invincible class aircraft carrier to the list of options available in considering a replacement for the HMAS Melbourne and also that it will be examining the purchase of two minesweepers from the United Kingdom, is he able to indicate whether, as part of that consideration, the Government has agreed or has been asked to agree to set aside the normal Atlstralian industry participation program which, in the case of these three items of defence equipment, could exceed $100m?
Mr KILLEN-It is completely correct, as my friend says, that the Government has under consideration an aircraft carrier of the Invincible class and two minesweepers. But I point out to the honourable gentleman and to the House that no decision on this matter has been made. I am

Questions Without Notice

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2847

bound to say that, looking at the matter prospectively, if a decision were made there would be substance in my honourable friend's contention that the Government's normal search for some 30 per cent Australian industry participation would be put in jeopardy. I think it is propitious to take this opportunity to point out to the House the absolutely lamentable state of Australian shipbuilding in Navy yards today. I have expressed to my honourable friend. the honourable member for Melbourne my utmost concern regarding industrial conditions in the Williamstown yard. It is my earnest hope that the Australian Council of Trade Unions will seek to co-operate with the Government to ensure that some reasonableness and sanity can be restored to that yard.
I will indulge myself to this extent, and say that no matter which kidney of government might be in office it would be absolutely impossible to build any follow-on destroyers in that yard while the present conditions obtained. I believe that at the end of the day reason must govern our individual and corporate existences. I hope that the unions represented in that yard will see the difficulties that are posed by their present behaviour. I hope that they will respond to the very earnest beckoning made to them by appropriate officers of the ACTU and seek to co-operate with the government of the day.
PERTH AIRPORT
Mr BUNGEY-I refer the Minister for Transport to recent announcements by the Government concerning the construction of international terminal facilities at Adelaide and Hobart airports. Do these approvals mean that construction of an international terminal at Perth will be delayed? If so, what is the length of the deferment? If not, does the scheduled completion date of 1985 for an international terminal at Perth Airport still apply?
. Mr HUNT-The decision by the Government to construct an international terminal, apron and taxiways to facilitate international flights from Adelaide by October 1982 and its proposal to upgr\ide the terminal facilities at Hobart will not in any way affect the scheduling arrangements for the Perth Airport. At present, as the honourable gentleman would know. we are developing a planning strategy for Perth Airport. I expect that to be completed by early next year. I know that the honourable member for Canning and the honourable member for Tangney have requested such a requirement for the Perth Airport. The completion date will, of course, be largely dependent

on the outcome of that strategy. There is no intention at this stage to alter the program and the proposal in respect of Perth announced early in the year. But we want to be sure that we place the air traffic control tower and the international terminal in a place that will take into account long term requirements at Perth Airport and also meet the community requirements in respect of air traffic noise and so on.

GREAT BARRIER REEF MARINE PARK
Mr CROSS-I ask the Prime Minister: Why will his Government not declare all of the Cairns section of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park extending to the low water mark? Will the Queensland Government still be able to issue oil drilling licences inside the 70 per cent of the territorial sea to remain under Queensland State control?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I have said on many occasions, and in fact the Queensland Government has also said it on a number of occasions, that we will not allow oil drilling in or around the region of the reef. I have already indicated that that 70 per cent would stilI be protected under the Acts of this Parliament. If we believed that anything was going to happen that could damage any part of the reef those Acts would give us power and authority to act and, if it were necessary, we would do so.
I was also asked why we did not declare the whole section in to the low water mark. In fact I answered that in reply to an earlier question. The boundaries are based on the advice, which is informal up to this point, from the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority. Its formal advice will be coming to us on Wednesday, which will mean that the appropriate proclamations can be made on Thursday.

WILLIAMSTOWN NAVAL DOCKYARD
Mr JARMAN-My question, which I address to the Minister for Defence, is in part supplementary to the earlier question asked of him.about industrial strife at Williamstown. As a member of the Government members defence and foreign affairs committee l. was invited to travel on HMAS Parramatta from Melbourne to Sydney in the last couple of days. The refit of HMAS Parramatta, which I think was commissioned in about 1960--

Mr Scholes-Is this a question?

Mr JARMAN-I am not giving information; I

am asking a question.

.

2848 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member might rephrase his question so that he seeks information.
Mr JARMAN-I am seeking information. Is the Minister aware that when Hl\1AS Parramatta went in for a two-year refit in 1976 the refit ultimately took 4t years at a cost to the Australian taxpayer of $35m to $36m and that the reason for this--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman must ask his question or I will have to rule him out of order.
Mr JARMAN-I am asking: Is the Minister aware that the reason for this extra time and extra cost to the taxpayer was industrial trouble at Williamstown?
Mr KILLEN-The information given by the honourable gentleman would, on reflection, appear to be substantially correct. The refit took far, far longer than was anticipated. May I correct the impression that all the fault at Williamstown rests with the trade unions.
Mr Scholes-You are giving it.
Mr KILLEN-I am very sorry if I did. I am seeking to make amends. Some time ago a very distinguished relative of the present honourable member for Wills--
Mr Hawke-The same name; no relation.
Mr KILLEN-Well, I thought I was favouring the honourable member. That person was commissioned to inquire into the state of affairs at Williamstown dockyard. He has produced a report. It is a very detailed report. The Government has it under consideration.
Mr Hayden-Can one have access to a copy?
Mr KILLEN-I say to my honourable friend that I was asked this question by a member of the Press gallery at a Press conference some time ago. I said that I would be prepared to consider it. A great deal of the information was given on a commercial, in-confidence basis. As a consequence of that it cannot be made available publicly. I unhesitatingly say to the Leader of the Opposition that I will place a copy in his hands knowing that he will respect the oath he took as a member of the Executive Council. The report does light up this simple but nevertheless daunting state of affairs: Unless reason is brought back into the conduct of all the yard's operations, it will simply not be possible for follow-on destroyers to be built and for refits to be carried out at the Williamstown dockyard. I want to make that point.
I stated to the House some time ago that I met the members of the shipbuilding committee of the

Australian Council of Trade Unions.They argued their case in a robust and cogent way. I took no exception to that at all. They acknowledged the difficulties that are there. Recently the Department of Defence had occasion to vet, and I do not use the term in any offensive sense, some of the people applying for work at the yard. I have discussed the matter with a number of honourable gentlemen on both sides of the House. I do not seek to be sententious about any persons who have transgressed against society. Indeed, in the past I have sought to lend some encouragement to rehabilitate them in society. Nevertheless, the Department of Defence and the Royal Australian Navy have a responsibility to ensure that the best possible quality of labour is available. Running in tandem with that, the Department of Defence, the Government and the Minister of the day, have an obligation to ensure that the best quality of management is available. That remains the search of the present Government.
SINAI PEACEKEEPING FORCE
Mr HAYDEN-I ask a question of the Prime Minister. It refers to Australia's role in the proposed Sinai multinational military monitoring force. Can the Prime Minister inform the House how far the accumulation of weapons has proceeded among Israeli settlers in the Sinai and especially in the Rafah salient who are preparing to resist by force Israel's withdrawal next April as provided for in the Camp David Accords? Can he also tell the House how far advanced is the systematic takeover by these settlers of areas left vacant in the Sinai by people who have returned to Israel in advance of the withdrawal next April? Does this resistance affect in any way the understanding that Australia's participation in the peacekeeping force be conditional on all parties to the Accords adhering to them 'by word and deed', to use the words of the Prime Minister of 22 October in this House? Finally, if this resistance is not considered to be an infringement of the Accords, is it intended that Au~tralian troops be involved in removing or dealing with those settlers who resist withdrawal by force of arms?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Mr Speaker, that would not be part of the responsibilities of the multinational force. What was said in relation to that force obviously applies to commitments by the governments of Egypt, Israel and the United States. I have no reason to believe that those governments are not strongly in support of the maintenance of the Camp David Accords and the withdrawal processes in a proper time and a proper manner. I have no reason to believe that the Israeli Government will not fulfil its part of

Questions Without Notice

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2849

the bargain in relation to its own people and its own personnel. I can advise the House of nothing else in relation to these particular matters at the moment except that from reading the newspapers honourable gentlemen will well understand that various negotiations are proceeding which could well involve a number of other countries making public statements about participation in the force.
One thing in an overriding way which has altered the views of many people in many different places is that since President Sadat's assassination people have suddenly been confronted with the fact that, even though there have been many proposals for peace in the Middle East, the Camp David peace process is the only one that has achieved anything. If that, therefore, is thrown out the window by lack of support in ways in which that support is needed and necessary and capable of being provided, then the only peace process that has achieved anything at all in the Middle East will have been abandoned. I think many countries have come to the view that it would be a major tragedy if that occurred. That is why there has been the obvious reassessment and, indeed, the bringing forward of any decision by Australia before there was a fully balanced force. We hoped that our decision would assist in achieving a proper balance in that force because that, of course, is necessary to give it its fully multinational character. I think the fact that many countries are reassessing their positions in relation to that and the fact that the Australian decision may have had some part, however small, in helping to bring that about, is an indication of the way in which a decision by a government in a country such as Australia can help in a peace process.
Let me emphasise again that this is an observing force and a monitoring force. It is not a fighting force and it is not an enforcing force. It is a monitoring and observing force. Of course, if fighting were to break out or if any of the parties were not to fulfil their obligations under the Camp David process, then the whole matter would have broken down. I hope that within the next week or two some of the countries may have got into a position in which they can make decisions and reinforce what has already occurred.
WHEAT VARIETIES
Mr GILES-Is the Minister for Primary Industry aware that a new high yielding variety of wheat called Roseworthy College 311, of great importance to the South Australian wheat growing environment, has been developed and that this variety has been refused registration by Queensland and Western Australia? Is he aware

that the South Australian Wheat Quality Advisory Committee, composed of bakers, researchers, breeders, growers and bulk handling authorities has passed this wheat, after extensive testing? Will he make sure, in an attempt to resolve this difficulty, that the matter can be listed for discussion by the Australian Agricultural Council at some subsequent meeting?
Mr NIXON-I think it is fair to say that in. the agricultural community at large there is a deal of prejudice against the use of crossbreeds or hybrids, whether it be in the grain section, in animal breeding, of whatever. That just happens to be a fact of life. I cannot say specifically whether RAC 311 has run into this particular prejudice. I will see what information is available on that matter.
I am aware that a great deal of work has been put into this particular breed of wheat by the authorities mentioned by the honourable member. I realise that it has the full support of all those members throughout South Australia. I am not sure whether I can have the matter listed for discussion at a meeting of the Agricultural Council; I will need to check that. If it is possible to do so and if some gains can be made out of that, I will -certainly do so and let the honourable member know.
MIDDLE EAST PEACE PROPOSAL
Mr HOWE-Is the Prime Minister aware of the eight-point peace plan proposed by Prince Fahd of Saudi Arabia which clearly entails the recognition of the right of Israel to exist? Is he aware of reports that Yasser Arafat, the head of the Palestine Liberation Organisation, recently described Prince Fahd's proposal as a positive step and a very important platform for a solution of Middle East problems? Can he describe to the House contacts that have been maintained for some time at a high official level between the Australian. Government and the PLO and inform the House of how productive these official contacts have been, especially whether they have been able to enlarge on this new and apparently encouraging development and the publicly declared attitude of the PLO towards the state of Israel?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-If, out of those proposals, the PLO is prepared to drop the plank in its policy which involves the destruction of the state of Israel, it is within its power to make that fully and plainly known and understood in the Middle East and around the world. It would be a very positive step towards peace if it were prepared to do so. At this stage, I am not aware that it has been prepared to do so. Obviously, a number of people are aware of those other proposals. I make the point that the only proposals that have

2850 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Questions Without Notice

succeeded in achieving anything in the Middle East are the Camp David Accords and the peace process that has flowed from that. If any honourable member wants to run the risk of jeopardising those proposals when they are the only ones that have advanced anything whatsover, he runs the risk of jeopardising peace in the Middle East for many years to come.

EXPORT FINANCE AND INSURANCE CORPORATION
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)-Pursuant to section 88 of the Export Finance and Insurance Corporation Act 1974-78, I present the 1980-81 annual report of the Export Finance and Insurance Corporation.

MEAT SHORTAGES
Mr O'KEEFE-Can the Minister for Primary Industry reconcile the low cattle prices and the decreasing population and yardings with the shortage of meat that is often complained about by housewives endeavouring to purchase meat supplies? Is the Minister satisfied that the present sales arrangements offer a satisfactory return to the producer and provide adequate supplies, economically priced, to the Australian consumer?
Mr NIXON-There has been a significant drop in the number of cattle available for slaughter over the past two or three years for a variety of reasons. Cattle numbers have fallen from 33 million head to about 24 million head. As a result, the volume of beef produced has declined significantly. I am not aware of any complaints from housewives that they are unable to purchase beef. Indeed, I thought the contrary position obtained. There are still significant volumes of beef available for the export market. I cannot say that the matter has been brought to my attention in any way at all. Despite the fall off in the numbers available for meat production, the fact is that the price of beef is very soft. I think this can be attributed mainly to the problems of the United States of America with its depressed economy, oversupply of white meat-chicken and porkand low beef prices. That reflects very much on the international scene. It reflects finally on the saleyard price paid for Australian beef. The last part of the honourable member's question raised queries as to the method of sale and the return to the producer. Studies on carcass classification are still in train. I know that a great deal of the producing sector of the industry hopes that it will advance the situation in terms of the sale price ultimately achieved by the producer. No final decision has been made on that yet. That still lies in the future. The producer is dependent upon supply and demand. That situation has existed in the industry for generations. I am unable to make any comment at this point on when work will be completed on carcass classification or even on the impact that that will have on the market place. I hope that it will be completed soon and that it will have some impact.

URANIUM ADVISORY COUNCIL
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)-For the information of honourable members, I present the report on uranium mining laws in the Northern Territory referred to in the Uranium Advisory Council 1980-81 annual report.
DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND ENERGY Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)-For the information of honourable members, I present the 1980-81 annual report of the Department of National Developmentand Energy.
SNOWY MOUNTAINS COUNCIL
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)-For the information of honourable members, I present the 1980-81 annual report of the Snowy Mountains Council.
ELECTRICITY GENERATION ANI) THE SHARING OF POWER RESOURCES IN
SOUTH-EAST AUSTRALIA
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)-For the information of honourable members, I present the report of the Committee of Inquiry into Electricity Generation and the Sharing of Power Resources in South East Australia-executive summary and volumes I and 2.
AUSTRALIAN TOURIST COMMISSION Sir PHILLIP LYNCH (Flinders-Minister for Industry and Commerce)-Pursuant to section 29 of the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967, I present the 1980-81 annual report of the Australian Tourist Commission.
AUSTRALIAN POSTAL COMMISSION Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications)-Pursuant to section 102 of the Postal Services Act 1975, I present extracts from the 1980-81 interim annual report of the Australian Postal Commission.

General

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2851

JAPANESE TUNA LONG-LINE FISHING
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-For the information of honourable members, I present the subsidiary agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of Japan concerning Japanese tuna long-line fishing.
AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURAL COUNCIL
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-For the information of honourable members, I present the resolutions of the III th Meeting of the Australian Agricultural Council held in Darwin, 3 August 1981.
AUSTRALIAN MEAT AND LIVESTOCK CORPORATION
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 49 of the Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1947, I present the interim annual report for 1980-81 of the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation, together with a list of licensed meat exporters and licensed livestock exporters as at 1 July 1981.
OILSEEDS RESEARCH COMMITTEE
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 28(1) of the Oilseeds Levy Collection and Research Act 1977, I present the 1980-81 annual report of the Oilseeds Research Committee.
AUSTRALIAN SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COUNCIL
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations)-For the information of honourable members, I present the report by the Australian Science and Technology Council on microelectronics.
LAW REFORM COMMISSION
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations)-Pursuant to section 35(3) of the Law Reform Commission Act 1973, I present the 1980-81 annual report of the law Reform Commission.

seek leave to have the statement incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The statement read as follows-
The Government is grateful for the comprehensive report of the Law Reform Commission which recommends changes in virtually all aspects of child welfare in the Australian Capital Territory and in the procedures of the ACT Children's Court and the Australian Federal Police. These matters are within the province of my colleagues, the Ministers for Administrative Services, Health and the Capital Territory as well as the Attorney-General.
On 15 May 1980 in response to the Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs, the Attorney General informed honourable "senators that, when tabling a report of the Law Reform Commission, the Government would indicate the arrangements for handling the Government's consideration of the report. He also mentioned that reports of the Commission require close and careful consideration before they can be implemented.
Careful study is clearly required in respect of this report on child welfare. My colleagues will be arranging for relevant officers to consider the report in detail. In addition, views will be sought from the ACT Children's Advisory Committee. As child welfare is a State responsibility relevant State Departments will also be consulted as will be the ACT House of Assembly and organisations concerned with child welfare in the Territory. In due course there may be a need for further discussions to be arranged with the Law Reform Commission.
Following those considerations of the report, my colleague the Minister for the Capital Territory expects to present options to the Government for child welfare legislation in the Australian Capital Territory.
EIGHTH INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW SEMINAR
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations)-For the information of honourable members, I present the papers and summary of discussions of the Eighth International Trade Law Seminar, held in Canberra, 23-24 May 1981.
AUSTRALIAN SHIPPING COMMISSION
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport)-Pursuant to section 39(4) of the Australian Shipping Commission Act 1956, I present the 1980-81 annual report of the Australian Shipping Commission.

LAW REFORM COMMISSION REPORT: CHILD WILFARE
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations)-Pursuant to section 37 of the Law Reform Commission Act 1973, I present the Law Reform Commission report on child welfare, together with the text of a statement by the Minister representing the Acting Attorney-General. I

SOCIAL WELFARE POLICY SECRETARIAT REPORT
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Social Welfare Policy Secretariat report on poverty measurement together with the text of a statement by the Minister for Social Security relating to the report.

2852 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

General

EMPLOYEES COMPENSATION
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport)-Pursuant to section 122 of the Compensation (Commonwealth Government Employees) Act 1971, I present the 1980-81 annual report of the Commissioner for Employees Compensation,
DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SECURITY
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport)-Pursuant to section 148 of the Social Services Act 1947, I present the 1980-81 annual report of the Department of Social Security,
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-For the information of honourable members, I present the 1980-81 annual report of the Department of Science and Technology,
AUSTRALIAN RESEARCH GRANTS SCHEME
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-For the information of honourable members, I present the report on grants approved for 1982 under the Australian Research Grants Scheme,
REPATRIATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-Pursuant to section 107vZZA of the Repatriation Act 1920, I present the 1980-81 annual report of the Repatriation Re- .view Tribunal.

DEFENCE SERVICE HMS
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology)-Pursuant to section SOB of the Defence Service Homes Act 1918, I present the 1980-81 annual report of the Defence Service Homes Corporation,
TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE AUTHORITY REPORT ON ALMONDS
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-For the information of honourable members, I present the report of the Temporary Assistance Authority on almonds,
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY CORPORATE AFFAIRS COMMISSION
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-For the information of honourable members, I present the 1980-81 annual report of the Australian Capital Territory Corporate Affairs Commission,
NATIONAL WOMEN'S ADVISORY COUNCIL
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-For the information of honourable members, I present the 1980-81 annual report of the National Women's Advisory Council.
SPORTS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and the Environment)-I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard details of grant allocations for 1981-82 under the Sports Development Program,
Leave granted,
The document read as follows-

1981-82 SPORTS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM-GRANT ALLOCATION ATTACHMENT B

Sport
Angling Archery Athletics Athletics (little) Australian
Football Badminton Baseball Basketball Ililliards &
Snooker Uocce Bowls(M) Bowls(W) Bowls Indoor Boxing Canoe
C<lsting Cricket (M) Cricket (W) Croquet

Administration

Coaching

International compo

International meet.

Development

Forward commit.

Director General Director General

22,000

4,000 3,000
1,000

..
22,000

.. 3,00.0.
5,000

22,00.0.
22,000 22,000

4,000

..
22,000 22,000

13,000 2,000

5,000
.. 5,00.0.
22,000

3,00.0.
4,000
4,000 2,000
3,00.0. 50.0.
3,000 2,000

O'seas In Ausl. Admin. Coaching Projects

.. 8,000
34,000

1,000' 1,000' 2,000' It,OOO' 4,000

..
5,000' 18,000
37,000'

.. 12,000'

2,000 1,500
1,900 5,000 2,000
11,000' 25,000
3,00.0.
2,500

18,000
1,000 3,000

1,000 1,500' 2,000'
..
500
1,000 1,000 1,000
2,00..0'
2,000 400

15,000 500' 1,000'
6,000 2,000

Talent Total 1982-83 1983-84

4,000 16,000
85,000 6,000

5,000 40,000

40,000

4,000

50,000
12,000
64,000 100,000

20,000
3,000
40,000 60,000

20,00.0.
40,000 40,000

5,000 7,000 5,900
10,000
5,000 15,000
32,000 3,500
48,000
8,900 5,000

3,000 10,000
.. 30,000 3,000 20,000
..
6,000

..
20,000

Sports Development Program

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2853

Administration

Coaching

International compo

International meet.

Development

Forward commit.

Sport

Director General Director General O'seas In Aust. Admin. Coaching Projects Talent Total 19B2-B3 19B3-B4

Cycling

5,000

Darts

Equestrian

6,000

Fencing

22,000

Game fishing

Gliding

Golf{M)

22,000

Golf{W)

22,000

Gymnastics

22,000

Hockey (M)

22,000

Hockey (W)

6,000

Ice hockey

Ice racing

lee skating

Judo

Karate-do

22,000

Lacrosse (M)

Lacrosse (W)

Motorsporl-

CAMS

22,000

Autocycle

Karling

Netball

22,000

Orienteering

Pentathlon

Polo

Polocrosse

Powerboat

Powerlifting

Roller Skating

16,500

Rowing

6,000

Rugby Union

22,000

Shooting-

ASA

22,000

Clay Targets

Field and

Game

National Rifle

Pistol

Shooting

Small Bore

RiHe

Sporting

Shooters

Skiing (Snow)

22,000

Soccer (M)

22,000

Soccer (W)

Softball

22,000

Sport aircrah

c'lee-

22,000

Aerobatics

Hang gliding

Parachute

Squash

22,000

Surrriders

5,000

Swimming-

ASU

22,000

Diving

Synchronised

Water polo

Table tennis

Taekwondo

Tennis (LTAA)

Ten Pin Bowling 22,000

Touc~ football

Trampolining

Underwater

Volleyball

22,000

Water skiing

22,000

Weight lifting

22,000

Wrestling

Yachting

22,000

Parent Bodies-

Australian

Commonwealth

Games

Association

Australian

Olympic

Federation

3,000
2,000 4,000
2,000 1,000 3,000 4,000 2,000 1,000
3,000 2,000 2,000
500 500 1,000 3,000 1,000
3,000 3,000 3,000 3,000 2,000 3,000
1,000
1,000 2,000 3,000 3,000
4,000 1,000 3,000
2,000
50,000

10,000 5,000 6,000 22,000 5,000
22,000
22,000 22,000
16,500
5,000 22,000 22,000 6,000 22,000 22,000 22,000 22,000

2,900 5,000 15,000

20,000'

1,000 3,000 '
500 4,000
2,000

20,000 B,OOO 12,000 16,000'
22,000' 30,000'
10,000" 10,000 12,000 10,000 12,000

2,900' 10,000' 5,000' 5,000
10,000

5,000 2,000 6,000

4,000

3,00010,000 B,OOO'

5,000' 25,000
5,000'

10,000
10,000' 10,000 20,000
14,000'

5,00010,000'

3,000 2,000
12,000 6,000

10,000 5,000
5,000 2,000' 10,000'
40,000 20,000

1,000
5,000 1,000
2,000 1,500 3,000

7,000 3,000' 15,000 16,000 5,000

3,000'

26,000' 10,000' 10,000'

15,000' 4,000' 7,000 11,000 2,000

5,000' 4,000'

20,000' 20,000 15,000' 15,000 43,000'

7,000 3,000
5,000' 10,000'

1,000 900
1,000' 1,000' 2,000 1,000 1,000
2,500' 1,500' 2,500' 1,000 1,500' 1,000' 1,500' 1,500' 1,500'
1,000 500
2,000
BOO 1,500 1,500 2,000' 2,000
1,000'
1,200
1,500' 1,000-
600
1,000
1,000 1,500
800
2,000' 1,000'
700 300 300
1,000
2,000 1,500' 1,500' 2,000' 1,500'
3,000
1,300

2,500' 1,500' 2,500'
1,500' 1,000' 1,500' 1,000' 1,000' 1,800

2,000

1,000'

1,000' 1,000'
1,000 800
1,500' 1,000'

1,000' 1,000'
20,000
1,500' 1,500'
500' 2,500'

6,000

26,000
6,800 22,000 3B,OOO
4,000 30,000 31,000 34,000 51,900 85,000 47,000 11,000 14,500 19,000 24,000 46,500 18,500
2,Boo

9,000'

23,000
7,500 2,000 62,000 39,000 8,500 5,500 6,000 13,Boo 17,500 30,000 51,000 48,000

30,000 25,000

5,200 13,000

II,BOO

4,000

8,000 53,500 76,000
1,600 48,000

22,000 8,000 7,000
21,000 61,500 10,800

B3,OOO 18,000
1,000 28,700 33,300 10,300 53,000 27,000
5,500 10,000 9,000
67,000 47,500 46,000 17,000 100,000

1,300 50,000

30,000 3,000
35,000 10,000
10,000 20,000 23,000 50,000 90,000 30,000
5,000 2,000 4,000 10,000 35,000
12,000
20,000
2,000 40,000
8,000
30,000 60,000 26,000
20,000 20,000
2,000
45,000 20,000
20,000
20,000
16,000 40,000 40,000
55,000 5,000 5,000
50,000 24,000
4,000 20,000 25,000
10,000
60,000 30,000 30,000
4,000 60,000

20,000
20,000 20,000 20,000 40,000 40,000 20,000 10,000
20,000 B,ooO
20,000
40,000
20,000 40,000 20,000 20,000 20,000
40,000 20,000 20,000 20,000
40,000
40,000
20,000 20,000 15,000 20,000 20,000
40,000 20,000 20,000 40,000

2854 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Sports Development Program

Administration

Coaching

International compo

International meet.

Development

Forward commit.

Sport

Director General Director General O'seas In Aust. Admin. Coaching Projects Talent Total 1982-83 1983-84

Conrederation of Australian Sport
State Departments-
WA
Department Professional
Bodies
Australian
'Council for
Health,
Physical Education
and Recreation
Australian Sports Medicine Federation
Drug Control Committee
Research Commonwealth
Projects National
Athlete Award Scheme National Coaching Accreditation Scheme
Talent development scheme
Workshops Other-
Custom Credit tennis
Surf lifesaving University
sports

11,000 6,000'

50,000 11,000'

22,000

35,000

15,000

30,000 25,000

80,000 25,000

3,000 900

16,000
28,000 20,000

27,000

20,000
28,000 20,000

20,000

20,000

190,000

.. 190,000

35,000

20,000 20,000

20,000 20,000

60,000

60,000 22,000
15,900

30,000 20,000

20,000

Total

643,500 216,500 361,500 118,000 710,800 243,900 80,700 31,100 400,000 79,000 2,885,000 1,490,000 993,000

- Denotes category block.

PERSONAL EXPLANATION Mr HICKS (Riverina)-Mr Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr HICKS-Yes.
Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed.
Mr HICKS-On 20 October 1981, when we were dealing with Appropriation Bill (No.1) 1981-82, consideration of the report of Estimates Committee B, the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) was making a speech regarding Aboriginal land rights. I refer honourable members to the bottom of the second paragraph on page 2241 of Hansard where an interjection was attributed to me. I was supposed to have said: 'Land grab'. That interjection was not mine.

LAW REFORM COMMISSION REPORT: CHILD WELFARE
Mrs KELLY (Canberra)-by leave-I want to take this opportunity to make a brief statement on the report on Child Welfare as it is an issue of great concern to the people of Canberra. I think it highlights the difficult problems we have in the Australian Capital Territory of getting changes to ordinances which in fact are antiquate<:i. The particular child welfare ordinances was described as: 'Confused both in concept and language and
a reflects values and attitudes of times gone by'.
This ordinance has been investigated now for period of three years. When I was a member of the Legislative Assembly I can remember that we investigated that matter for two years, brought down recommendations, but were then told that this would be investigated by the Law Reform Commission. It is an issue of great concern to the people of Canberra because it deals with social issues such as child abuse, what we do with children in need of care, care proceedings, how we

Australian Financial System

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2855

treat juveniles, and what sorts of conditions we lay down for child care. It is an important issue that needs to be discussed by this community. I hope it will be fully aired in the community. I welcome the report. I thank you, Mr Speaker, for giving me an opportunity of making a brief comment.
AUSTRALIAN FINANCIAL SYSTEM: COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY
Report and Ministerial Statement
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-I present the final report of the Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System.
Motion (by Mr Howard)-by leave-agreed to:
(!) That this House, in accordance with the provisions of the Parliamentary Papers Act 1908, authorises the publication of the report, and
(2) That the report be printed.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-by leave-In tabling the final report of the Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System, I wish to express the gratitude of the Government to the members of the Committee and the Committee secretariat for the work they have done over a period of almost three years in putting together this very comprehensive docu~ ment. I especially acknowledge the distinguished leadership role and contribution of Mr Keith Campbell as Chairman of the Committee. The Government is also very appreciative of the contribution that the financial and broader community of Australia has made to the workings of the committee.
The report is certainly the most detailed analysis ever of the Australian financial system. It has made a number of quite sweeping and fundamental recommendations for change which cover many aspects of the financial system, and which call for a considered and careful government response. The report will now be very closely studied by the Government. We will welcome public comment and debate. In particular the views of State governments will be sought as many recommendations affect the States. As -already announced, a special task group has been established to advise the Government on its response to the report.
Whilst for obvious reasons I am unable at this stage to respond to specific recommendations in the report, I can make two observations of a general character. The broad approach of the Committee has been to argue for a less regulated, more competitive and freer financial system and one which places emphasis on stability and investor

protection. Such an approach is consistent with the Government's basic objectives in this area. If implemented, many of the recommendations of the Committee would continue the process of measured and prudent deregulation in the financial system which has taken place in recent years.
However as the Committee itself recognises the report is essentially an economic document which concentrates on the efficient workings of the financial system. It is inevitable, therefore, that the Committee has made some recommendations which raise social and political sensitivities. Indeed, in certain areas the Committee has advocated changes to long-standing methods whereby governments have provided either assistance or a preference to different sections of the community. I have in mind, in particular, areas such as housing finance and the role of certain institutions in providing finance for different areas of the community, such as the rural and small business sectors.
In considering the report the Government must of necessity address itself not only to considerations of economic efficiency but also to social and political issues which are of enormous importance to many Australians in their everyday activity. It is important to note in this regard that the Committee hilS not questioned whether the Government should provide special assistance in any area nor has it questioned the level of that assistflnce. It has quite properly acknowledged that governments do have reasons other than purely economic ones for providing special assistance or conferring a preference. The Committee has simply made recommendations regarding the way' in which that assistance might be delivered or preference conferred more efficiently.. It is now up to the Government to assess carefully the Committee's recommendations. In doing so we shall naturally seek to achieve a balance between economic, social and political considerations and realities. However, I make it clear that the level of assistance to particular sections of the community should not and will not be an issue in the Government's consideration of the report. The Government's priorities in these areas are well known and will be maintained. Furthermore, the Government will not change existing arrangements for the provision of assistance in these areas unless it can be completely satisfied that the alternatives are not only more efficient but also fully meet the Government's social and political priorities.
I again thank all of those who have worked so hard to put together the report which touches virtually all of the financial institutions of our nation. The Committee's recommendations are

2856 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Australian Financial System

wide-ranging and cover many areas of great complexity which will require thoughtful examination. I look forward to a period of public debate and scrutiny of the report which will be invaluable in guiding the Government's own deliberations upon its contents. I conclude by expressing on behalf of the Government my thanks to the members of the federal parliamentary Press Gallery for the first class manner in which all members of that Gallery, to my knowledge, have observed a 48-hour embargo on the publication of this report. I think documents of this kind ought to be made available to the Press well in advance of publication. I thank the members of the Gallery for their superb co-operation on this occasion.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand}-by leave-This is a momentous report. I thank the Treasurer (Mr Howard) for making a copy of it available to the Opposition over 24 hours before the announcement.
Mr Howard-Thirty-six hours; don't be mean.
Mr WILLIS-Well, I am being gracious. It is a most momentous report because of the extraordinary amount of information that it reveals about the operations of our financial system. I think we have all seen that in the interim report; there is, indeed, more of that in the final report. It is of interest because of the devastating impact on our society that would flow from the adoption of the recommendations of the Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System. It is momentous because it confronts this Government with the full implications of its own ideology. To that extent it is indeed a very momentous report. We shall now see to what extent the Government really believes in its free enterprise rhetoric by the degree to which it adopts this report.
The report is based squarely on the Government's professed ideology, as shown firstly by its terms of reference. The terms of reference of this report make it quite clear that the committee has had to bear in mind the Government's free enterprise objectives and broad goals for national economic prosperity, et cetera. The emphasis on free enterprise objectives is of importance. The Treasurer, in announcing the establishment of this Committee and its terms of reference, made various comments which are quoted in the preface to the final report. Those comments ran along the lines that the objective of the inquiry was not to bring about more regulation by the Government-this is reported by the Government in thick black type; in other words it knew from the very outset what its instructions werebut that it was to bear in mind the Government's

free enterprise philosophy and not in any way to produce recommendations which would involve increased regulation. Those were the Committee's marching orders. To make sure that this objective was accomplished the Government established a Committee which was composed of persons who were very largely from the finance industry-a technocratic group the members of which undoubtedly believed in the ideology propounded by this Government.
The Chairman of this Committee was the head of a property development company; the chairman of a merchant bank which is 49.9 per cent owned by Citibank, a foreign bank and one of the largest banks in the world-he has since resigned from that position but he held it when he was appointed chairman of the committee; and a director of IBM Australia Ltd. In addition, the Committee was composed of a merchant banker; the head of our largest life insurance company; the head of the Australian Resources Development Bank, which is owned by the trading banks; a Reserve Bank of Australia official; and a Treasury official. I think that it can be seen from that list that there was no Ben Chifley in this committee of inquiry into our financial system, as there was in the previous committee in the 1930s. There was no-one with an opposing view or a broader view than the very narrow view of the technocrats involved in the finance industry of this country. I believe that the report suffers enormously because of that and because of the enormous constraint which was placed upon it by the terms of reference and the instructions from the Treasurer, which were faithfully reported by the Committee in its preface.
The report confronts the Government with the implications of the implementation of its own ideology. It does so because it shows quite clearly that deregulation-of which we have heard so much in this House-in the finance industry means higher interest rates for home buyers, higher interest rates for small business, higher interest rates for farmers, higher interest rates for government, increased government taxes and charges to cope with increased borrowing costs, less finance for housing, a more volatile exchange rate with decontrol of our foreign exchange and less control by the government over the form of development of the Australian economy. That is what deregulation means. This report brings out those implications very fully indeed. It also shows that reliance on competitive markets to ensure competition in the finance industry involves the introduction of foreign banks and higher levels of foreign investment in the Australian finance industry. It shows that reliance on private

Australian Financial System

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2857

enterprise means selling off-the Committee strongly recommends this-the Commonwealth Banking Corporation, the State banks, the State government insurance offices, the Australian Industry Development Corporation, the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation, which the Government has already announced it intends to sell off, and the abolition of the Commonwealth Development Bank. If the Government finds an that a little difficult to carry out, the report says that at least an these organisations should be made to operate on exactly the same basis as the private enterprise organisations in those areas so that they will have no regulatory influence at all other than that of an additional competitor in the market. They are the broad implications of the Government's ideology in respect of this industry. Doubtless the Government win find some part of those regulations comforting indeed. I suggest that it will find many of them extraordinarily difficult to deal with.
The Government has a profound, severe problem in accepting the implications of its ideology, particularly in the area of interest rates. It is shown quite clearly in the report that the interest rates will be increased. A commissioned study reported in the report shows that it is expected that, with deregulation, interest rates on housing loans by banks would increase to up to 2 per cent above the government bond rate. At the time when the study became available to the Committee of Inquiry, the bond rate was 13.1 per cent. The bond rate is now 14.6 per cent at the lower end and 15 per cent at the top end, for longer term loans. A 2 per cent margin above that would mean housing loans at 17 per cent. Admittedly, the Inquiry does not.accept that this will necessarily be the case and gives the reason why it thinks that deregulated home loan interest rates would not rise to that margin above the bond rate, but it does not in any way deny that they would rise to the bond rate and perhaps go above it.
One of the reasons it gives for interest rates not rising to the fun 2 per cent above the bond rate is that there would be much less demand for hous-
ing. Of course, that is fairly likely and is also a very important implication of what has been recommended in this report, that is, that a lot less finance should be available for housing, that housing should compete in the market on a thoroughly unsupported basis with an the other demands for capital in this country. In that situation home buyers will have less capability of obtaining finance against the demands for finance by multinationals and others seeking to develop resources in particular. I believe that area is of extraordinary importance in this report.

The Treasurer in his statement today produced a report which the Opposition simply cannot accept. We cannot accept it on varying grounds. Firstly, we cannot accept its ideological basis. That basis is, of course, that reliance on markets will bring about a more optimum result for society than will government regulation. We believe that that is not likely to be the case because, firstly, markets are not perfect. Indeed, they are marked by oligopoly in this country, particularly in the banking industry, and there is thus a lack of real competition, especially as the Government has allowed amalgamations which have diminished the degree of competition. That diminution of competition is then used as a reason for the introduction of foreign banks, as we forecast at the time when
the Government allowed those amalgamations to occur.
At times the report seems to say that it is satisfied with the degree of competition. At other times it stresses the need for an effective trade practices Act to ensure competition. In fact, as we all know, the Trade Practices Act has been weak-
ened by this Government and reliance on the Trade Practices Act, as it is likely to exist under this Government, seems to us to be relying on a very weak reed. Even if markets are perfect, the results may not accord with what we as _11 society regard as optimal because we want to assist various disadvantaged groups. The report acknowledges that but says that it is best to give that assistance by other means, that is, by Budget measures such as subsidies or tax concessions. It does not attempt to define the increasing costs that would come from those measures or the implications for tax levels of having to provide increased taxes to cover the tax assistance that would be given through the Budget by way of subsidy or tax concessions to home buyers to overcome the enormous increase in interest rates which is likely to come from deregulation. By not giving that costing the report is quite deficient. Despite such a scheme it is quite clear from the report that housing would lose out to other investments.
We regard the impact of the implications of this report as thoroughly unacceptable. Increased interest rates at a time when interest rates are already at a record high level is something that society as a whole simply does not want. I cannot believe that the Committee, in propounding a proposal which would have that implication, really has its finger on the pulse of this nation. It suggests in the report that it feels that the community wants some further deregulation. I suggest that the last thing the community wants is higher interest rates for home loans. The last thing the community wants is more difficult availability of

2858 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Australian Financial System

finance for housing. I believe in those circumstances that the implications of this report are quite important and that the report will be rejected completely by the community. Not only home buyers but also small businessmen and farmers will reject totally a report which has these implications. There are. many. other indications which we find deficient but Ido not have time to go into them.
We regard the report as deficient in a few particular ways. It is absolutely amazing that in the interim report and, so far as I can see, in the final report-I have not had time to read the 830-odd pages-there is no mention whatever of bank profits or the profits of any element of the finance industry. I find it an extraordinary deficiency that in this mammoth report, with the mountains of information that have been produced, it has not been thought necessary by the Committee to study the profits of the industry to see whether they are at a reasonable level or whether they may be regarded as excessive and whether that may have some implications for the degree of competition or the necessity for government regulation. There is not one mention of banking profits or the profits of any other element of the industry. This is at a time when banking profits have been soaring. Studies have shown that bank profits in Australia are amongst the highest anywhere in the world. Today we see in the Press that one of our largest banks has produced a 30 per cent increase in its profitability. This follows a similar increase announced by the National Bank of Australasia Ltd last week.
It seems to be an extraordinary deficiency that the Committee has not at any stage deemed it necessary to report on 'or study the level of profitability or the performance of banks at large. There is no mention of the way in which the banks have flouted the attempts of the Reserve Bank of Australia to impose quantitive controls on bank lending. They have lent in excess of the amounts to which the Reserve Bank made it clear it wished to limit them. I think that is also an extraordinary deficiency. There is an amazing reliance of a very unspecified form of the ability of welfare policies or some other budgetary policy, which is unexamined, not speJt out and uncosted, to offset the damaging effect that the deregulation procedures recommended in the report would have on the majority of people in this country. There has been no attempt at all to go into those details. The report simply ~tates that it will leave those matters to the welfare sector or to a budget measure of some sort. I regard that as a major area of deficiency.

Finally, there are some aspects of this report of which we approve. I will make those elements clear in the flext few days. We think there are a number of minor recommendations which are extremely helpful and important, some of which we believe fly in the face of government policy. I commend the report for that. I believe that overall this report is one which cannot be accepted by the Australian people. It puts the Australian Govt:mment on its mettle. It should say whether it really believes in its ideology. If it does so, I believe the Australian people will say that they no longer want this Government to run the country.
Sir William McMahon-1 have been telTIpted to reply to the honourable membedor Gellibrand who has just sat down because it is obvious--
Mr Lionel Bowen-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. I do not take umbrage at what the honourable member was saying but I understand that honourable members may speak only by leave in this debate.
Mr SPEAKER-That is absolutely right. I was about to call on the right honourable gentleman to indicate to him that he had no right to address the Chair.
Mr Lionel Bowen-I also indicate that, byarrangement with the Government, there was to be one speaker from each side.
Mr SPEAKER-The right honourable member for Lowe seeks leave to make a statement. Is leave granted?
Mr Lionel Bowen-No.
Mr SPEAKER-Leave is not granted. I indicate to the House that on the procedures adopted there is no record of the report in the formal documents of the chamber. It has been tabled and that is that.
BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE Mr SPEAKER-The following Bills were
returned from the Senate without amendment or requests:
Social Services Amendment Bill 1981.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Bill 1981.
Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Amendment Bill 1981.
ASSENT TO BILLS Assent to the following Bills reported:
Social Services Amendment Bill 1981.
Repatriation Acts Amendment Bill 1981.

Housing

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2859

HOUSING
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The willingness of the G~vernment to make the housing sector a victim of its misguided economic policies.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number o/members required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr UREN (Reid) (3.l6)-Mr Speaker, after unemployment the most serious social problem in this country is housing. Yet over the past six years of this Government the growing problems of housing have suffered tragic neglect. As a result this country has a large and growing number of homeless people. Hundreds of thousands of people are living in substandard, over-priced rental accommodation. Thousands are living in caravans, temporary or makeshift accommodation. An increasing number of people are being excluded from the chance of buying their own home, particularly first home buyers. A growing number of people who are now paying off their homes are faced with crippling repayment burdens.
We have stagnation across the home building industry in all but a few regions in this country. In fact, the Victorian housing industry is in a situation of over 22 per cent under capacity. This has been occurring for several years. Home building firms are going to the wall. We have a loss of skilled labour from the home building industry but, under the policies of this Government, there is worse to come. The recent speech of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) is an indication of the line that has been followed by this Government. This Government has no policies for creating stability in the housing finance market. It has no intention of stimulating the home building industry or of expanding the provision of public housing. It has no concern to ensure security of housing for the Australian people. Under this Government we face a future of continuing housing neglect. This Government is pursuing a policy which deliberately sacrifices the housing sector for the purpose of expanding corporate profitability in the resource development sector.
Last night the Secretary of the Treasury, Mr John Stone, made clear the thrust of the Government's economic policy-its deliberate intention to make a victim of the housing sector. Today the

TreasllTer has tabled the report of the Campbell Inquiry into the Australian Financial System which signals a further phase of victimisation for the housing sector. I might say that it is also a threat and a sell-out to the overwhelming majority of ordinary Australian people. Yet in the view of Mr Stone and the Treasury-a view which has dominated Government thinking over the past six years-significant sectors of the Australian economy should be squeezed back in order to make more room for expanded foreign capital inflow and to facilitate a transfer of domestic funds towards investment in resource development.
The thrust of this Government's misguided policies is to transfer wealth away from wage and salary earners, the public sector, the housing industry and other domestic activities that the Treasury considers relatively unproductive. It has been the thrust of this Government's taxation policies, industry assistance policy, budgetary policy, monetary policy and interest rate policy to transfer funds towards a wealthy elite for investment in resource development. In the pubiic sector the housing industry has been one of the main victims of this Government's ruthless policy. Funds made available by the Federal Government for public housing have dropped from 3.9 per cent of total Budget outlays in 1974-75 to one per cent this year. In real terms Federal housing funds have fallen from $1,413m in 1974-75 to $399m in 1981-82. This Government has transferred not only funds away from housing but it has also transferred its national responsibilities to ensure housing security on to the States; and it has thrown it back on to the individual, and particularly that large group of individuals, details of which have been given in the Campbell report.
There is now a dangerous backlog of neglected housing needs which requires a substantial increase in outlays for public housing if Australia is to avoid serious social upheaval. But the private housing sector has also been a major victim of this Government's misguided policies and, given the glasshouse recommendations of the Campbell report, the private housing sector is likely to face even more serious disruption. The Campbell report has recommended:
All official intervention in the determination of bank deposit and lending interest rates should cease and existing controls should be abolished.
The acceptance of that recommendation-it is the philosophy of this Government to in fact accept it because the whole trend has been on that

2860 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Housing

line-will mean a great tragedy not only now but also in the next decade or two when we have increasing population, both natural and through immigration, in this country. The recommendation for across-the-board deregulation of interest rates, if implemented, will create havoc in the housing industry. It will cause a further rise in home loan interest rates which will act to exclude a greater number of people from access to home ownership. Already four out of five wage and salary earners are excluded from access to affordable housing finance. Interest rate deregulation will impose heavier burdens on those people now paying off home loans. Already under this Government home loan interest rates for savings banks have risen in less than two years since February 1980 from 9.5 per cent to 12.5 per cent. On a $30,000 loan repaid over 25 years, that increase in the interest rate of 3 percentage points has raised the monthly repayments by $65 a week. People paying $262 a month now have to pay $327 a month which adds $19,800 to the total loan to be repaid over the 25 years. This has occurred to new home buyers and is also placing an increased burden on people paying off their mortgages at present. That is only a part of the story that will occur if deregulation continues.
The Campbell report recommends that housing loan interest rates should be determined by so called market forces and not be held down to affordable levels by Government intervention. The prevailing market interest rate at present on semi-government authority loans is between 15.5 per cent and 15.7 per cent. A $30,000 loan repaid over 25 years at 15.5 per cent interest rate would mean a monthly repayment of $395.92. That repayment would exclude virtually nine out of \0 wage and salary earners from access to housing finance. In addition, the charging of such an interest rate would impose intolerable burdens on existing home buyers and people paying off their mortgage at present. Monthly instalments would rise a further $69 a month andtotal loan repayments would rise something like $20,650 which would make the total repayments for a $30,000 loan over 25 years $118,780. To give the House further details I seek to incorporate in Hansard a table I have prepared on interest rates.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

LOAN REPAYMENTS AT DIFFERENT INTEREST
RATES ON A $30,000 LOAN REPAID OVER 25 YEARS

Interest rate Monthly loan instalment Total loan repayment

9.5% 12.5% 15.5%
.. $262.10 $327.10 $395.92 .. $78,630 $98,130$118,776

ADDITIONAL REPAYMENTS WITH RISING INTEREST RATES

from

from

9.5%-12.5% 12.5%-15.5%

Additional monthly repayments ..

$65

$69

Additional total repayment

$19,800 $20,646

Mr UREN-I thank the House. This table sets out the monthly loan instalments and total loan
repayments on interest rates at 9+ per cent, 12+ per cent and 15+ per cent for a $30,000 loan over 25 years. I have been talking about a $30,000 loan. House prices at the bottom end of the market in Sydney are $55,000. So if one is able to get a $30,000 loan one has to raise a deposit of $25,000. That is how impossible the position is. In fact, the median price of a house in Sydney is $84,000 while in Melbourne the median price is about $55,000 and a house at the bottom end of the market is about $45,000. So we can see the serious situation that arises in those areas. If free market forces are allowed to prevail, people will be repaying $134 a month more on a $30,000 loan than they were in February 1980, or a total increased repayment of over $40,000. That is what the policies of this Government are doing.
I am frankly amazed at the ruthlessness displayed in the recommendations of the Campbell report. How can the average home buyer compete with companies such as Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd, Conzinc Riotinto of Australia Ltd, Exxon-the biggest company today-Utah or General Motors-Holden's Ltd? How can the ordinary individual compete with those powerful organisations? The authors of this report have a distorted view of the operations of the finance market. It is as if there were no such thing as a concentration of wealth in a few large companies and in the greedy hands of these selfish people. The Committee has recommended that controls over the lending of banks and building societies that favour the housing sector be lifted-and I stress the word 'lifted'. This will ensure a further flow of funds away from housing and will act to deepen the level of concentration of wealth which already distorts the financial market. The point I want to make is that these recommendations
come out of the same stable-I stress those words-as the advice the Government has been following over the past six years. It is the consistent extension of the logic of the Government's policies and no amount of opportunist sidestepping over the Campbell recommendations at

Housing

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2861

this stage when the cards are placed clearly on the table can alter that fact. This Government is pur-
suing a course that endangers the housing industry and which threatens the housing security of the overwhelming majority of the Australian people.
The Campbell Committee recognises in a way some of the hardships that will result from the implementation of its recommendations because the
report states at page 639:

Housing construction activity will, of course, continue to

exhibit some degree of instability, reflecting the sensitivity of

demand for housing to increases in interest rates, and the de-

pendence of purchasers of housing and home builders on

credit.

.

I note that the Committee curiously stated:

The Committee has not sought to determine whether there is an appropriate level of resources going into housing.

The Committee made no estimate of the need of the housing sector for funds and failed to consider
seriously how effectively and equitably the exist-
ing arrangements in the finance market will meet those needs. On page 646 of the report the Com-
mittee included a table, but without comment. I
stress these next words because the Government has to look at the seriousness of the situation. It
showed that while 45 per cent of income earners
received less than $185 a week that group accounted for only 3.4 per cent of loans from
banks. Those 45 per cent of people received only
3.4 per cent of the loans yet this Government, which really supports the very wealthy, is going to
squeeze those little people more and more. That is
the law of the jungle: Free market forces must prevail. Instead of addressing the problem of how
to increase access to housing finance more equita-
bly the Committee proposed a series of measures
that will skew the distribution of housing loans even further in favour of those on high incomes.
The Committee commented at page 648 of the report:

Those persons most likely to be affected by sizeable interest rate increases are those who have not yet acquired their first home . . . or who have borrowed recently and whose repayments are a high proportion of their income.

These are the people most in need of housing in Australia, yet they are the people whom the
Government's policies are failing. We need at
present a five-point plan co-ordinated at the federallevel and pursued co-operatively at the State
and local government level to expand the provision of funds for public sector housing, to ensure
stable liquidity flow into the housing finance mar-
ket, to provide effective assistance to first home buyers, to protect existing home buyers having
trouble meeting their home loan repayment com-
mitments and to stimulate employment and activity in the home building industry by targeting
for a level of construction appropriate to existing

capacity to meet emerging housing requirements. The housing industry, except in a couple of regions in Australia, is at a very low ebb and it is about time this Government stimulated the housing industry to create employment, when there is so much unemployment. It is about time the Government stopped people moving away from the housing industry and built it up in the interests of the Australian people.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (3.31 )-1 am gratified indeed that the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) has placed this matter before the House because it provides me with the opportunity of enunciating once again the Government's very real achievements and the responsibility and integrity of the Budget handed down in August. I want to rebut some of the honourable member's misguided statements. I have no wish to debate the report of the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System. It is not now the time to debate it, and we have made that quite clear. It is a pity that the honourable member for Reid did not read the statement made by the 1;'reasurer (Mr Howard) because he said that adequate time will be allowed for a proper and sober assessment of the report. I am a little concerned because although the honourable member for Reid does not usually do this, today he took a selective, biased reading of carefully culled quotations in order to give a distorted picture of the report. I am disappointed that he has seen fit to do that. However, on the credit side for him, for once he is right. The housing sector is sensitive to overall government economic policy. The housing sector needs an economic policy which maximises long run economic growth; provides sustained demand through lifting real family incomes; maintains a healthy rate of population growth; ensures young people can get jobs and, consequently, form households; keeps building costs within reason; promotes efficient finance markets; minimises inflation and price increases; and assists a steady availability of housing finance.
The Government's achievements in those areas are already clear and I want to repeat them. We have come a long way since the economic ruin of those disastrous years of 1972-75. We have rebuilt the economy. That is not an idle statement. I will cite statistics which show the job we have done. Inflation is down from 17 per cent to 9.1 per cent. In the last two years government policies have created 320,000 new jobs, which indicates that the

2862 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Housing

economic climate we have created is one of confidence. Real income which is, after all, the thing that really counts, has increased by almost 4 per cent in the last year bringing increased living standards for all. Migration has increased steadily each year and is up from 21,000 in 1975-76 to almost 120,000 at present. Gross new farm product grew by 4 per cent in 1980-81 and private business fixed investment increased by 21.2 per cent in the same year. Quite obviously, that is a climate of confidence.
This climate of confidence has been reflected in the housing industry. The year 1980-81 saw approximately 148,000 housing commencements. That figure allows, of cou.rse, for revision of the Australian Statistician's June quarter figures. That is the highest level of commencements in almost a decade. It is interesting to note that commencements in New South Wales and Queensland were at an all time historical record level. However, there is always a price to be paid. We have to be realists. Economic achievements we have made so far have caused a price to be paid and that price has been discipline-a steady discipline over government spending, a discipline over the growth in financial aggregates, a discipline over the deficit, a discipline over the grandiose borrowing plans of State governments and local and semi-government authorities. Some State Ministers, unfortunately, seem to think that money grows on trees.
I want to mention a couple of key factors. The 1980-81 Budget was a milestone. It saw, for the first time in many years, a substantial domestic surplus. That, more than any other factor, will help us to reduce the pressure on interest rates. The second fact that is vitally important is that it reinforces our very real efforts to cut the heavy pressures that State, local and semi-government authority borrowings were placing on financial markets. We achieved that discipline through decisions we took in the Loan Council in June of this
year. It was a pity that our attempts at discipline and financial responsibility were not matched by the States. When they thought that they would have to exercise some discipline and that they would have to go out on the hustings and indicate to people that they could not give them the things that they wanted they roared like scrub bulls because, for the first time in their lives, many of them had to be responsible.
We realised that these decisions were not popular decisions, but being a government of responsibility and a government with steel in its spine our economic policy is all of one piece. It is a policy that emphasises responsibility and the need to get the fundamentals right. Our policies do not need

to be popular, but, by George, they have to work and they are working. This Government is a good government. It is not a government composed of members who believe that they can pander to the whims of everyone. That would be a government of weak reeds, swaying and bending in the breeze. One cannot look at our economic track record without conceding that our policies are continuingtowork.
Our decision to let banks increase their interest rates on home loans was not popular, but it was responsible. If we had bowed to pressure, such as that coming from the irresponsible fringes of party politics to keep interest rates artificially low, we would have witnessed the drying up of the finance pool. That would have been far morc:< unpopular. We would have been denying young people access to home loans. We were not prepared to do that. Unfortunately, there has been an inevitable easing in the number of loan approvals for housing. While the savings banks were able to increase their lending in early 1981, building societies, particularly those subject to urirealistic State government interest .rate con-. trois, did have to cut the funds they were providing to home seekers. Some State governments were unwilling to take responsible decisions prior to an election, but once the elections were over they did what we told them they should .have done.
We must get this matter in perspective. The year 1980 was probably the best year we have seen in terms of the number of loans approved by banks and building societies. There is already evidence that building societies are getting into a position where they too will be able to improve their lending. The latest advice coming to me is that,in most parts of Australia, their funds intake has improved, that they have been able to restore their liquidity levels and that, therefore, we can expect an improvement in the flow of loans from permanent building societies through 1981-82.
I do not and I know my Cabinet colleagues and other Government members also do not want to give the impression that the Government is not' concerned about or sympathetic towards young home seekers, home buyers, pensioners who have to rent their dwellings, Aboriginals, other special groups and those who are being helped through the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement. The Government has' taken firm action in the 1981 Budget to lift its overall spending on housing and accommodation. I repeat, expenditure on housing and accommodation in the Budget rose

Housing

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2863

from $555m last year to $660m this year, an increase of 18.9 per cent covering the whole spectrum of housing and accommodation for all types of people.
As honourable members know, we are currently reviewing our whole range of housing policies. This review underlines our flexibility in responding to changing circumstances. It will determine whether the Government is getting value for money from its current programs and examine ~he need for new home ownership assistance measures. However, it is not just a Commonwealth problem. Far too many Australians try to sheet home the blame for all financial problems to the Commonwealth Government. The States and local government have their own responsibilities. I support the statements made by the Treasurer in answer to a question without notice earlier this afternoon.
I want to speak about one area of concernconveyancing and stamp duty. In Victoria, a first home buyer currently pays up to $1,256 State stamp duty on the purchase of a house worth $50,000 with a $40,000 mortgage. However, in Tasmania a first home buyer receiving a full home savings grant pays absolutely no stamp duty at all. This shows that with a bit of flexibility, common sense and concern, the States could do a lot more to help first home buyers to bridge the deposit gap. In the case of Tasmania, I like to see this sort of co-operation between the States and. the Commonwealth.
I get a little concerned when I pick up the Press and read certain statements made by other Ministers for housing. I can assure the Minister of Housing in Victoria that vilification and vituperation are not the hallmarks of a fighter. Success in his own sphere of endeavour and responsibility is the hallmark of a fighter. The fact is that in Victoria, as I stated, it costs $1,256 for stamp duty. If the Victorian Minister followed the example of the Tasmanian Minister and reduced the charges in line with these in that State it would help considerably people who wish to purchase their first homes. Victoria spends less money on welfare housing than any other State in Australia. I challenge the Victorian Minister to do two things: Increase his State's spending on welfare housing to equal the Australian average and give a rebate of, say, $400 or $500 over and above the present rebate which is given to first home buyers. If he can do that, I believe that he can quite rightly claim to be interested in housing. What does he do at the present time? He has spent on advertising $15,000 which would help people to get their first home. He is wasting money in trying to camouflage the

issue. Instead of being a fighter and a man of responsibility he is what we might term a political gelding. He seems to think there is something to be done, that there is a problem and he would like to be involved. He realises that he cannot do anything about it, and all he can do is whinny and neigh.
Mr Uren-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. We are debating a matter of public importance raised by the Opposition about the housing crisis in this country. All we are getting at the moment is a fight between the Liberal Party and the National Country Party about housing. When are the parties to the coalition going to come together and solve the people's problems?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order.
Mr McVEIGH-Another area in which State and local governments bear a heavy responsibility is housing costs. Studies carried out for the Commonwealth-State ministerial council on housing costs showed that land development costs could be cut by thousands of dollars in many local government areas if State and local governments would work together to rationalise standards. The same sort of remark could be made about building regulations. Members of this House would be well aware of the manufactured housing awareness program that we have launched jointly with the States. This innovation could offer a real solution to housing cost problems in many of the high growth development areas. We will be supporting wholeheartedly a conference organised by the Master Builders Federation in April next year to keep up the pressure on State and local governments to remove the causes of unnecessarily high housing costs. The success of our economic policies in holding down building costs can be seen in the latest figures for material price increases. In the 12 months to October 1981 the figure was 8.4 per cent, contrasting with 15.4 per cent in the 12 months to October 1980.
In its figRt against rising costs, the Government has taken a firm and very positive line against the introduction of the 36-hour week which, on current estimates, would add somewhere between $4,000 and $6,000 to the cost of new housing. When we look at the last six years of the FraserAnthony free enterprise coalition Government, we can identify those economic gains which have placed Australia as one of the Western world's most favoured nations. With a degree of selfsatisfaction, although the battle -is far from over, we can view our controlled inflation rate, our employment situation and various other so-called barometers in the light of performances achieved

2864 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Housing

in other developed countries. Our performance, by comparison, has been good. In its latest report, the Reserve Bank of Australia notes that we are maintaining our high rate of home ownership. Our home ownership rate of almost 72 per cent compares with 62 per cent in Canada, 50 per cent in England and Wales, 69 per cent in New Zealand, 65 per cent in the United States of America and 33 per cent in West Germany. While interest rates in this country have increased-;-no government, no Treasurer., no minister likes to see them at these levels-they are most favourable when compared with rates which apply in the housing markets of other countries.
The current rates in Australia for housing loans vary between 13t per cent and l4t per cent. Interest rates on new loans overseas are 15 per cent in the United Kingdom, 17 per cent in the United States and 21 per cent in Canada. The rates which now apply in Australia have been made possible through the rigid enforcement of the Government's economic policies and by the disciplille with which the Government has faced opposition to those policies. The successes of these policies are self-evident and they are being reflected in various areas of commerce and the community together with an associated restoration of confidence.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The Minister's time has expired.
Mr DUFFY (Holt) (3,46)-We are all aware of the obsession of this Government with the need for restraint in government expenditure. However, I still find it impossible to understand why housing has been forced to bear such a disproportionate share of such restraint. Nearly all home buyers have to borrow to buy a home and, consequently, interest rates and the availability of finance are crucial factors in the quest for home ownership. Because of the policies of the Fraser Government, interest rates have reached record levels; there is intense competition for finance both in the private and public sectors to finance resource based industries and related infrastructure; the Government, through government bonds, is taking an increasing share of household savings; and the housing sector is being squeezed.
In this Parliament, we are subjected to claims that government policy is directed at giving scope for a wide range of innovative policies. When the Housing Assistance Bill 1981 was debated in this House on 2 June, the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) stated:
The current Bill increases the Hexibility given to the States and continues the prc~ess of ensuring that assistance is directed to people in need.

This is absolute nonsense and such statements of principle bear no relationship to the facts! Yet the Minister for Housing and Construction continues to make such ridiculous statements while he presides over vicious cutbacks in funding for housing and supports policies which have caused record interest rates and a severe restriction on funds available for housing finance. As recently as 17 September 1981, on Estimates Committee E when considering estimates for the Department of Housing and Construction, the Minister again expressed confidence that our high level of home ownership by world standards would continue, a matter which he repeated today in the debate. It is difficult to know whether the Minister for Housing and Construction is ignorant of the facts or whether he prefers to ignore them.
Figures released yesterday by the Australian Bureau of Statistics show a substantial slowing down in the price of building materials. This is caused by the lower demand for housing because of record interest rates and lack of housing finance. Commenting on the figures, the Deputy Executive Director of the Housing Industry Association, Dr Silberberg, stated:
There are now thousands of Australian families squeezed out of the home market because of the present level of interest rates.
Dr Silberberg further predicted that, unless this Government moves quickly to restore home ownership opportunities, there will be 15,000 fewer homes produced in 1981-82 with a shortfall of at least 22,000 new dwellings in 1980-81. This Government refuses to face the fact that half of all employees in Australia earn less than $200 a week. Yet to borrow $30,000 to purchase a home requires a gross weekly income of about $350. The Government's cavalier attitude to increases in interest rates ignores the fact that a one per cent increase in interest rates reduces borrowing power by about $2,500 for a family which can afford mortgage payments of $1 00 weekly.
The policies of this Government have caused tragic consequences. These are clearly seen in the report of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation Building Research Division which states that the number of families able to afford maximum loan conditions for an average lower cost house in Melbourne has fallen from 80 per cent 10 years ago to less than 50 per cent now. It makes one wonder whether the Minister looks at any of these independent reports or whether he continues to prefer to run the line that, because of the fact that we have always had a high rate of home ownership, it will continue. The facts indicate quite clearly that, unless this Government takes action as a matter of urgency,

Housing

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2865

that claim by the Minister will not be able to be maintained.
Home buyers have become so desperate for housing finance that they are now prepared to borrow from finance companies at exorbitant interest rates. The magnitude of this problem is clearly seen in the figures released by the Australian Bankers Association Research Directorate on 3 September this year. These figures disclose that value of housing loans from banks grew by 5.2 per cent over 1980-81. For the same period, the value of housing loans from building societies increased by 2 per cent but the value of loans from finance companies for that period increased by a massive 44 per cent. The response of the Minister for Housing and Construction to this information clearly indicates the appalling attitude of this Government on this crucial issue. His reaction was that, if people are prepared to go to finance companies for housing finance, this indicated that they still have a commitment to home ownership. What is does show, despite the view of the Minister, is that people have become desperate to obtain finance to purchase homes. It is not a matter of them having a commitment; the fact is that it is the only finance available to far too many people who are desperately seeking finance to purchase a home. Many of these people borrow money from finance companies on a first mortgage but the tragedy of people who borrow that sort of money on second mortgages is seen in what is happening throughout Australia at the moment.
The Treasurer (Mr Howard) has recently indicated that he does not accept the fact that mortgagees auctions are being conducted throughout Australia at the moment. That is incredible because it completely refuses to accept the facts. At the present time people have been caught and locked into the increases in interest rates from building societies and banks but more particularly the people I indicated earlier who are forced to borrow on second mortgages from finance companies, are finding it absolutely impossible to maintain their mortgage payments. The position now is that not only will people find it impossible to purchase a house but also, tragically, so many people who have a house are likely to lose it in the near future. In Victoria, the problem of the public housing sector has reached a desperate stage. Despite the claims today by the Minister, it was announced that Victoria will, over the next year, pay to the Commonwealth Government $2.6m more in interest and loan repayments than it receives in housing allocation.
Mr Uren-That is for public housing.

Mr DUFFY-That is for public housing as the honourable member for Reid has indicated. Despite the rhetoric of the Minister this Government has indicated its contempt for those Australians so desperately in need of housing. The reality is that this Government has singled out housing for unprecedented cutbacks in funding. Public housing is the only category to have suffered a fall in Commonwealth outlays in real terms. Clearly, when one looks at the tragedy of people unable to get a home, I agree entirely with what the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) has said-after unemployment this is the most significant social problem in this country. This Government must be judged as having failed dismally.
Mr. ROCHER (Curtin) (3.56)-At the outset I acknowledge that, given that interest rates have risen rapidly, there is concern in Government circles for the house purchaser who is suffering hardship. Already it has been widely reported that Cabinet has before it for consideration proposals which will come to grips with short term problems. This well-publicised circumstance, coupled with whatever is contained in the report of the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System-which I have not yet seen-and whatever it recommends affecting housing finance gives the lie to any alleged lack of
care on the part of the Government and, at the same time, gives rise to doubts as to the motives for raising this matter of importance at this time. Knowing that the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) has proposals before the Cabinet and under consideration, it is obvious that he will not pre-empt Cabinet deliberations in this debate; not that it is proved to be necessary, given the argument advanced by Opposition speakers. However, I am not under that constraint because I do not know the details of what is before the Government.
The problems associated with higher mortgage interest rates seem to have elicited three short-run reactions: Firstly, income tax deductibility or tax credit on housing loan interest; secondly, interest subsidy; and, thirdly, hardship relief. Any arbitrary rules which must be attached to either tax deductions, credits or interest subsidies are almost certain to exclude some cases of demonstrable hardship. Studies undertaken by the Perth Building Society, the largest in my State of Western Australia, and the first or second of the three largest and most reputable building societies in Australia, indicate that at most 1t per cent of purchasers who have taken out loans over the past two years may be in some sort of difficultysometimes serious difficulty. I might add that that estimate of 1t per cent of purchasers is not the

2866 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Housing

Perth Building Society's experience. In its experience, the percentage is much lower. Therefore, the estimate probably errs on the high side.
These purchasers deserve-I am confident that they will receive-priority in any considerations now before the Government. Reference has already been made by the Minister to expectations as to new housing starts during the financial year. He referred to an estimated and staggering 140,000 to 150,000 dwelling units expected to be commenced this year, which is up 13 per cent on the previous year-hardly evidence of restraint by the Government in relation to its housing policy or to the housing sector generally. The largest national housebuilder in Australia, Jennings Industries Ltd, has aln,ady recently reported a 30 per cent increase in new orders over last year. Other cottage builders with whom I have consulted, with products which cater for the market, have similar stories to tell. There has been an increase in orders. Sydney might be the exception but that can probably be explained by the extraordinary level of dwelling construction in that city over the past three years. House builders whom I know and to whom I have spoken are already anticipating a scarcity of resources, particularly labour in metropolitan and probably remoter areas. Well they might, because the non-residential construction sector and the building sector generally are operating at a very high level. Labour is interchangeable between non-residential, high density residential and the cottage building sector. If anything is likely to exacerbate the problem of rapidly increasing house building costs it is a scarcity of suitable skilled' labour. I suggest that that is potentially in the offing. The maintenance of what I see as a resurgence of the cottage building industry will be the catalyst for further cost pressures to the detriment of intending purchasers of houses.
With that scenario the Government's overall economic management remains of paramount importance. Within the framework of continuing sensible economic management Cabinet will consider and decide what must be done with the best interests of those in need and the Australian tax~ payer in mind. It must be recognised that the outcome of adopting some of the alternatives open to the Government will not be confined to obvious and costed impact on expenditure, either in the form of subsidy or, in the case of tax credits or tax deductibility, in the form of revenue forgone.
Both tax credits and tax deductibility schemes will have the effect of making house loans cheaper, thereby increasing the demand for new housing. Given likely pressures on costs, to which 1 have already referred, a likely outcome will be

increased prices for houses which will increase the average size of home loans and, anticipating a shortage of funds, further upward pressure on interest rates. The net result of tax credit or tax deductibility schemes will be that net loan repayments will end up being the same as they were before either scheme was adopted. In considering what is to be done for those currently suffering hardship, care must be taken not to look for quick-fix short term solutions which have after effects which will be of detriment to future purchasers.
The Opposition advocates control of interest rates. It does not say how funds will be attracted into lending institutions and become available to those seeking to purchase a house. The options open to the Commonwealth Government in relation to levels of interest rates in the one sector where it has control, that is the banking sector, appear to be these: Firstly, by exercising control in the areas in which it has the legal power-the banking sector-the Commonwealth may stipulate that bank borrowing and lending rates are arbitrarily kept at levels below those offered to investors and borrowers generally. Or, secondly, it may allow interest rates to rise to something like the going market rate enabling institutions such as banks and building societies, which are predominantly lenders to dwelling purchasers, to attract investment funds. The first option has been disregarded because the effect would be a general absence of funds from investors who could logically be expected to seek better returns elsewhere. Reductions in, or an absence of, investment funds would see demands for borrowing outstrip available funds and probably culminate in demands for injections of taxpayers' funds for long term lending as one industry association did a couple of years ago. The alternative, which has been adopted, has the advantage of attracting investors' funds into institutions permitting borrowers access to funds which would not otherwise be available even though the interest on those borrowings will be, and have been, at rates higher than we in Australia have been accustomed to paying. Although it is difficult to be categorical on the point it seems that the availability of funds at current interest rates remains good. That was supported, I think, by a recent article in a newspaper which indicated that building societies had funds available, an improved situation over that which they experienced earlier this year.
It is a basic tenet of the coalition Government parties to maintain a higher level of home ownership in Australia. To that extent we have been successful, as evidenced by the fact that Australians enjoy one of the highest levels of private

Censure ofMinister for Communications

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2867

home ownership in the world. As evidence of our concern I refer to a program already under way. The Opposition has conveniently ignored the fact that tax deductibility for interest rates was abandoned in Australia after the demise of the Whitlam Government. It was replaced by the Homes Savings Grant Scheme which had the advantage of allowing a front-end reduction of debts up to $3,000 thereby reducing the principles secured by mortgages and, in turn, eliminating the interest commitment of recipients over the nominal life of a mortgage. I add that I am sympathetic to any proposition which calls for that benefit to be paid at, say, the date of occupation or settlement rather than nine months later.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired. The discussion is now concluded.
CENSURE OF MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS
Suspension of Standing Orders
MrKERIN (Werriwa) (4.7)-1 move:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the honourable member for Werriwa from moving:
That this House censures the Minister for Communications for having misled the Parliament with respect to his knowledge of activities by the Australian Dairy Corporation when under his ministerial control.
This issue really demands another airing in this Parliament given the comments of the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) at the weekend and the evidence given to the Australian nation on the radio program PM last Thursday night. At the weekend the Deputy Prime Minister accused the critics of his dear old mates the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) and the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon, of being toad-like creatures skilled in the personal smear. I will get on to that matter later.
In speaking to the motion for the suspension of Standing Orders I point out to the House that the matter we now wish to raise does not relate to all the previous debates when the main issue under discussion was whether the Minister for Communications had known of the continuing breach of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade arrangement and whether he was at all concerned with the sales of skim milk powder to Holland Milk Products Inc., the subsidiary of Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd in the Philippines. What was in the evidence last Thursday night quite clearly showed that the Minister had knowledge of this matter as early as April and May in 1976.

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman--

Mr N. A. Brown-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. My point of order is that the honourable member's motion relates to the suspension of Standing Orders whereas it is clear that he is traversing factual matters which might or might not become relevant if and when that motion is carried.

Mr SPEAKER-The point of order is correct. Indeed, I was just moving to ask the honourable member for Werriwa to give reasons for the suspension of Standing Orders as distinct from the reasons for censuring.

Mr KERIN-The Standing Orders need to be suspended because of the on-going saga of Asia Dairy Industries and the role of the Minister for Communications in this matter in 1976. Asia Dairy Industries and the Australian Dairy Corporation were clearly--

Motion (by Mr N. A. Brown) put:

That the honourable member for Werriwa be not further heard.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

.67

Noes

44

Majority

23

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bradfield, J. M. Brailhwailhe, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M. A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Ewe" Cameron, Ian Carllon, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D. B. Dean,A.O. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Groom,R.J. Hall,Sleele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunl, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M. Jarman, A. W.

Jull,D. F. KaUer, R. C. Killen,D.J. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar, P.e. Moore, J. C. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porler, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D. Shiplon, R. F. Sinclair, J. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, e. W. Viner, R. I. While, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. e.

2868 REPRESENTATIYES 17 November 1981

Censure ofMinister for Communications

NOES
Armilage, J, L. Beazley, K. e. Blewell, N. Bowen, Lionel 8rown,lohn Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M. H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross, M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J. Everingham. D. N. Free, R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke,R.J.L. Holding, A. e. Howe,B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller)

Hurford, e. J. Innes, U. E. Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Jones, Charles Kealing,P.J. Kelly,R.J. Kenl, L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. Mildren, J. B. Millon,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mounlford, J. G. (Teller) Scholes, G. G. D. Scoll, J. L. Theophanous, A. e. Uren, T. Wallis, L.G. Wesl,S.J. Young, M, J.

PAIRS

Bourchier, J. W.

Johnson, Les

Question so resolved in the affirmative,

Mr SPEAKER-Is the motion seconded?

Mr KEATING (Blaxland) (4,12)-1 second the motion and charge that the Government-

Motion (by Mr N. A. Brown) put:

That the honourable member for Blaxland be not further heard,

The House divided,

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon, Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

68

Noes

44

Majority

24

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anlhony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaile, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carllon, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Groom,R.J. Hall, Sleele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks,N.J.

Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F.
KaUer,R.e. Killen,D.J. Lioyd,B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch,Sir Phillip
MacKellar, M. J. R. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar,P.C.
Moore,J.e. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porler, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D. Shiplon, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Slreel, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J.

Hodges, J. e. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunl, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M.

AYES

Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, e. W. Viner,R.t
While, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. e.

NOES
Armilage, J. L. Beazley, K. e. Bleweu,N. Bowen, L.ionel Brown,John Brown, Roberl Campbell,G. Cass,M. H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross, M. D. Cunningham,B. T. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Fry,K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. e. Howe,B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller)

Hurford, e. J. Innes, U. E. Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Jones, Charles Kealing, P. J. Kelly, R.J. Kenl, L. Kerin, J. C. Klugman, R. E. Mildren, J. B. Millon,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison. W. L. Mounlford,J.G. (Teller) Scholes, G. G. D. SCOII, J. L. Theophanous, A. e. Uren, T. Wallis, L. G. Wesl,S.J. Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Bourchier,J. W.

Johnson, Les

Question so resolved in the affirmative,

Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (4,25)-Mr
Speaker, this Minister has persistently misled this House and it is time this scandal was ended one way or the other.

Motion (by Mr N. A. Brown) agreed to:

That the question be now put.

Original question put:

That the motion (Mr Kerin's) be agreed to,

The House divided,

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon, Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

44

Noes

67

Majority

23

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. e. Bleweu,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Roberl Campbell, G. Cass, M. H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K.L. Hawke, R. J. L.

AYES

Hurford, e. J. Innes, U. E. Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R.J. Kenl, L. Kerin,J. C. Klugman, R. E. Mildren, J. B. Millon,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mounlford, J. G. (Teller) Scholes, G. G. D. ScolI, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren,T.

Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2869

AYES
Holding, A. e. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller)

Wallis, L.G. West,S.J. Young, M.J.

NOES
Adermann. A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bradfield,J. M. Braithwaite, :to A. Brown, N. A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M. A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron. Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton,J.J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan. D. B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. e. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M.

Jarman,A.W. Jull,D.F. Kaller,R.e. Killen,D.J. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip
MacKellar, M. J. R. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar, P.e. Moore, J. e. Nixon, P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter,J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. Mce. Spender,J. M. Streel, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, e. W. Viner,R.1. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. e.

PAIRS

Johnson, Les

Bourchier,J. W.

Question so resolved in the negative.

INSURANCE (AGENTS AND BROKERS) BILL 1981
Bill received from the Senate, and read a first time.

Second Reading
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (4.35)-After seven years of struggling it is with pleasure that I move the second reading of this important and much needed legislation. I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This private member's Bill was presented in the Senate by Senator Evans on 19 August this year. In his second reading speech he dealt fully with the purposes and proposals of the Bill. I commend Senator Evans for his foresight and initiative. In essence, the Bill, with minor modifications, seeks to implement the recommendations of the Australian Law Reform Commission's report entitled 'Insurance Agents and Brokers'. What is particularly pleasing to note is that the Senate supported the Bill without any division on 29 October this year. Equally important, the Senate flatly rejected

the reasons upon which the Treasurer (Mr Howard) claimed in this House on 10 June this year that a Federal government should not legislate at a national level and that it is best left to the States. In fact, no body of opinion with any understanding of the insurance industry supports the Treasurer's stand, with the exception of one or two Press editorialists. The statement of the Treasurer-in repeat what I said in Junedestroys five years of detailed and constructive investigation and recommendations on the need for legislation for insurance brokers. It is a slap iri the face to the industry, to the community and, above all, to Professor David St Leger Kelly and the staff of the Law Reform Commission, To my knowledge up to now the Treasurer has not even had the courtesy to pay tribute to the work of the Commission. Let me congratulate equally Senators Bolkus, Watson, Jessop and Missen on their support in the Senate for this Bill. I recommend that honourable members opposite study the excellent speech of Senator Missen in particular.
Let me canvass the Government's track record in this matter. As I said on 10 June, the need for regulation has long been recognised overseas and within State jurisdictions by all sections of the community involved in the brokering iridustry. The Queensland Insurance Act 1960-1976 provides for the licensing of brokers. The United Kingdom brought in legislation in 1977. The Whitlam Government drafted legislation before it was dismissed in 1975. Since then, there have been a number of somersaults by this Government. In April 1976 the then Minister assisting the
Treasurer announced that the Government would introduce legislation for the supervision of insurance brokers. In March 1977 the Government reversed the decision and announced its intention to pursue a scheme for self-regulation in conjunction with the Insurance Brokers Council. In 1979 the Treasurer announced that he would seek government approval to develop legislation for voluntary regulation arrangements for brokers. Six months later he again changed his mind. In effect, the Government refused to grasp the nettle claiming that there was no consensus amongst the various bodies representing brokers on the forms of control that ought to be or might be introduced.
The Government cannot claim in its defence that the insurance broking lobby is against legislation. Bodies representing the insurance brokers in all sections of the insurance industry have persistently supported and demanded legislation. We have the spectacle of the Western Australian Government being obliged to bring in legislation. The New South Wales Minister has repeatedly

2870 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill

indicated that if the Commonwealth fails to act New South Wales will be obliged to do so. The Victorian Minister is committed to bringing in legislation. Unquestionably the only two States left will be obliged to bring in legislation to protect the consumer section of the industry. What will the Minister have? I will tell him what he will have. He will have a plethora of mis-matched, ineffective, inefficient State laws. The situation is scandalous.
Let me briefly advise. the House just what a mess this Government's negative approach will inflict on a national industry. In Western Australia the licensing system excludes life insurance but includes general insurance. If a life insurance agent is also selling general insurance he is obliged to register. As I said, Queensland has had legislation in respect of the insurance industry for many years but it is confined, in effect, to general insurance. It applies only to brokers. If a life insurance agent is selling general insurance policies he is not obliged to register. New South Wales intends to legislate. It will follow the Western Australian Act but will include life insurance. Victoria has made no official announcement but has indicated that it will be obliged to legislate. Tasmania and the Northern Territory have made no indication at this point that they will legislate. In South Australia we have the spectacle of the State Liberal Government implementing negative licensing. What this means is that, if a broker commits a misdemeanour or an offence and fails to comply with government criteria, he will be deregistered even though there is no registration. What a shambles we will have. Senator Missen, in support of this much needed legislation, perhaps summed up this aspect more cogently. He said:
I think it also ought to be borne in mind that the report of the Commission came down in 1980, the consumer affairs Ministers of the States met in Melbourne after that-on 14 November I980-and resolved as follows:
Insurance brokers
Ministers agreed to express their concern to the Commonwealth that the need for urgent action to implement the Australian Law Reform Commission's proposals to regulate the activities of insurance brokers.
It was agreed that there was a need for the Commonwealth to examine legislation involving a fidelity fund to compensate consumers for losses caused by cases of brokers failing to perform. It was also agreed that the legislation should provide for the registration of insurance brokers.
This is not something which has been imposed on the States, it is something which they have requested. The Victorian Minister urged the Federal Government to introduce legislation to register insurance brokers and require them to set up trust and fidelity funds. He pointed out that there had been recent .:xamples of collapses of insurance brokers. One liquidator had been

appointed for Kinloch (Insurances) Pty Ltd with debts of $3m. The same month Anthony H. Brown and Associates Pty Ltd went into liquidation and One Stop Insurance Shop Pty Ltd collapsed with debts of $322,000. So there is a constant need. Those examples call for action. State Ministers have supported those claims and demands.
The legislation is based upon the report. It is also based upon defalcations, details of which are set out in the second reading speech, which totalled about $7m in the years before the Law Reform Commission Report. From the time that the report was prepared at least another $7m appears to have been defaulted. The total is probably more like $20m now because it is not known precisely what are some of the losses among a number of the companies. It is utter nonsense to claim that this important aspect of insurance, namely the role of the intermediary-that is the broker or agent-can be isolated from the national legislature' and dealt with on a fragmented basis by the States. The Commonwealth Parliament has already intervened and taken action in regard to insurance. We have the Life Insurance Act of 1945 and the Insurance Act of 1973. Certain regulatory bodies and commissioners are operating already in those two fields. As is proposed in the Bill they will playa very active role in the regulation of brokers. Intermediaries are an integral part of the insurance industry. Laws must be not only uniform but also national if the industry is to have the effectiveness, the efficiency and the credibility it deserves.
There are two myths Paul Revered by the Treasurer that must be destroyed once and for all. The Treasurer constantly states that losses represent 0.1 per cent of total broker premiums. My answer is that a vast majority of broker premiums relate to commercial and other large scale insurance. The losses as a percentage of consumer insurance premiums would be much higher than 0.1 per cent. Furthermore, some policyholders will suffer a loss of 100 per cent of premium. Secondly, the Treasurer claims that 92 per cent of losses represent amounts due to insurers. What is the answer to that? This analysis is utterly misleading. Every cent of that 92 per cent of losses is recoverable by insurers from their clients. Furthermore, the remaining 8 per cent owed directly to those insured is a sizable sum. Losses between 1967 and 1979 were 8 per cent of $7m, or $560,000. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a document setting out what the Bill does and what it provides.
Leave granted.

Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2871

The document read as follows-
INSURANCE (AGENTS AND BROKERS) BILL 1981
What the Bill does
I. Statutory System of Registration of Brokers
Administered by Insurance Commissioner and Life Insurance Commissioner;
Obligations upon registered brokers:
compulsory proFessional indemnity and fidelity guarantee insurance (cI.17);
separate insurance broking account in which all premium and claim moneys must be kept and investment of which is limited to 'prescribed securities' (cl.2l);
regular inspection or audit of books, accounts and records (cL33);
full disclosure to insured and insurer of details of insurance contracts, including details of the broker's remuneration (cL25);
Registration liable to be suspended or cancelled if broker or its employee convicted of any offence relating to insurance or to dishonest conduct (cL20).
Funding: The system of registration is intended to be selffunding. Based on an estimated registration fee of $200 and an expected registration of 1,000 brokers, the budget of $200,000 would allow For 2 permanent staff plus 2 casual. It is not envisaged that there will be elaborate investigative machinery.
2. Regulating the Conduct ofI nsurance Agents
Bill establishes clear demarcation between agents and brokers (cl.ll);
Insurer responsible to the insured for any conduct of his agent which is relied on by the insured (cLIO) except where it would be unreasonable for the insured in his particular circumstances to rely on the agent's conduct;
No-one other than a registered broker may describe himselF or his business in such a way as to mislead a person into believing that he was a broker (cl.30);
Agents are prevented from behaving as brokers because cl.28 (as amended in the Senate) requires them to forward all premium moneys to the insurer forthwith, thus removing any possibility of investment of premium moneys by anyone other than a registered broker.
3. Regulating the Conduct of Brokers and Agents Alike
Payment of premium by an insured to an agent or a broker discharges the insured's liability to the insurer (cI.l3) i.e. the agent or broker receives the premium as agent for the insurer and the insured is not vulnerable if the broker collapses or defaults before paying over the premium;
Bill creates offences for an agent or broker to deliberately misrepresent the cost or effect of, or benefits available under, an insurance policy or to misrecord inFormation on a proposal or claim form or to advise an insured or intended insured todoso (cI.l2);
Penalties are graded on the same basis as those in the Companies Act 1981 and the Securities Industry Act 1980, and are of similar severity for similar offences.
Mr JACOBI-I thank the House. I will indicate the principal headings of the Bill. The first is 'Statutory System of Registration of Brokers'; the second is 'Regulating the Conduct of Insurance Agents'; and the third is 'Regulating the Conduct of Brokers and Agents Alike'. The legislation is

well set out at the beginning of the report of the Law Reform Commission. The Commission stated:
The private insurance industry is today organised on a national basis. It is undesirable that, in important aspects of the law governing relationships with the insuring public, this national industry should be subject to vague and uncertain rules developed long before the growth of modern insurance. It is equally undesirable that it should be subject to differing legislative requirements From one jurisdiction to another. The needs of the industry and of its customers can only be met by development of a national law of insurance contracts .in Australia. This law should promote:
uniformity, to the extent that the Federal Constitution permits
clarity, by removing doubts in existing case law and statutes--
I will deal with this matter later-
relevance, in recognising the realities of the respective positions of the insured, the insurer and the intermediaries (agents and brokers) who Facilitate and effect contracts of insurance.
I believe that statement sets out very fairly the need, and the recommendations that justify the action proposed in the Bill. I also note that the need for regulation has been supported by the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard page 360 and page 363 of the report.
Leave granted.
The pages read as follows-
IV INSURANCE AGENTS AND BROKERS
A. Background
20.187 There is little regulation of insurance brokers or agents in Australia and selF-regulation has been fragmented.
20.188 Until recently, Queensland has been the only State which has provided for the licensing of brokers. In that State, requirements are laid down For the handling of premiums and the delivery of documents and the State Insurance Commissioner has powers of supervision extending to the suspension or cancellation of a licence. In other States the actions of both agents and brokers are constrained, by and large, only by common law." (In August 1981,Iicensing requirements were introduced for brokers in Western Australia.)
.. Details of the requirements applying in Queensland and of the efforts of agents and brokers to regulate themselves are outlined in Chapter 16 of the Interim Report.
20.189 The Law Reform Commission published its report on Insurance Agents and Brokers in September 1980. A number of its recommendations relate to issues which have been raised with the Committee or which bear on the stability and efficiency of this sector of the financial system.
B. Approach to Regulation
(a) Agents
20.190 The Law Reform Commission cites various State Consumer Affairs Departments/ Bureaus as noting complaints in regard to misrepresentation by agents of: .
premiums payable for motor vehicle insurance cover; the size of surrender values for life insurance policies; and the type oflife insurance policy being bought.

2872 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill

20.191 Neither common law nor statute are clear regarding the insurer's responsibility for the actions of their agents; this confusion has been compounded by attempts to exclude liability via contractual exclusions.
20.204 On the other hand, the Committee would not favour sole reliance on self-regulation. Governments clearly have a role in protecting individual consumers against fraud and misrepresentation.
20.205 The Committee also stresses the desirability of consistent regulation. This has been recognised by the Treasurer, who has expressed the hope that any state legislation will recognise the benefits of the existing self-regulatory arrangements and have regard to the advantages associated with uniformity in controls. He has indicated the Government's readiness to assist in achieving uniformity between the States in this area.
20.206 The Committee favours a system of 'co-regulation', with government legislation laying down the ground rules for an arrangement basically involving self-regulation by an appropriate industry body on which there would be some government representation. It believes early action should be taken by the Government to ensure that appropriate cooperative national legislation is developed. This could provide for the holding of funds in trust accounts in connection with their business as brokers, as recommended by the Law Reform Commission.
20.207 It is also desirable that guidelines for the disclosure of information by brokers to their clients should be developed, as this would facilitate caveat emptor. Such guidelines might cover disclosure of such matters as:
the nature of any contractual relationship between an insurer and the broker; and
the remuneration received by a broker from the insurer in respect of a client's business.
20.208 On the latter question, as the broker represents the policyholder, not the insurer, it is reasonable to expect that such information should be made available. As well, details of brokerage fees in other areas of the economy are invariably available to those using brokers (e.g. stockbrokers, real estate agents).
20.209 The Law Reform Commission has suggested that disclosure of such information would:
provide a concerned client with the information which is essential for a check to be made on whether the broker's remuneration appears unusually high, a fact which may itself suggest that a broker has been motivated more by his commission than by his client's needs. Disclosure would also encourage and promote informed assessment and, perhaps, questioning by the client of the cost of the services of an insurance broker. It might well lead to a client comparing the cost of the services of different brokers. There are limited opportunities for inquiry and comparison when the client is not told of the amount paid to his broker. As the amount of remuneration is already determined as between insurer and broker, disclosure to the insured would not itself involve significant costs and might in due course even encourage a reduction in the total costs of insurance. The market forces which operate in favour of competition can be most effective when the consumer is made aware of the cost of services rendered on his behalf.
20.210 The Committee endorses this view.
Mr JACOBI-I thank the House. The purpose of this Bill is to deal with the severe problems faced by members of the insuring public in relation to misconduct by insurance agents and brokers. There are thousands of insurance agents and brokers in Australia. The vast majority of

them act honestly in the interests of their clients, but cases of misconduct occur and, when they do, severe losses are needlessly inflicted on honest people. This Government, indeed the Treasurer, has shown a distinct lack of enthusiasm for the controls suggested by the Commission after an exhaustive inquiry. Yet the Commission's central recommendations have the support of the insurance industry as a whole. It is for that reason, and because of the factors noted in the Commission's report, that Senator Evans has introduced this Bill.
Insurance intermediaries are of two classes, namely, agents and brokers. Agents act for one or more insurers, not for insureds. Brokers act for insureds and place business with several insurers. A person may call himself a broker whether he is a true broker or an agent tied to a single company. The public is readily misled by a practice like that. The major problem with agents is that some insurers will not accept responsibility fpr them. They choose their agents, but when something goes wrong it is for the insured to worry. The insurer simply denies liability. In the past this has led to scandalous decisions. Insurers have made insureds sign a statement to the effect that the insurer's agent is not the insurer's agent at all. Instead, he is the agent for the insured. The courts have upheld this charade. Insurers have also been able to avoid liability by denying that their agents had authority to do certain things. We all know how agents and employees often fill in proposal forms themselves. When they make a mistake, the' insurer should accept the responsibility. This Bill provides for that. Unfortunately this often does not happen.
The most frequent complaint that I have had to handle is in relation to motor vehicle insurance. A car salesman is an agent or a sub-agent for insurance. He offers to arrange insurance for the buyer, often at scandalously high rates. He fills in the form on the strength of the answers given him by the buyer. The buyer tells him he has had two accidents in the last five years. The salesman knows that the insurer may not be willing to insure a buyer with that record, so he writes the word 'no' alongside a question concerning the buyer's claims history. In that way he makes sure of the contract and, would you believe it, his commission. If the insured makes a claim, the inaccuracy of the answer as recorded by the agent is discovered. The insurer denies liability on the basis of the insured's misrepresentation, When he says: 'It was your agent who made the mistake', the only answer is: 'Too bad'. The insured loses out. I suggest that position is simply intolerable.

Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2873

Disreputable insurers are encouraged by the law to have no concern for the behaviour and ethics of their agents. This is bad business practice. Insurers have a duty to train and to supervise their agents. They will uniformly do so only if they are made legally responsible for their conduct. The main problem with brokers is well known to all members. There has been an alarming number of broker collapses over the last decade. The Law Reform Commission at page 61 of the report stated that it had been able to find losses of $7m. from broker insolverrcy between the years 1970 and 1979. The true figure for that period will almost certainly exceed $lOm. Since 1979 matters have become much worse. In the last 18 months losses have exceeded $7tm, more than was proved to have been lost in the preceding decade. It is estimated now to have reached $20m. This is simply scandalous. One might say that much more is lost by businesses of various types which have become insolvent. Why then is there all the fuss about brokers?
Broker insolvencies are a matter of particular disquiet because what is lost in a broker insolvency is not the broker's own money, but money paid to him for transmission to an insurer. Brokers use premium funds in a quite unacceptable way in running their own businesses. Solicitors, real estate agents and others are forbidden to act in this way, but brokers are free to indulge in the luxury of spending other people's money. The result of the practice is that the premiums of thousands of clients are dissipated in badly run businesses and bad investments. Obviously either the insureds or the insurers are the losers. Under existing law it is not clear in fact who it is. Many insurers claim the right either to cancel the relevant policies or to ask for payment all over again when premiums are lost in this way. That leads to enormous confusion, to additional costs for the insureds, to legal disputes and to a general lack of confidence in the probity of the industry.
Insurers allow brokers to retain premium funds on credit for months at a time. The details are set out in the Law Reform Commission report at pages 62 to 64. It is unthinkable that they should be permitted any longer to put the loss upon innocent insureds. If, for business reasons they want to give brokers credit, they must pay the cost of that de,cision. Making sure that insurers cannot avoid this responsibility is not enough. Successive insurance companies have warned of another danger associated with broker insolvency, namely, the failure of one or another, or more, of broker reliant insurers. The confusion and loss to innocent insureds in the event of an insurer collapse are well known to all members. They are worse

than those directly resulting from the insolvency of a broker. An insured who has a claim against the company for the loss of his house simply cannot enforce it. If he gets paid at all, it will only be in part, usually a small part, and then only after many years have passed. The failure of the Government to heed the warnings of successive insurance commissioners and of the Law Reform Commission itself is reprehensible.
What can be done to reduce the risk? Laws cannot make people honest, as the Treasurer has often said to me time after time, but laws can inhibit people, including brokers, from acting dishonestly. They can provide ameans of uncovering dishonesty and of punishing it when it is revealed. By making the price too high, the risk of crime is reduced. Moreover, by no means do all broker insolvencies arise from deliberate dishonesty. Many brokers already keep their premiums separate from their own moneys. Others would certainly do so if the law obliged them. They are encouraged by the present law to indulge in bad business practices. Dishonesty is simply irrelevant.
What should be done to prevent this type of practice? Clearly, premiums and other insurance moneys should be held in trust accounts and their use should be restricted. In the event of insolvency, they would not be available for the general body of creditors, but only for the individuals and insurers to whom they are due. The practice of investments might be continued, but subject to restrictions aimed at reducing the risk of poor investment by a broker. A set of laws should be implemented so that it would be easily avoided without back-up mechanism. Some supervision, minimal in scope, is essential. Audits on an annual basis should be required. To enable this to be supervised, all insurance brokers should register with insurance commissioners, or with one or other of them, depending on the type of business which they run. The cost of registration and suspension should be met by fees-in other words, by the industry itself. The government purse would not be affected.
In proposing this Bill, Senator Evans has drawn heavily on the draft Bill attached to the report of the Law Reform Commission. The Bill contains a number of provisions aimed at further protecting the public against the risk that a broker is not truly impartial. It also required brokers to possess professional indemnity and fidelity guarantee insurance. State legislation, undoubtedly, will be ineffective. What effect will this type of legislation have on the legal framework? Let us analyse that matter. A single Supreme Court judge in Victoria,

2874 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill

Mr Justice Gobbo, in his decision following the inoffers protection to the insurer by imposing on

solvency of a broker, claimed that the insured brokers proper accounting standards and

had, in effect, lost his premium, had to carry his procedures.

own liability and the liability was not sheeted home to the insurer. During the last fortnight, the Full Bench of the Supreme Court in Victoria, in dealing with a case involving insolvency of what it termed an insurance consultant-another term for a broker-took the opposite view. It claimd that the insurer was responsible and, in effect, the insured never lost his premium. A single Supreme Court judge in New South Wales has reserved judgment on a similar case following the insolvency of a broker. Who picks up the tab? It will be interesting to see what decision the judge hands down. But one can reasonably expect that the case will go before the Court of Appeal in New South Wales. Where does all of this lead us? The next stop, obviously, will be appeals to the High Court of Australia. The States may even appeal to the Privy Council. Why? Because it is a common law issue.

What is the downstream effect of this separate State law, this diverse State law, this fragmented mish-mash which this Government has inflicted and wants to persist in inflicting on this country? I say bluntly to the Treasurer that there is not a single State statute on this issue which addresses itself to the real issue; that is, to make the insurer responsible for the loss of brokers' premiums. In no State statute is that provided for. We can do that only at a national level and we ought to do it. Confusion will mount and so will the legal costs until this Government is forced to face its national responsibility and enact national legislation.
This Government has trotted out cliches with respect to the inability of legislation to make people honest. One can only agree that no amount of legislation could provide a guarantee against fraud and against business failure. That is simply not the purpose of the legislation. The purpose of

What does all this add up to? It adds up, firstly, the legislation is to state what are proper business

to utter confusion in the insurance industry and practices and to penalise those who are unwilling

more particularly, a costly exercise for those who to follow them. At present, many so-called

are obliged to protect the insurers and, secondly, brokers are following practices which do not

to a harvest for the legal profession. The net effect merely border upon the dishonest; they are dis-

will be that members of the legal profession will honest. If, as some judges appear to think, the pre-

be the only beneficiaries because we have failed to miums held by brokers in investments are still the

legislate nationally. It is an extremely expensive property of the insured, not the insurer, then

business to bring cases before the courts. Costs brokers are making money out of their clients'

will total hundreds of thousands of dollars before funds. That is the clearest possible breach of trust.

the case is ultimately resolved, I suppose, by the The Commission concluded that the funds held by

High Court or the Privy Council which, let me brokers were not held on behalf of the insured,

add, will make decisions in the current climate on but on behalf of the insurers. Only on that basis

appeals on a particular point. Even then it cannot can the conduct of brokers be regarded as honest.

resolve the issue.

On that basis all that trust account requirements

I am not a lawyer, but let us look as the matter. Perhaps the barristers sitting opposite ought to look at the position because up to this point in time each case has been judged when there exists no appropriate national or uniform legislation or directives as to-accounting procedures and other arrangements between the broker in particular and his insurer. Each case will be different because of the vast differences in the respective State legislations. Consequently, the decisions of either the High Court or the Privy Council on a given case may be of no value in other cases. Litigation will mount and the legal profession will be the only beneficiary. The only avenue open to ob-

are doing is to impose upon brokers the same restriction as is placed upon solicitors. In fact, it is even less of an imposition on brokers than it is on solicitors because brokers are, under our legislation, entitled to make money out of these funds. That, of course, can only be explained on the basis that the funds held by brokers are held by them for insurers rather than the insured. One cannot provide a guarantee against fraud. One can certainly penalise it and make the course of fraud less eligible. One can also provide no guarantee against business failure. But one can assuredly provide for protection of moneys held by brokers which do not belong to them.

viate this mess, this confusion, and to avoid I strongly support this much needed initiative

needless litigation and the infliction of costs is . by Senator Evans. I have every confidence that

legislation which, firstly, clearly distinguishes bewhen honourable members opposite take the

tween agents and brokers and secondly, makes the effort to examine this Bill, they will appreciate

insurer responsible for the premium received by a why the Senate adopted it without any division

broker. That is what this Bill sets out to do. It and why they likewise will reject the Treasurer's

Radio and Electronics Institute

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2875

stand and support the Bill. I commend the Bill to the House.
Mr SPEAKER-Is the motion seconded?
Mr John Brown-I second the motion and seek leave to continue my remarks when the Bill is debated again.
Leave granted; debate adjourned.
PROFESSIONAL RADIO AND ELECTRONICS INSTITUTE OF AUSTRALASIA: INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) Mr Speaker, may I have your indulgence to provide information to the House in answer to a question asked of me earlier this afternoon by the honourable member-for Wills (Mr Hawke)?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman may proceed.
Mr VINER-Thank you, Mr Speaker. I give the following information to the House in answer to the question asked of me earlier this afternoon by the honourable member for Wills concerning comments by Mr Commissioner Vosti about the conduct of the Public Service Board in a case relating to a reclassification claim by the Professional Radio and Electronics Institute of Australasia: Firstly, the Public Service Board has received and is analysing the report by Mr Commissioner Vosti referred to by the honourable member. Secondly, the report-this is important for the House to understand-is a report to the Full Bench of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. Thirdly, the Board has informed me that it does not believe that the criticisms made by Mr Commissioner Vosti are at all fair. Fourthly, the Board is preparing a submission to be presented to the Full Bench of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission which will address, amongst other things, certain of the points made by Mr Commissioner Vosti and will be contesting them, both on the grounds of fact and in" terpretation. In those circumstances, I think that it is proper-I believe that the House will agree-to have the processes before the Full Bench take their course. After that has occurred, I will assess what Mr Commissioner Vosti has said and what the Board has said in the light of what emerges from the consideration of the matter by the Full Bench.
Mr Lionel Bowen-I do not know whether the Minister for Industrial Relations had a chance to mention this matter to my colleague the honourable member for Wills. I think the Minister has encouraged debate because those who are aware

of the problem know that, whilst the Public Service Board may take another view, the evidence given clearly indicates support for what the Commissioner has found. This is not just a recent matter. It is a misuse of the forms of this Parliament to be making the sort of explanation now that the Board will try to justify itself again. I think it has already had its chance and failed. I think it would have been appropriate for the Minister to give his answer tomorrow when the honourable member for Wills could have had a chance to ask him a further question.
Mr SPEAKER-It is always a difficulty for the Chair, not knowing what is going to be said. I gave my indulgence on the basis that had the Minister been informed of these matters at the time that the question was asked he would have been able to give the answer. That is the reason why I gave my indulgence. But I do not propose to permit debate because there is no question before the Chair for debate. I think it is now a matter for the honourable member for Wills, that information having been provided, to consider whether he will take any course of action.
Mr Hawke-Mr Speaker, with respect, I am at a disadvantage. I had no indication from the Minister for Industrial Relations that there would be any course of action. It seems to me, apart from anything else, that it would have been courteous to give an indication that that course of action would be sought to be adopted. It seems to me, with great respect to you, Mr Speaker, that the appropriate course to have adopted, as no one's interests would have been disadvantaged, would have been for the Minister to answer the question tomorrow at the normal time and we could have proceeded from there. I am at a loss to know what is intended now. Has the Minister given his answer? I simply do not know what has happened.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Wills was not in the chamber, through no fault of his. The Minister sought my indulgence to provide information relevant to a question asked by the honourable member for Wills earlier today. At that time the Minister indicated that he would take the matter under consideration or words to that effect and provide information later. The Minister just approached me and indicated that he would like my indulgence to provide information. As I thought that would assist the honourable member for Wills and the House, for that matter, I permitted him to have my indulgence to provide that information. In fact, it was done when the honourable member for Wills was

2876 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

States Grants (Tertiary Education) Bill

not here and the honourable member for Wills apparently was not informed that it was going to be done.
Mr Hawke-That is my complaint.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Wills will understand that there are conventions about giving indulgence. I give my indulgence if it is for the purpose of providing information to the House. It is not for me to go behind the request to ascertain whether any arrangement has been made or anything of that kind. I suggest that the honourable member for Wills now obtain the concurrence of the Minister to see a copy of the Hansard 'greens' as soon as they become available, which will be quite soon. The honourable member for Wills can then consider any course of action he proposes.
Mr Hawke-lam indebted to you, Mr Speaker. I will accept that course. I repeat that I think it would have been an appropriate courtesy in this matter for the Minister to have informed me before he intended to ask for your indulgence in this matter.
Mr Viner-If I may have your indulgence for a moment, Mr Speaker, I thought it appropriate, as has been customary on similar occasions, to seek, at the first opportunity, to provide that information to the House. It has just come into my hands and I did that.
Mr SPEAKER-Will the Minister agree to the course I proposed of authorising the Principal Parliamentary Reporter to provide a copy of the Hansard 'greens' to the honourable member for Wills?
Mr Viner-I am quite happy to do that.

STATES GRANTS (TERTIARY EDUCATION ASSISTANCE) BILL 1981

Bill returned from the Senate with amendments.

Senate's amendments-

No. I-Pages 10 to II. clause 6, leave out the clause.

No.2-Page 12, clause 8. sub-clause (I), lines 23 to 26. leave out all words after "year" (first occurring).

No.3-Page 12, clause 8, sub-clauses (2) and (3), leave out the sub-clauses.

No.4-Page 13. clause 8, sub-clause (4), paragraph (b). sub-paragraph (ii), leave out the sub-paragraph.

No.5-Page 13. clause 8, sub-clause (4), paragraph (c).

leave out the paragraph.

.

No. 6~Page 13, clause 8. sub-clause (4), paragraph (d), lines 17 to 19, leave out ". otherwise than in accordance with the condition set out in paragraph (c) ....

No.7-Page 16. clause 8, sub-c1ause (13). leave out the sub-c1ause.

No.8-Page 23. clause 16. sub-c1ause (I). lines 25 to 27. leave out all words after "year" (first occurring).
No.9-Page 23. clause 16. sub-c1ause (2) and (3). leave out the sub-clauses.
No. IO-Page 24. clause 16. sub-clause (4). paragraph (b). sub-paragraph (ii).leave out the sub-paragraph.
No. II-Page 24. clause 16. sub-clause (4). paragraph (c). leave out the paragraph.
No. 12-Page 24. clause 16. sub-clause (4). paragraph (d). lines 19 to 20. leave out ". otherwise than in accordance with the condition set out in paragraph (c).".
No. I3-Page 25. clause 17. sub-clause (I). lines 34 to 38. leave out all words after "year" (first occurring).
No. 14-Pages 25 to 26. clause 17. sub-clauses (2) and (3). leave out the sub-clauses.
No. 15-Page 26. clause 17. sub-clause (4). paragraph (a). sub-paragraph (ii).leave out the sub-paragraph.
No. 16-Page 26. clause 17. sub-clause (4). paragraph (b). leave out the paragraph.
No. 17-Page 26. clause 17. sub-clause (4). paragraph (c). lines 33 to 34. leave out ". otherwise than in accordance with the condition set out in paragraph (b).".
No. 18-Page 39. clause 23. sub-clause (I). lines 30 to 34. leave out all words after "year" (first occurring).
No. 19-Pages 39 to 40. clause 23. sub-clauses (2) and (3). leave out the sub-clauses.
No. 20-Page 40. clause 23. sub-clause (4). paragraph (a). sub-paragraph (ii).leave out the sub-paragraph.
No. 21Page 40. clause 23. sub-clause (4). paragraph (b). leave out tile paragraph.
No. 22-Page 40. clause 23. sub-clause (4). paragraph (c). lines 28 to 29. leave out ". otherwise than in accordance with the condition set out in paragraph (b).".
No. 23-Page 44. clause 23. sub-clause (18). leave out the sub-clause.
No. 24-Page 45. clause 24. sub-clause (2). lines 20 to 24. leave out all words after "$1.300.000.".
No. 25-Page 45. clause 24. sub-clause (3). leave out the sub-clause.
No. 26-Page 46. clause 24. sub-clause (4). paragraph (b). sub-paragraph (i). sub-sub-paragraph (8). leave out the sub-sub-paragraph.
No. 27-Page 46. clause 24. sub-clause (4). paragraph (b). sub-paragraph (ii).leave out the sub-paragraph.
No. 28-Page 46. clause 24. sub-clause (4). paragraph (b). sub-paragraph (iii). lines 21 to 22. leave out ". otherwise than in accordance with the condition set out in sub-paragraph (ii).".
No. 29-Page 51. clause 27. sub-clause (2). leave out the sub-clause.
No. 30---'Page 51. clause 27. sub-clause (3). lines 36 to 39. leave out all words after "Schedule 8.".
Mr SPEAKER-I wish to draw to the attention of the House the fact that the purported amendments transmitted by the Senate raise issues of ~onstitutional significance as a result of the restriCtion of paragraph 3 of section 53 of the Constitution, which provides that the Senate may not amend any proposed law so as to increase any proposed charge or burden on the people. The Senate resolved to omit clause 6 and by that

States Grants (TertiarY Education) Bill

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2877

action purported to amend the Bill. It has been argued that the Senate does not possess the power to amend the Bill but possesses only the power to request an amendment. My task, as Speaker, is merely to alert the House to the problem. It is for the House to decide the manner in which it wishes to deal with the matter.
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (5.7)-1 move:
(I) That this House considers that the effect of the purported amendments of the Senate would be to increase the burden on the people in contravention of section 53 of the Constitution and therefore declines to take the purported amendments into consideration, and
(2) That the Bill be laid aside.
In the Committee stage of the Senate debate on the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Bill the Senate resolved to remove clause 6 of the Bill. Thirty amendments consequential upon the removal of clause 6 were also agreed to by the Senate. It is the Government's view that the effect of the purported amendments of the Senate would be to increase the burden on the people in contravention of the third paragraph of section 53 of the Constitution. The fi\ird paragraph of section 53 provides as follows:
The Senate may not amend any proposed law so as to increase any proposed charge or burden on the people.
The effect of the purported amendment to remove clause 6 is to increase the minimum amount of the Commonwealtn's expenditure under the Bill and, hence, increase the amount of the appropriation as the Minister would not have the power to make the determinations that would result in a reduction of the amounts payable to the States. The Senate could, however, have requested the House of Representatives to make the amendments instead of exceeding its constitutional power in the way it has done. But a Governor General's message, pursuant to section 56 of the Constitution, would be required before this House could agree to such requests, if made. The purpose of section 56 of the Constitution is to deny to private members any right to initiate measures for the expenditure of the public revenue and to keep the initiation of such expenditure in the hands of the Government, which has the overall responsibility of relating total expenditure to total revenue. This fundamental tenet of our Constitution has been breached by the action of the Senate in relation to this Bill. Therefore, on those grounds, I commend the motion to the House.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (5.l5)-The Opposition opposes the motion on the ground that, legally, the problem is not what the Government says it is. Mr Speaker, I think you might share our view-and we do not want to

embarrass you on this point-because you said in your message on this occasion that you wanted to alert the House to the problem. I think that is very fair. Earlier, when we had another problem with the Senate which was anxious to press its requests in respect of sales tax legislation you expressed the view that it should not be entitled to press its requests. We agree with you. On that occasion, the pressing of requests would have amounted to seeking to exercise a function to which it was not entitled as it had already rejected the Bill once. But on this occasion, Mr Speaker, I think you might share our views again because you have only taken us to the point of alerting us to the problem and I do not think it is as the Government states.
If honourable members look at the Constitution, they will see views about types of laws, whether they appropriate money for annual services or whether they impose taxation. It becomes very clear that the Senate may not amend laws which appropriate money for the annual services of government. Consequently, I draw a distinction between laws that the Senate has power to deal with and those. with which it has not power to deal. The Opposition remains very firm-it has not deviated from the point-that the Senate has no right to deal with annual appropriation Bills by altering the appropriation. The Government is really drawing a long bow in this case when it says that this legislation deals with the annual appropriation. Let us make it very clear. Under clause 6 of the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Bill (No. 2)-that is the clause which has been the subject of some discussion-the Minister for Education has the ability to determine tuition fees in respect of students undertaking later degrees. But the Bill gives an appropriation in to to which is completely sufficient to furnish the requiremen~s of tertiary facilities.
There is an additional provision in the Bill that, if the Minister decides that fees have to be paid by students who undertake later degrees, the amount payable to each State will be reduced by the amount of fees collected. So this measure could not possibly increase the charge or burden on the people. It is quite ridiculous to argue, as the Government has argued quite unconvincingly, that anything that might have the effect of increasing the appropriation or, to put it more accurately, decreasing the deductions from the appropriation necessarily involves a burden on the people. That is complete nonsense! The point I make is very clear. There will be no taxation burden as seen in the terms of our Constitution. This will not be one of those issues. Of course it would suit the Government to state in a Bill: 'We

2878 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

States Grants (Tertiary Education) Bill

will give you a sum of money and that is the Bill that provides it'-it has appropriated that sum of money-'but we would like to reduce it if we decide to charge fees'. The Government could not possibly say that that is increasing the burden on the people. The appropriation has been made.
Section 53 of the Constitution states:
The Senate may not amend any proposed law so as to increase any proposed charge or burden on the people.
That is the only argument on which the Government could hang its hat at the present time and this Bill does not enable it to do that. In no way does the Bill, as designed and prepared by the Government, increase the charge or burden on the people. Perhaps what it is doing is increasing the burden on the Government which has already appropriated the money in the Bill. All it is trying to do is decrease its burden to which end it has alrea-dy appropriated thefunds. The Government is saying: 'Perhaps we can unload some of that burden by making students pay extra fees'. Naturally we do ~ot in any way support this view.
The Government would get itself out of its dilemma in this matter if it supported the new constitutional alteration proposition of fixed term parliaments that the Opposition put forward in the Senate. This proposition has a clause which states that any Bill appropriating revenue or moneys or imposing taxation shall be deemed to be passed by the Senate, whether it passes it or not, 30 days after it is transmitted to it. It is appropriate that, if that is the view that the Government now has, it might get going about a constitutional amendment and support the Opposition's legislation in the Senate. Then we would be ad idem on the issue. Matters such as this cannot be the subject of some ping-pong arrangement where the matter is continually transmitted between one House and the other. We must get on with the business of Government. The Government has a mandate and has brought down a Budget. It has responsibilities, fiscal and otherwise, and the Senate should not interfere. The Government as elected by the people should run its term of office. In 1974-75, we were not given that concession but our argument has not changed. It has always been that a government is entitled to its annual appropriation. The Senate agrees with that. But this measure is not an annual appropriation.
The Senate also has power to amend Bills but it cannot do this in a fashion that would increase a charge or burden on the people. The amendment does not do that. I make it very clear that it is time that something was done about the constitutional change and a bipartisan attitude is the only way to get it. At the present time the Bill in the Senate

says what I think everyone in Australia would applaud, that is, when a government puts forward laws that appropriate revenue or revenue which imposes taxation and these laws go to the Senate that chamber can certainly transmit a message on it but that is about all. It is not to hold on to the legislation for more than one month because, after one month, it shall be deemed to have been passed. Mr Speaker, I think you would agree with that proposal. No longer would we have the spurious argument that the Government advances in this case, that is, that the Senate does not have any power to deal with this Bill. The Senate has the power to deal with it and it justifiably deals with it. It is a matter of great concern to all people in the tertiary field that they may have to pay fees. But, if honourable members look at this matter in terms of the law, it is a specious argument to suggest that this amendment in any way increases the burden on the people or increases taxation.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (5.23)-1 join this debate briefly to support the remarks that have been made by my deputy leader. What the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith (Mr Lionel Bowen) has pointed out very clearly is that the effect of the Senate's amendment does not increase the burden on the people in a way which would infringe section 53 of the Constitution. I repeat section 53, the provision in question, which states:
The Senate may not amend any proposed law so as to increase any proposed charge or burden on the people.
In its original pristine form, the Bill provided that certain grants would be made by the Commonwealth to universities, colleges and the technical and further education sector via State governments. If the Minister for Education took two separate actions, the level of those grants could be reduced by amounts determined by the Minister. The action which the Minister needed to take was that he may determine levels of fees not exceeding certain amounts and in respect of certain groups of students. That is, he was not saying that he would determine certain levels of fees. The power did not require the Minister to do that. It simply gave him a power which he could exercise if he felt like it. If the Minister did determine that fees would be collected in respect of certain students at certain levels, he could take a decision to reduce the amounts of the grants to be made to the colleges or the universities. Or, if he was of the view that certain fees should be collected, he could reduce the grants by an amount which he thought should have been collected by way of fees and which equalled that amount.
The two discretionary powers which the Bill was to give to the Minister were: Firstly, he may

States Grants (Tertiary Education) Bill

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2879

determine fees and, secondly, if he does, he may decide to reduce the amounts of the grants to be made to individual universities and colleges. It means that, as a result of the Senate's amendment, there was no prospect that the level of the grants to be made to universities and colleges could have been increased. The effect of the amendment was not to achieve that result. The maximum level of the grants was set by the original Bill. So there was no prospect of the Government having to find more money than was already included in the Bill as presented to this House. If the power to determine fees remained in the Bill then there was some prospect that the level of grants may have been reduced. But there was no absolute guarantee that there would have been any sort of reduction because, as I have already said, it relied upon the Minister exercising two separate discretionary powers.
I think from that we can see that the Government draws a very long bow indeed when it says that because the Senate decided to remove the Minister's power to set fees-a power which he may never have exercised in any event, even though he said he would-that would increase the burden on the people. The Minister and the Government arrived at this situation in the Senate because of the botched nature of this proposal. The proposal to reintroduce fees in this form came not from the Department of Education or even from the Minister for Education. It came from the Lynch Committee reviewing Commonwealth functions. It is a hobby-horse of the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) which he has entertained ever since those sad days when he was Treasurer of this country.
On one occasion, I think in 1976, he proposed that the Government would reintroduce fees in this form. He was defeated on that proposal in the Cabinet. He has waited and has bided his time. Now, when he had another opportunity to pursue this matter he included it in the report of his committee reviewing Commonwealth functions. But it was put up in such a way that the Government would simply be able to re-establish the principle of fees while at the same time ensuring that its effect was fairly limited as far as the Government was concerned.
The Minister wanted to be able to exclude from the imposition of fees all students studying for their first qualification. Indeed, that provision remains in the Bill as amended by the Senate. As well as that, the Minister wanted to require students doing certain combinations of first qualifications to be charged fees. When students were doing one or more first qualifications, either consecutively or concurrently, the Minister

wanted some of them to pay fees and some of them not to pay fees. It was a very ill-defined group to which the exclusion would obtain. Therefore, the Minister wanted to reserve for himself the power to determine which students in this group would pay fees and which would not. Again, in relation to post-graduate students and students studying other forms of higher degrees, the Minister wanted some of these students to pay fees and some of them to be excluded from the burden of fees. But again it was not possible, in the
way in which the Government presented this proposal, for the Bill to go into the detail in relation to which of these students would be paying fees and which would not. The Minister wanted to keep to himself the power to determine which of these students would pay fees and which would not.
As a result of the Minister keeping to himself this largenumber of discretionary powersfirstly, whether fees would be charged at all, secondly, to which group of students the fees would apply and, thirdly, the amount at which the fees would apply-we then get to the second problem
where, having decided to charge fees at a certain level in respect of certain students, he mayor may not have decided to reduce the grants available to universities and colleges, either by an equal amount as collected by fees, or by someother amount as he determines.
The net result of all of these discretionary powers which the Minister was given in the original Bill meant that there was an extraordinarily tenuous connection between the power of the Minister to set fees, the level of grants and the amount of money which was required to be spent by the Commonwealth in respect of universities and colleges throughout Australia. If the Government really wanted to sustain its argument that the removal of the power to determine fees would, in fact, directly lead to a reduction in those grants and, therefore, reduce the burden on the Government's coffers-as has been stated by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition-then there would have to be a very much more precise requirement in relation to the setting of fees. Indeed, there would have had to be a very much closer, tighter linkage between the collection of those fees and the reduction of the grants made available to the universities and colleges.
The Government's problem is really entirely of its own making. The proposal was ill-considered. It was not, in my view, supported by anyone who was serious about the problems confronting tertiary education in this country, particularly the problems confronting Australia's research effort. However, the Government was landed with this

2880 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

States Grants (Tertiary Education) Bill

problem as a result of the Lynch Committee report. But then the Minister wanted to ensure that it applied to the smallest number of students in such a complicated way that in the end the connection between the payment of fees and the reduction of the grants, or the increase of the burden on the people-whichever way one wants to put it-was extraordinarly tenuous indeed. Under those circumstances I do not think the Government can in any way sustain the argument which it has put to the House this afternoon.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (5.33)-1 also oppose the Government's motion. I do so for a number of reasons. Firstly, this is an extraordinarily loose means by which the Government is seeking to appropriate funds if, in fact, it maintains that this is an appropriation of funds. I point out that the clause in question being deleted from the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Bill in no way alters the appropriation in the Bill. It takes away from a Minister of the Crown the right to determine whether or not the appropriation will be a certain amount, or whether a part of that appropriation will be raised from a section of the people as opposed to Commonwealth revenue. I think that is a distinction which has not been made during the course of this debate.
When the Government says that it increases the burden on the people, it increases the burden on some people, if the Minister for Education (Mr Fife) applies the terms of the provisions which have been deleted from the Bill. The only increased burden which could be involved is where the Minister imposes on the States an obligation to raise certain money as an offset to moneys which are already appropriated by this Bill, which obligation is then deleted from the Commonwealth grants and, in fact, becomes an additional burden on a section of the people. This is not only a loose means but also a means which obviously has been devised by draftsmen to get around this Parliament's attempt to use its monetary functions to impose a condition on the States' operation of universities which fall within its constitutional power. The Commonwealth Parliament could not impose a condition of that sort in legislation of its own. This Parliament could not legislate to impose fees on any sections of universities as it is outside its constitutional powers. So we have a provision in this Bill where a general appropriation is made to provide the States with financial assistance for universities. A clause within the legislation provides for the conditional application of fees to be imposed under the States grants legislation in a manner which would be unconstitutional and would be opposed in separate legislation.

There can be no question that any appropriation is involved in the clause which is under consideration in this Bill. The Bill does not specify any amount. It does not specify any fees which will be charged; rather it provides the Minister, at his discretion, with an open-ended opportunity to, alter the amounts of grants which will be made to the States from this appropriation. It could well be that under this clause the Minister could impose a fee of $1 and reduce the grant to the States by $Im. These matters are not co-related. There is also no suggestion of a relief from taxation or a relief of the burden on the people. It can be argued that there is a transfer of the burden, a transfer from Consolidated Revenue and the appropriations which are made to Consolidated Revenue, to a limited number of persons on whom a fee is levied by the States in exchange for the funds which are provided for in this Bill.
This is a loose or a smart Bill-one can take one's pick of which term to use. Certainly the appropriation whereby the Parliament gives its rights over the appropriation of moneys to a Minister of the Crown is not of the type which should be made by either House of the Parliament. This Bill transfers the rights to determine that appropriation. I use an extreme case as an illustration. It would be possible to bring in an Appropriation Bill under which an amount is appropriated, as in this Bill, to cover the general appropriations required for the running of the Administration. A clause could be written into the Bill enabling the Treasurer or another Minister to vary those amounts both within the legislation and in total in accordance with the wishes of the Treasurer or that Minister. In other words, if this is, in fact, legislation which meets the criteria of the Constitution and with which the Senate is not able to deal, it is also legislation which is capable of being manipulated in such a manner as to take away from the Parliament totally the right to consider appropriations in a fixed form-a form determined by the Parliament. This is an appropriation which has a rider attached to it in the form of the clause which has been deleted. This clause enables a Minister to alter that appropriation in any way in which he so desires. He has only to meet one basic requirement. There is no provision for offsetting reductions in the appropriations in accordance with the amounts of the fees.
The Government is seeking in this legislation to create a situation where, under its policy of reducing the general level of skills and the availability of training in this community, education is restricted to those people who can afford to pay. This is a very dangerous precedent.

States Grants (Tertiary Education) Bill

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2881

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman is now speaking to the merits of the
clause; this is a different motion.

Mr SCHOLES-it is a dangerous precedent
whereby a government seeks to move around its
constitutional powers by providing legislation which enables it to impose on others-without specifying in this Bill what it is seeking to
impose-an obligation to enact laws in exchange
for the wherewithal to maintain tertiary education in this country-tertiary education being
accepted as a financial obligation of this Parliament. Such a government could impose laws
which this Parliament would find to be beyond its
constitutional powers if it sought to pass them as
separate legislation.

Question put:

That the motion (Mr Viner's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr G. O'H. Giles)

Ayes

66

Noes

45

Majority

21

AYES
Adermann. A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M. E. Birney, R. J. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton,J.J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris,G. MeD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.

Hyde,J. M. Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter,R.C. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar,P.C. Moore,J.C. Nixon, P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack,P. D.
Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A.
Tambling, G. E. J. Thompson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.1. White, P. N. D. Wilson,1. B. C.

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewelt,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John
Brown, Robert

NOES

Hurford, C. M. Innes, U. E. Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J.

NOES
Campbell,G. Cass, M. H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross,M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry,K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller)

Kenl, L. Kerin,J. C. Klugman, R. E.
Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. E. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. (Teller)
Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Ureo, T. Wallis, L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R.
Young, M.J.

PAIRS

Bourchier,J. W.

Johnson, Les

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

EDUCATION LEGISLATION
Suspension of Standing Orders
Motion (by Mr Fife)-by leave-proposed:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the introduction and passage through all stages without delay of the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Bill [No.2]. the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Bill (No.2) and the Australian National University Amendment Bill (No.3).
MrDAWKINS (Fremantle) (S,48)-TheOpposition will not oppose the suspension ofStanding Orders, The suspension of Standing Orders will allow the House to consider and deal with the legislation to provide grants for universities and colleges around Australia and, of course, the Opposition would not want to hold up that process. That is something which ought to be facilitated as quickly as possible. We are happy also for the Government to reintroduce the rewritten sections dealing with the imposition of fees in a separate amending Bill. We are happy for that process to proceed because we know that when that matter goes to the Senate it will be rejected again. No doubt the Government will seek in three months beyond that date to introduce that legislation again, to see it again defeated by the Senate.
We are perfectly happy to have the question of - tertiary fees being one of the matters on which a double dissolution election is fought. The Government was not courageous enough to say before the last election that it intended to take this action. This will force it out of the dark, out of the background, and force it to declare its hand at the time of the next election in respect of tertiary fees. It got away with misleading the people last time; it will not get away with misleading them again, The chances are that the legislation to. reintroduce fees will be the first piece of legislation setting the scene for a double dissolution of this Parliament. We are happy to see that occur. We are happy to

2882 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

States Grants (Education) Bill [No.2]

fight the Government in the Parliament and on the hustings on the question of tertiary fees, not just because of the issue involved, but also because we know that if the Government were ever allowed to re-establish the principle of tertiary tuition fees it would want to extend it to cover all undergraduate students, which would do enormous damage to universities and colleges around the country. For that reason we are happy to facilitate the consideration of these Bills this afternoon and this evening.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
STATES GRANTS (TERTIARY EDUCATION ASSISTANCE) BILL
1981 [No.2]
Bill presented by Mr Fife, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education) (5.51)-I move:
That the Bill be now read a second lime.
The Government has reconsidered its position in the light of the action taken by the Senate to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Bill and the Australian National U niversity Bill to delete the limited tuition fees provisions, and also to reject the Canberra College of Advanced Education Bill which dealt only with fees. The Senate has disagreed with the House in two important respects. It has not been prepared to endorse the provisions of the Bill passed by the House which authorise the limited reintroduction of student fees for selected second and higher degree students, and it has also taken a contrary view to the Government as to the Senate's powers in respect of this legislation. During the debate in the Senate the Government argued that the Senate did not have the power to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Bill, but it did not dispute the right of the Senate to request amendments to this legislation. The Senate, however, decided that it did have the power to make amendments and proceeded accordingly. The Government regarded the Senate's action as contravening section 53 of the Constitution and it invited the House to set aside the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Bill in the form received from the Senate. The House has done so.
The Government is now proposing a new measure which will provide for the program of grants to the States without the fees provisions to which the Senate objected. If the House approves this Bill, we will then introduce a separate Bill to amend the first Bill to restore the fees provisions. In the case of the Australian National University,

we will propose that the House accept the Bill as received from the Senate. When that has been done, we will introduce amendments to restore the fees provisions. The Government is not proposing to take any action for the present about the Canberra College of Advanced Education Bill which the Senate rejected.
The Government has had to keep in mind that the principal purpose of the legislation is to appropriate funds totalling approximately $1,725m for the universities, colleges of advanced education and tertiary and further education institutions in the States and the Northern Territory for 1982 and further appropriations for some areas for 1983 and 1984 also. Provision has also to be made for cost adjustments in respect of the program for the 1979-81 triennium. Many institutions will be short of funds by late December unless this legislation is passed in sufficient time for the appropriate instalments of approximately $300m to be made available from the Commonwealth through the State treasuries to the institutions. Their position will be made worse if further instalments of about $lOOm cannot be made in late January. The grants reflect the Government's approval of the financial recommendations put forward by the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission in respect of State and Northern Territory institutions and in accordance with the guidelines announced by me on 4 June 1981. On 23 September I tabled Volume 2 of the Commission's report which responded to the guidelines.
The Bill is in the form of the Bill received from the Senate except for some minor differences to overcome technical defects in the amendments adopted by the Senate to remove the new tuition fees provisions. In putting forward this Bill without the tuition fee provisions, the Government has recognised the urgent need to ensure that funds will be available to tertiary institutions in
the States to proceed with their approved programs. Some funds are yet to be allocated for 1983 and 1984 and will be included in subsequent annual amendments. However, the Government will continue to press for the limited reintroduction of tuition fees for universities and colleges of advanced education. The Government accepts that fees should not be charged to first degree or diploma students, but it believes that
students entering second diploma or degree courses or higher degree courses should pay tuition fees. These fees would be applied to a min-
ority of students and would represent a small con~ tribution to the cost of operating the institutions.
The inclusion of this tuition fees provision in a States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance)

States Grants (Education) Bill [No.2]

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2883

Bill as a condition to the grants for recurrent expenditure for universities and colleges of advanced education is the only mechanism open to the Commonwealth by which it can take legislative action. There is absolutely no question of the Government attempting to tack-on some extraneous matter to an appropriation Bill. The Commonwealth has the sole responsibility for financing the universities and colleges of advanced education and has the authority to make a decision about fees and to attach that as a condition to its grants. It has been the practice since the grants for the 1974 academic year for the States grants legislation for tertiary institutions to include a condition requiring the States to ensure that the universities, colleges of advanced education and TAFE colleges do not charge tuition fees. The Government has sought to continue that provision, except for second and higher degree students. I commend the Bill to the House.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (5.57)-For reaSons which 1 have already outlined, the Opposition does not oppose this legislation. I take the opportunity to note, however, that the Government has done what it should have done in the first place, that is, retreated from the extraordinary decision of the razor gang to impose these fees. As 1said before, this proposal was not new. It was defeated when Senator Carrick was Minister for Education. He clearly opposed it. The fact that is was revived on this occasion was a source of huge embarrassment to the current Minister for Education (Mr Fife). I am sure that he, of all the Ministers in this Government, would be breathing a great sigh of relief at being able to see the passage of this legislation providing for grants for universities and colleges without the requirement that fees be charged in respect of certain students.
When we were last dealing with this legislation, 1 referred to the inadequacy of the level of funding and the fact that it does not represent, as the Minister has sought to maintain, the implementation of the recommendations of the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission. It diverts from the recommendations in a significant regard, firstly, and particularly, in relation to the capital requirements and, secondly, in relation to the recurrent requirements insofar as the Government's election commitment, its extra new expenditure, has to be met from within recurrent expenditure close to that recommended by the Commission for continuing to maintain the current level of quality and quantity within universities and colleges. However, those points were canvassed on the earlier occasion and we are keen to see the speedy passage of this Bill not only through this House but through the Senate as well.

Sitting suspended from 5.59 to 8 p.m.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Fife) read a third time.
STATES GRANTS (TERTIARY EDUCATION ASSISTANCE) ,
AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1981
Bill presented by Mr Fife, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education) (8.2)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to provide for the limited reintroduction of tuition fees in tertiary education institutions in the States and the Northern Territory. The Bill specifically excludes the charging of tuition fees for students undertaking courses leading to first degrees or diplomas. It also exempts students, who commenced second degree or diploma courses before 1982, from paying fees for those courses, and it sets a maximum fee of $1000 per annum. Subject to these limitations the Bill contains a provision for the Minister to make determinations as to the circumstances in which students should be charged tuition fees or be exempt from such charges. The Bill provides as a condition of recurrent grants that institutions charge tuition fees in accordance with these arrangements and that they do not charge tuition fees in other circumstances. The Bill provides for recurrent grants scheduled in the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Bill 1981 to be offset by an amount equivalent to the money from tuition fees which those institutions will be required to charge. I commend the Bill to the House.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (8.3)-Many of the issues which are involved in the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981 were canvassed when the legislation was previously before the House as a composite part of the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Bill in its first version. The Government had intended that the grants made to the States for passing on to universities and colleges would be conditional upon the requirement that the universities and colleges charged fees in respect of certain students and at certain levels as

2884 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Tertiary Education Amendment (No.2)

the Minister determined. It is history now that the Senate jacked up on that part of the legislation. Now the Government has decided to attempt to enact those provisions separately. The Government is attempting to amend the Bill which passed this House about 30 seconds ago. If it were successful, of course, it would reinstate the original version of this Bill as it was presented earlier in this session. My guess is that when this Bill gets to the Senate it will receive the same treatment that the clauses of the earlier States grants legislation relating to this matter received a couple of weeks ago, that is the Senate will reject it. The Government will then attempt to introduce the legislation again after a period of three months. If the Senate again rejects the proposal, as I predict it will, the Government will have the first of its pieces of legislation to constitute the grounds for the calling of a double dissolution. We are not the slightest bit perplexed or daunted by that prospect. We know that the Government will not want to fight an election on this issue.
We have to go back to the last election to discover the reasons why the Government, particularly the Minister for Education (Mr Fife), ran into trouble with this proposal. The Government made certain undertakings prior to the last election in relation to tertiary tuition fees. When we consider the power of the Senate in respect of what governments want to achieve and what they put to the people at the time of elections we have to accept-I put this very forcefully-that the Senate must use its power very carefully. We in the Australian Labor Party would go much further and say that the power of the Senate in respect of a number of issues ought to be substantially truncated. To the extent that the Senate has the power and retains it, it must, in our view, use that power judiciously. Firstly, if a government puts a proposal to the electorate prior to an election I think there is an obligation on the part of the Senate, unless extraordinary circumstances intervene, not to frustrate what the government has a mandate to implement. If the government has said before the election that it intends to do things then legislates to carry out those undertakings I believe the Senate ought to pass those proposals.
There is a second category of measures, those for which the government has no mandate and which it did not mention prior to the election. In those circumstances the Senate is entitled to consider the matter on its merits. Then there is a third group of measures, those for which the government has absolutely no mandate on the basis that it undertook, prior to the election, not to implement them. It is a sort of reverse mandate. The

government may have promised not to do something and may subsequently attempt to do it after the election. It is a sort of electoral fraud. In those circumstances the Sentate is duty bound in my view to keep the government to its undertakings and force it to abandon any proposal which absolutely and directly contradicts what it said prior to the election. I refer to what the Minister said on 8 October 1980 in an article produced in the Australian newspaper. I will read one paragraph. In a prepared statement the Minister said:
There continues to be speculation about Government plans to re-introduce fees for tertiary education. I have given an assurance publicly and I repeat that assurance, that no proposals are being considered by the Government for the possible reintroduction of tertiary fees.
That is a specific undertaking. The Minister and certain other members of the Government have subsequently sought to quibble with the fine print of that paragraph. They say it did not mean that the Government would never reintroduce fees but that it did not have anything under consideration on the day the statement was made. That quibbling has to be disregarded because there is no doubt at all what meaning the Minister intended to convey in that statement. The Minister was trying to dampen and quash speculation about Government plans. That is what the first sentence referred to. The Minister stated:
There continues to be speCUlation about Government plans to reintroduce fees for tertiary education.
The Minister wanted to kill that speculation and to leave in everybody's mind the impression that the Government had no intention of reintroducing tertiary education fees. Yet it took just a few months for the Government to abrogate that promise via a decision of the Lynch Committee, the razor gang, which recommended-the Government accepted the recommendation-the partial reintroduction of tertiary tuition fees. So quite clearly the Government went to the people before the election and said that it would not do it and then a few months later said that it was going to do it. Under those circumstances the Senate not only is empowered but also has a duty to keep the Government honest in respect of those sorts of undertakings which it gives prior to an election. I repeat that that is the main reason why the Government has run into trouble on this measure. However, the proposal itself can be opposed on its merits regardless of whether there was this problem of the breaching of an election undertaking.
In the first instance, the proposal intends to reintroduce fees for post-graduate students, higher degree students and second degree students; that is certain categories of students who are not exempt. This proposal, if enacted, would strike

Tertiary Education Amendment (No.2)

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2885

quite directly at the heart of the research effort carried on in universities and colleges around Australia, but more particularly in universities. That research effort has already been greatly affected by the reduction in funds over a period of years in relation to general research funding which has been made available by this Government through a variety of sources. It has to be acknowledged that post-graduate students are central to the research effort of universities. They are the ones who are responsible for very much of the research effort. Even if the research itself is directed by full time members of the university community, the post-graduate students are fundamentally important to the carrying out of that research.
As well as that, this proposal represented a quite specific penalty directed at anyone who had the nerve or gall to undertake any sort of postgraduate education to get a second degree. Those classes of student were selected for this specific penalty of up to $1,000 a year. The quaint thing about it was that those people who had some measure, inadequate as it is, of public, university or college support by way of post-graduate awards were not to be charged the fees, and those who had no public support were to be specifically penalised in this way. It really is impossible to justify that sort of approach and to impose that sort of penalty on that quite specific, quite limited group of students. There is no question at all that it would have had a severe impact on the level of enrolments next year in those courses to which the fees apply.
It has been impossible to obtain any idea, in direct terms, of what the effect on enrolments might have been quite simply because the universities, at least in relation to post-graduate students, are the ones more particularly involved and their enrolment figures are not available until early next year. In any event, one suspects that because of the impending imposition of these fees a lot of people would have enrolled late this year in courses which they intended to undertake next year in order to escape the imposition of the fees because, as the Government made it clear, there was no intention to apply the fees to those people who were already enrolled. So it may have been in this first year that the effect of enrolments would not have been all that severe for that reason-that is for next year-but in succeeding years there is no question that in respect of those who were required to pay the fees it would have been quite substantial.
The point that we particularly took exception to was that the Government was quite clearly trying to re-establish the principle of fees. It always

has been keen. There is a very active and noisy group on the back bench in this House and in the Senate which is desperately keen to see university fees and college fees reintroduced for the undergraduate level as well as the post-graduate level. The numbers are variously estimated at anything from 20 to 30, which makes the group a quite sizable and influential minority within the Government ranks. This measure, partial as it was, was a sort of a sop to those people to keep them happy until such time as the Government could extend, when political circumstances might have been more favourable, to include undergraduate students as vvell.
The Minister can say for as long as he likes that there was no intention to reintroduce fees for undergraduate students, but the Minister unfortunately has to live with the fact that his word after the last election is no longer reliable and nobody believes a word he says. He broke a promise made at the last election and no one will believe him ever again. I suspect that that is why he will not be in this portfolio for very much longer. He will be off to other pastures where he can make new commitments and break those commitments subsequently.
The members of the noisy group on the Government back benches have constructed very elaborate arguments about the importance of the user-payer principle in relation to higher education. They argue that the benefits from higher education accrue to the community and to the individual and, therefore, there should be a contribution from both in respect of the cost of providing that education. At the same time they go to great and windy lengths to indicate there is a great bias in terms of the socio-economic composition of the university population. They point to the fact that the university and college populations consist of the sons and daughters who substantially come from the wealthier part of the community. They seem to ignore the fact that the im" position of fees will do absolutely nothing to improve that situation, but rather will exacerbate the problem to make universities and colleges more and more the preserve of the sons and daughters of the rich. They have made no attempt to demonstrate how the imposition of fees will create one extra place for somebody not already enrolled in a college or university.
The second point which they seem to assume erroneously is that Australia already has enough enrolments in the higher education area. We heard an even less elegant version of this argument from Senator Harradine a few nights ago.

2886 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Tertiary Education Amendment (No.2)

Senator Harradine in the end supported the Australian Labor Party and the Australian Democrats in knocking out this fee proposal, but he spent a lot of time during that debate frothing at the mouth about how this had something to do with the fact that it made it easier and easier for a whole lot of bludgers to clog up the universities to the exclusion of kids from middle and lower income families. Somehow these people who were sitting around, in his words, doing their fourth and fifth degrees were denying places to kids from families headed by service station proprietors and the like. He went on at great length.
In the first case Senator Harradine, and I suspect others, labour under a huge delusion. It is no picnic hanging around a university with no public support. It has to be recognised that anybody doing a second qualification gets no Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme allowance, no scholarship and no public support at all. People are not entitled to social security benefits if they are involved in full time education. So anybody who is involved in doing a second qualification
either has to have substantial private means or must be extraordinarily determined to undertake that course at a huge private cost. Whilst students may not have to pay fees, they certainly have to support themselves during the undertaking of that course. As well as that, this whole argument, the whole user-pays argument, the whole reference to the bias in terms of the university population, ignores certain important facts; that is, if we are concerned about access to tertiary education we should ensure that everybody who qualifies for tertiary entrance should be allowed to proceed regardless of their economic circumstances. It was that problem which exercised the mind of my predecessor in Fremantle, the Labor Minister for
Education, Mr Beazley. He talked about bringing in a revolution of access through the introduction of the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme. He understood the problem. He understood that the statistics were very unfavourable. Even today something like 18 per cent of the university and college population come from 5 per cent of the most wealthy families in the country, while another 18 per cent come from the poorest 50 per cent of the families in this country. He set about trying to correct that distortion, and quite rightly so. What he did was to try to improve the financial support which was available to those people who had qualified but who, for economic reasons, under the old arrangements were not able to undertake a tertiary education. What honourable members on the other side of the House fail to address themselves to is the question of how the imposition of fees would do anything but exacerbate

the sort of distortion which we set out to try to correct.
This also raises the question of the overall participation rates in higher eduction. What we have seen is a shift, a reduction, in the full time enrolments in colleges and universities over the last few years. There has been a fall of about 20 per cent in the number of kids who are going straight from school to full time education in universities and colleges. That is a matter of great concern to us and it should be a matter of great concern to the Government as well. In 1974, about 18 per cent of kids who finished their final year of secondary school went straight on to university or to college but now that number is down to about 14.5 per cent. That is a substantial fall in just five or six years and it is something which we ought to be concerned about. In that regard I quote a few lines from the most recent report of the Tertiary Education Commission. The Commission, in referring to the fact that one of the reasons which the Commission identifies as the cause of this problem is the inadequacy of student financial assistance, says:
In the context of changes to the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme (TEAS) and the introduction of a loans scheme, the Commission believes that it should draw the matter again to the attention of the Government. Both the increasing pace of technological change and the fall in the number of full-time jobs for teenagers make it important that able young men and women avail themselves of educational or training opportunities. A decline of one-fifth in the participation of young people in higher education is surely a matter for community concern. It runs contrary to Government policies relating to technological change and to transition from school to adult life. It raises questions about Australia's long-term capacity to meet the challenges ahead of it.
When we couple those statements with the fact that more and more kids are dropping out of school earlier and earlier and therefore not even getting to the starting gate in terms of entrance to tertiary education, we really see the magnitude of the problem beginning to unfold before us. That is why we are so adamant that the question of fees should not proceed, that it is a matter which ought to be rejected on principle. We are deeply concerned about access to tertiary education. We are deeply concerned about improving participation rates in tertiary education. We are concerned about seeing kids from poorer families staying at school longer so that they get a chance to get to universities and colleges and that when they get to the starting gate they have sufficient financial support to ensure that they actually proceed with that education. Mr Deputy Speaker, I have mentioned to the Minister that I want to incorporate in Hansard a small section from the Tertiary Education Commission report. I now formally seek leave to have it incorporated.

Tertiary Education Amendment (No.2)

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2887

Leave granted. The document read as follows-

Fulltime

Parttime

Externa1

Total

PARTICIPATION IN HIGHER EDUCATION
1.10 Table 1.3 sets out student numbers in higher education from 1974 to 1981. Total enrolments have continued to grow over the whole period, although the rate of growth has slowed in the last few years. There has, however, been a major shift from full-time to part-time and external study. Not only have full-time enrolments declined as a proportion of total enrolments (from 63.5 per cent in 1974 to 53.2 per cent in 1981), but over the past four years they have declined in absolute terms: there are now nearly 12,000fewer full-time enrolments than there were in 1977.
Table 1.3
STUDENT NUMBERS IN HIGHER EDUCATION, AUSTRALIA, 1974 TO 1981 ('000)

Fulltime

Parttime

External

Total

1974

159.9

76.3

15.4

251.6

1975

173.0

81.1

17.3

271.4

1976

182.7

86.7

18.7

288.1

1977

187.3

90.5

20.4

298.2

1978
1979 1980 1981 (P)

184.9 180.4 176.3 175.7

98.6
105.8 112.6 116.1

25.9

309.3

30.2

316.4

35.2

324.0

38.7

330.S

(P) Preliminary.
1.11 The decline in full-time enrolments has been associated with a reduction in the participation of young people in higher education and a substantial increase in the enrolment of older people, particularly as part-time or external students. The decline in the participation of the young is clearly illustrated in Table 1.4, which gives numbers of students, by sex, commencing higher education direct from school, and the proportion they bear to the 17 year old population. In absolute terms, there has been a decline of nearly 4,000 between 1977 and 1981. As a proportion of the agegroup, the numbers declined steadily from 1974 to 1980; for 1981 they are about the same as for 1980, that is, about one-fifth less than they were in 1974. If the proportion has been maintained at the 1974 level, in 1981 there would have been about 8,500 more young people enrolling at universities and CAEs direct from school. The decline has occurred for both males and females, although it has been greater, absolutely and relatively, for males.

Table 1.4
STUDENTS COMMENCING COURSES AT UNIVERSITIES AND COLLEGES OF ADVANCED EDUCATION(a) DIRECT FROM SCHOOL, BY SEX, 1974 TO 1981

Number

As a proportion of previous year 17-year-old population --

Males

Females

Persons

Males

Females

Persons

1974
1975 1976
1977 1978 1979 1980
1981 (P)

'000

'000

'000

Per cent

Percent

Percent

21.8

20.1

41.9

18.3

17.6

17.9

21.4

20.7

42.1

17.7

17.6

17.7

21.S

20.5

41.9

17.2

17.0

17.1

21.3

20.6

41.9

16.6

16.8

16.7

20.3

20.0

40.3

IS.7

16.2

15.9

19.9

20.2

40.1

14.8

15.9

15.3

19.1

19.1.

38.2

14.1

14.9

14.S

19.1

19.0

38.1

14.2

14.9

14.6

(a) Excludes advanced education courses conducted at TAFE institutions. (P) Preliminary.

1.12 In Volume 1 (Part 1, paragraph 9.IS) the Commission indicated its concern with the decline in the participation of the young in higher education. In the context of changes to the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme (TEAS) and the introduction of a loans scheme, the Commission believes that it should draw the matter again to the attention of the Government. Both the increasing pace of technological change and the fall in the number of full-time jobs for teenagers make it important that able young men and women avail themselves of educational or training opportunities. A decline of one-fifth in the participation of young people in higher education is surely a matter for community concern. It runs contrary to Government policies rdating to technological change and to transition from school to adult life. It raises questions about Australia's long-term capacity to meet the challenges ahead of it.
1.13 As pointed out in Volume I (Part I, paragraphs 2.30 and 2.31), the decline in the participation of young people in higher education appears to be related partly to their assessment of the benefits of higher education and partly to the

availability of financial support for full-time study. The latter is a matter for Commonwealth Government policy. Since 1975 a major source of support for undergraduates, namely the teacher training scholarships awarded by State education departments, has been virtually eliminated. Moreover, the real value of grants under TEAS has been eroded by inflation and the real severity of the means test increased. The.reversal of the downwards trend in the participation of the young will, at the least, require improved financial assistance to students. One possible way of achieving this is through a loans scheme. The Government has announced its intention to introduce such a scheme; this may increase access to higher education, although its impact will depend on the availability of credit, the conditions under which loans are made, and the arrangements for repayment.
1.14 In Volume I (Part I, paragraph 7.IS) the Commission supported the charging of fees for n-on-award courses; the Commission, therefore, does not argue against the charging of fees for courses of a continuing education nature. However, the Commission is concerned that the Government's decision

2888 REPRESENTATIYES 17 November 1981

Tertiary Education Amendment (No, 2)

that tuition fees should be charged for second and higher de-
grees runs counter to the Commission's support for increased
emphasis on enrolments for higher degrees in universities (Volume I, Part I, paragraph 9.16). Existing financial assistance for higher degree students is now seen by many to be in-
adequate. The situation could be improved if revenue from fees were used to increase support for higher degree students.

Mr DAWKINS-I thank the House,

Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (8,25)-Mr Deputy Speaker--

Motion (by Mr Hodges) put:

That the question be now put.

The House divided,

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr p, C. Millar)

Ayes

63

Noes

43

Majority

20

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Baume,M. E. Birney, R. J. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaile, R. A. Brown,N.A. Durr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D. B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J.D.M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Hall, Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. e. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M. Jarman. A. W.

Jull,D.F.
Katter, R.C.
Killen,D.J. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip
MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie,A.J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T.
Macphee, t. M. Moore,J.e.
O'Keefe, F. L.
Peacock, A. S. Porler,J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C.
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P.D. Shipton, R. F.
Sinclair, t. Mce.
Spender, J, M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W.
Viner, R. t.
White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. e.
Blewett,N. Bowen. Lionel Brown,lohn Brown, Robert
Campbell,G. Cass,M. H. Charles, D. E.
Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross,M.D.
Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. DuffY,M.J. Everingham, D. N, Free, R. V.

NOES

Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A.
Keating, P. J. Kelly, R. R.
Kent, L. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morrison, W. L.
Mountford, J. G. (Teller) Scholes,G. G. D. Scott, J. L.
Theophanous, A. e. Uren, T. Wallis, L.G.

Fry,K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B. L.

NOES

West,S.J. Willis,R. Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Bourchier,J. W.

Johnson, Les

Question SO resolved in the affirmative,

Original question put:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

The House divided,

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr p, C, Millar)

Ayes

65

Noes

43

Majority
AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bradfield,J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. 8rown,N.A. Burr,M. A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Jan Cariton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Hall, Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J.M. Jarman, A. W.

22
Jull,D. F. Katter, R. C. Killen,D.J. Lloyd, B. Lusher,S.A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar,M.J.R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, l. M. Moore,J.e. Nixon, P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R.l. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. e.

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert
Campbell,G. Cass, M. H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham. D. N. Free, R. V. Fry,K. L.

NOES

Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J.
Kent. L. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. (Teller) Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren,T. Wallis,L. G. West,S.J.

National University Bill (No.3)

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2889

Hawke. R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B. L.

NOES

Willi"R. Young, M.J.

PAIRS

Bourchier,J. W.

Johnson, Les

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Fife) read a third time.

AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1981
Bill returned from the Senate with amendments.
Ordered that the amendments be considered in Committee forthwith.

In Committee
Consideration of Senate's amendments.
Senate's amendments-
No. I-Page 2, clause 4, paragraph (b), leave out the paragraph.
No.2-Pages 2 to 4, clause 5,Ieave out the clause.
No.3-Page 4, clause 6,Ieave out the clause.
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education) (8.36)-1 move:
That the amendments be agreed to.
The Government is prepared to accept the Bill as amended, It contains provisions to clarify the distinction between undergraduate and postgraduate students in the election of student representatives to the University Council and to enable the University to recognise certain persons who have undertaken studies in other institutions. These amendments were requested by the university and the Government wishes to see them enacted without further delay. However, 1 foreshadow again that following the completion of the House's consideration of this Bill, I will introduce a further Bill to provide for the limited reintroduction of tuition fees at the Australian National University, similar to what has been proposed for universities in the States.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (8.37)-The amendments which the Government is accepting are essentially those amendments which were moved by the Opposition in the Senate to the Australian National University Amendment Bill. For that reason we do not oppose the amendments.
Amendments agreed to.

Resolution reported; report adopted.
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY AMENDMENT BILL (No.3) 1981
Bill presented by Mr Fife, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education) (8.40)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to provide for the limited re-introduction of tuition fees at the Australian National University. The principles involved in this Bill are the same as those in the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981. 1 commend the Bill to the House.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (8.41)-We are all struck with a quaint sense of deja vu because the House has just rejected these propositions and and they are now being represented to us. We are now being asked to agree to proposals which the Government has just acknowledged should not be enacted In this legislation. It is a charade which the Government wants to go through because it recognises that it cannot get through the Senate i1 proposal for which it has no mandate and a proposal which it specifically promised it would not attempt to enact. This proposal relates to the Australian National University which, unlike all other universities in this country, is a legislative responsibility of this Parliament, set up by this Parliament and therefore its statutes can be amended by this Parliament along the lines of this sort of legislation. Of course, for reasons which J went into when a similar Bill was before this House and for reasons which were elaborated on in the Senate by an Opposition spokesman, we will oppose the Australian National University Amendment Bill (No.3) 1981.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (8.42)-1 take advantage of this occasion to raise a couple of arguments that 1 would have.raised on the previolls Bill-the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Bill had 1 had an opportunity, but as this Bill contains the same principle that opportunity is presented to me now. 1 am sorry that these measures are being dragged through the House in the way in which they are because they are being made the basis, in announcements by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm F~aser), of the possibility of a double dissolution, 1 would have thought that, before the country was put through that trauma, some sort of explanation might be offered as to why it should be. No explanation has been offered here to this point. 1 am concerned that, in the general

2890 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

National University Bill (No.3)

community, there may be an impression that what has been happening to this Government in the Senate on the Australian National University Amendment Bill (No.3) (1981) and other Bills is similar to what happened to the Australian Labor Party when it was in office between 1972 and 1975. The circumstances are, of course, completely different.
In 1972-75 we had a government in office which sought to enact a program which it had obtained a mandate from the people to enact. Approximately 80 Bills were either rejected or severely amended during that period by the Liberal National Country Party majority in the Senate. On this occasion we have a piece of legislation for which no mandate has been sought. Indeed a reverse mandate, if I can put it that way, has been
given because the Government gave undertakings not to introduce fees. Nevertheless it has proceeded to do so. It is a very sad reflection, I think, on the quality of the relationship between this Government and the electorate that it should have seen fit to do that.
I make one or two other points which relate to the Australian National University. I can make them more directly on the ANU because it has the particular courses to which I wish to refer. I think that the Government, having decided that it wishes to proceed to the point where a double dissolution is threatened on this matter, has to present an argument to the Australian people that this is a weighty and sufficient issue to go to that expense and trauma. A reasoned analysis of this proposition suggests that this is nothing of the sort. In the first place this Bill in particular and the other one passed today raises negligible revenue. At the very best it would not be 40 per cent of one day's expenditure on education in Australia and it would probably raise much less. In the second place, it imposes a regressive burden on poor students. Pious statements have been made that what we have to do with this legislation is make people pay for the education that they are receiving but of course some people will pay and others will not.
For example, consider the case of a business student at the ANU who is doing a Master of Business Administration. That business student will now be obliged to pay, if this legislation goes through, $1,000 a year in fees. Let us assume that that business student, as is most likely, is a government employee or a businessman. That person will be able to relate that fee to efforts made to expand his earning capacity related directly to his job. The Taxation Commissioner will permit a tax deduction. The MBA student will therefore be able to claim, if he is on an income of $25,000 or

$30,000 a year, at least $500. Therefore, $500 will be all that that student pays. The same situation
applies to a lawyer who is seeking to do a Master of Laws degree. Such a student if he is a lawyer on
a similar sort of income will be able to make pre-
cisely that sort of claim. However, this will not apply to a person who seeks to move on in
qualifications from a Bachelor of Arts degree to a
Master of Arts degree if that person has been funding his own education through university on
the basis of a part time role in the work force and
a part time role in the university. Very consider-
able damage will be suffered by such a person be-
cause a tax deduction will not be open to him and
he will be living on pittances and will be obliged to pay an extra $1,000.

The Government has not looked into the ques-
tion of tax deductibility of these fees and the im-
pact of that on the revenue that it will raise from it. I know that the Government has not done this
because I asked a question in the appropriate esti-
mates committee as to whether it had. I was told
that the Government had not considered that matter. A very important element of equity in this
proposal-this most inequitable proposal-has not even been considered by the Government and
that I think is a scandalous situation. The prop-
osition hits at the very heart of the voluntary reseach effort in the Australian community, in
this legislation the voluntary research effort in
Canberra. Let there be' no doubt whatsoever
about that.

Whether a person has to pay for his education
has an impact on whether he or she will go to university. There is precious little research published
on this matter by the Government. One would have thought that it would have made some effort to do something, given that it was introducing this
legislation. However in its recent publication,
'Studies of Tertiary Student Finances', something does come out. Several pieces of research, which
have been done at Government expense and pri-
vately, have revealed substantial numbers of students who are dropping out of tertiary edu-
cation for financial reasons. One of the principle
categories, this report states, is:

Students of mature age, possibly married, highly motivated

but finding it difficult to meet their long-term financial

commitments.

'

Unquestionably, those sorts of students will find
themselves even more damaged. A student, who enters university or a College of Advanced Education on the basis of a mature judgment, will be the student who will find himself or herself disadvantaged and excluded from the education process.

This report concludes with the statement:

Social Sevices Amendment Bill (No.3)

17 November 1981 REPRESENT ATIVES 2891

In summary this section has presented a review of recent literature and research (primarily Australian) related to the importance of financial factors as an influence on student progress in tertiary education. The studies demonstrate that financial factors are of some importance to progress in tertiary education. But there is clearly a need for more research in order to investigate the types of students whose progress is most likely to be affected by financial factors, and the ways in which insufficient finance contributes to the decision of these students to withdraw from tertiary education.
Throughout this report there is no assumption that students withdraw on the basis of inability. They withdraw on the basis of inadequate finance. This Government really ought to have done some work on that matter before it introduced this legislation.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Mr Dawkins-With your indulgence, Mr Deputy Speaker, I indicate that we will not divide on this measure as we divided earlier on a similar one, but that is not to be taken as an indication that our opposition is in any way attenuated.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Fife) read a third time.
STANDING COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION
Motion (by Mr Fife on behalf of Mr Sinclair) agreed to:
(I) That if the House is not sitting when the Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation has completed its inquiry into the transport and disposal of hazardous waste, the Committee may send its report to Mr Speaker or, in the absence of Mr Speaker, to the Chairman of Committees, who is authorised to give directions for its printing and circulation.
(2) That the foregoing provision of this resolution, so far as it is inconsistent with the Standing Orders, have effect notwithstanding anything contained in the Standing Orders.
SOCIAL SERVICES AMENDMENT BILL (No.3) 1981
Bill presented by Mr Hunt, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) (8.52)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Honourable members will be aware that clauses precluding spouses of persons involved in industrial action from receiving unemployment and special benefit were deleted by the Government from the Social Services Amendment Bill 1981 during its passage through the Parliament. This was done pursuant to a request of the Senate, not

because the Government agreed with the request, but to prevent delay in the passage of the remainder of that Bill which, inter alia, authorised the payment of additional unemployment benefit to single beneficiaries aged 18 years and over. In deleting those clauses, the Government announced that fresh legislation containing those provisions would be introduced at the first available opportunity. This Bill introduces those provisions.
Before October 1979, the Social Services Act precluded payment of unemployment benefit to a person who was a direct participant in a strike. However, it enabled unemployment benefit to be paid at the 'married' rate to the spouse of a person ineligible for unemployment benefit on those grounds. The Act was subsequently amended to provide that unemployment benefit payable to the spouse of a person engaged in industrial action was to be at the 'single' rate. A further amendment precluded payment of special benefit to a person who, because of industrial action, was not qualified to receive unemployment benefit.
This Bill now proposes that, for so long as a person's spouse is disqualified from receiving unemployment benefit because of involvement in industrial action; or unwillingness to undertake suitable work; or failure to take reasonable steps to obtai'n such work, that person will also be ineligible for unemployment benefit. Additionally, persons will be ineligible for unemployment benefit for so long as payment of that benefit to their spouses is postponed because of their misconduct as a worker, because they have become voluntarily unemployed or because they have failed to accept an offer of suitable employment.
Consistent with this approach, special benefit will also be withheld from persons not eligible for unemployment benefit in these circumstances. The Government has decided, however, that if a person is precluded from receiving unemployment benefit and special benefit, in a case of extreme hardship and where there are no other means of support, his or her spouse may be eligible for special benefit at the single rate, with additional benefit for any children.
We are not here concerned to discuss the merits of strike action as contrasted with other means open to employees in dispute with their employers to resolve these disputes. What we are concerned with is how the cost of strike action is to be borne. The Government holds strongly to the belief that these provisions should become law. In the case of the provisions relating to industrial action, we do not believe that Australian taxpayers should be

2892 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Social Sevices Amendment Bill (No.3)

asked to subsidise strike action through the social welfare system.
Trade unions choosing to take such action make a free decision to strike. If they choose to take such action, they should bear the consequences of their action, not the tax-paying community. Trade unions cannot expect, in those circumstances, that the rest of the community will pick up the bill for the support of the families of members of the trade union involved in the strike. The legislation as it stands at the moment permits a situation where trade unions can choose to strike, knowing that through the operation of the social security system their members can be largely insulated from the financial effects of their actions.
Unless frivolously or maliciously entered into, the object of a strike is to obtain, by the exercise of economic pressure directed against the employer, a benefit for those who take such action. As a result, the benefit sought is itself economic, such as increased pay, a shorter working week, or special allowances. Not infrequently, strikes are settled on a basis that effectively compensates those who have gone on strike for pay lost during the duration of the strike. The point to be emphasised is that to strike is an exercise in freedom of choice. It is one taken by the membership of a union to promote its own interests and only its own interests. It is taken against the interests of the employer and, what is directly relevant to this Bill, it is one which is not taken in the interests of the community as a whole.
Indeed, the effect of strike action is often in conflict with the interests of the community as a whole or some part of it. Frequently, the community suffers as a result of strike action. This may be reflected simply in inconvenience or in terms of direct economic cost. Furthermore, in a larger sense, it may be said that in the longer term the community always suffers as the cumulative result of the strike action is to decrease the availability of goods and services, and sometimes to do great damage to particular sectors of the economy, or to particular employers. These matters need only to be mentioned to make clear the absurdity of any argument that benefits should be paid to strikers or their families, and should be paid by the community at large. For it is the community at large that provides through taxation the funds from which strikers are presently paid the benefits that this Bill proposes to eliminate.
There have been numerous cases where the wives of strikers, who have appeared to have no genuine intention of joining the work force themselves, have registered for work in places such as

mining and construction towns where there is no real possibility of employment for them. This has enabled them, under the existing legislation, to obtain unemployment benefit, and so transfer to the taxpayer some of the real cost of the industrial action taken by their husbands. So, the Australian pUblic'is attacked from two directions. First, it has to bear the personal disruptions, inconveniences and associated costs that result from the strike. In addition, it is then called upon to meet the cost of providing income support for the families of those involved in the strike.
To act to correct this situation is not to 'punish' the families of strikers but to ensure that people accept the financial consequences of their own actions and do not look to the rest of the community to bear the costs. Similarly, there is no good reason why the community should automatically and immediately be expected to assume the normal financial responsibilities of people who are not willing to work, who voluntarily and without good reason give up their job or who are dismissed through their own misconduct. This is happening at present because the spouses of such people can register for employment in their own right and, if they are unable to obtain employment, can claim unemployment benefit both for themselves and their 'dependent' spouses. We believe that whether people refuse to work because of industrial action or whether, in some other way, they show themselves unwilling to enter or remain in the work force, there is no reason why the rest of the community should shoulder their financial responsibilities. This Bill prevents them from manipulating the social security system to shift the consequences of their actions. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.
SOCIAL SERVICES AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1981
Bill-by leave-presented by Mr Hunt, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) (9.2)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Honourable members will be aware that the Social Services Amendment Act 1981 extended the scope of the double orphans' pensions provisions in the Social Services Act 1947 to enable those pensions to be paid to persons having the custody, care and the control of refugee children who are admitted to Australia where the parents of those children are outside Australia, or the

Air Traffic Services Centre, Perth

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2893

whereabouts of the parents of those children are unknown.
A technical, but important, defect has been found in the definition of 'refugee child' in the legislation and this Bill will amend that definition to cover all children the Government considers should fall within the extent provisi011S. The existing legislation defines 'refugee child' in terms of a child granted refugee status by the Australian Government. There are, however, children who are admitted into Australia as refugees who do not have the formal status of refugee granted to them. The Government intends these children to fall within the class of children in respect of whom double orphans' pensions are payable. In addition, there are children admitted into Australia otherwise than as refugees, under special humanitarian programs, whom the Government considers should be regarded as within the class of children in respect of whom double orphans' pensions should be payable. I am sure that honourable members will share the Government's concern that the double orphans' pension provisions be extended in respect of those groups of children who came to Australia whose parents are outside Australia or the whereabouts of whose parents are unknown. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.
NEW AIR TRAFFIC SERVICES CENTRE AND CONTROL TOWER, PERTH AIRPORT
Approval of Work: Public Works Committee Act
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (9.4)-1 move:
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following elements of the work known as the construction of new air traffic services centre and control tower, Perth Airport, Western Australia, which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the Committee has duly reported to Parliament: Air traffic services operations building, technical maintenance centre, radio equipment building and services building.
The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works has recommended the construction of these elements which are estimated to cost $2.7m. The Committee recommends also that a start on the construction of the control tower element estimated to cost a further $O.9m be delayed pending completion of a master plan for the Perth Airport. The Government notes the Committee's intention to report further on this element and its siting in the light of the completed master plan. These conclusions are acceptable to the Government and a start on the control tower will accordingly be deferred although detailed planning of

the tower to minimise potential delays will continue in accordance with the Committee's recommendation.
The Committee has further recommended that discussions with the Western Australian Government should be re-opened with a view to setting up the Western Australian Airfields Committee within six months. The Commonwealth will move to re-open these discussions as recommended. Finally the Committee recommends that the Department of Transport should re-examine the public parking at the airport to ensure it is compatible with peak loads. This recommendation also will be implemented. If the House agrees to support this motion planning can proceed in accordance with the recommendations of the Committee.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (9.6)-1 have sought to intervene in this debate very briefly as the representative for the area in which the work is to be done. As I understand it the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) seeks approval to proceed only with the work approved by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and not that which the Committee recommended be held over until a master plan for the development of Perth Airport is produced. 1 think the Minister's statement is to be welcomed on that basis. I welcome also his statement that the Commonwealth Government intends to pursue the establishment of the Western Australian Airfields Committee. I understand that the Commonwealth Government and the Department of Transport have not been the problem in establishing that Committee; it has been the State Government that has resisted its establishment. No blame is to be attached to the Commonwealth Government for its not being created hitherto.
The Public Works Committee's recommendation followed substantial input and appearances before it by local authorities in my area and a number of local members of parliament including myself. 1 think an explanation is appropriate here as to why we sought delays in the construction of a new control tower-delays which the Minister has accepted. In the first place there is substantial concern in my constituency that no major construction which might pre-empt some options on future airport developments should be undertaken prior to a full consideration of those options in a master plan for the future development of the airport. This master plan was promised to the local authorities in my area as a result of recommendations published in 1979 by a joint committee consisting of representatives of Commonwealth, State and local governments in

2894 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Air Traffic Services Centre, Perth

the area. It has yet to emerge though it is apparently being rushed through the process now.
The control tower related to these considerations because that which has been proposed by the Department of Transport and the Department of Housing and Construction would be unsuitable for one of the options under consideration in a master plan. I refer to the construction of a wide-spaced runway parallel to the present north-south runway. For this latter development to proceed an additional control tower to the one currently under consideration would have to be constructed at considerable expense to the Commonwealth. The local authorities in my area, particularly the Belmont Shire Council and the Canning City Council have put forward excellently argued propositions pointing out the very substantial number of additional houses that would be affected by airport-related noise and environmental pollution if the parallel runway option is not to proceed. It is very important that we keep faith with those authorities as they have, by associating themselves with the 1979 Joint Committee report, taken the unusual step of moving beyond the expected stolid opposition to the presence of the airport in their area to accepting it under certain conditions jointly agreed with the Commonwealth. There are not too many local authorities around Australia that, given the opportunity to argue a case for the removal of an airport, would actually come to those conclusions. That makes keeping faith with them very important.
One of the related considerations which must affect the timing of when the control tower should proceed concerns the question of compensation. Given that the control tower as proposed obviates any immediate development of a north-south parallel runway, another promise of the Joint Committee comes to mind; that is, the Joint Committee argued that, if a properly considered master plan recommended on economic grounds that the parallel runway should not proceed, the residents should be paid compensation to insulate their homes. The Department of Transport has written to the councils asking them to research the environmental impact of the usage of the airport in their area, I hope that this is not a blind but a prelude to legislation for compensation. I hope also that we will not see the master plan rushed through in an ad hoc fashion to accommodate early construction of the tower and later the new international terminal. The Minister's acceptance of the Public Works Committee's recommendations would be made a mockery of were that the case.

As I said, I welcome the Minister's acceptance of the recommendations. I welcome the other announcements made by the Minister and the fact that the Government is now consulting with the local authorities on the question of compensation. I hope that we will jointly achieve a development that is satisfactory to all the parties concernedthe users and neighbours of the airport.
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (9.11)-in reply-I am grateful for those comments. They appeared to be very practical ones. I will draw them to the attention of the Minister for Transport (Mf Hunt) for use on the appropriate occasion. I think it is always good when local members show an intelligent interest in what is going on in their electorates and bring matters of concern to the local people to the attention of the appropriate authorities.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
REDEVELOPMENT OF BRISBANE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT
Approyal of Work: Public Works Committee Act
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (9.12)-1 move:
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Commillee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the Committee has duly reported to Parliament, namely: Redevelopment of Brisbane International Airport-Further dredging and reclamation.
The proposal is for the execution of further sand dredging and site reclamation associated with the balance of phase one works, including the provision of a cross runway and general aviation areas. In reporting favourably on the proposal the Committee has made certain other recommendations and comments. The Committee indicated that it holds serious doubts as to the quality of the planning co-ordination between the Department of Transport technical divisions involved and was critical of the failure by the Department of Transport during 1979 to perceive the evident major disadvantages in the simultaneous operation of the two airports at Brisbane. Although there is no doubt that the two airports could be operated together, it was only during the design development stage during 1980 that some earlier assumptions regarding operating and equipment costs were found to be too low and the full costs of such an operation were realised. The Department of Transport moved immediately to rectify the situation and proposed to the Government in June 1980 that a cross wind runway should be provided and the existing airport closed when the redeveloped airport is commissioned.

Brisbane International Airport

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2895

The Committee also concluded that a completion date of 1986 rather than 1990 for the full phase one works has not yet been clearly justified and went on to state that evidence to be put before the Committee on the remainder of phase one must provide such a justification. The Government commitment is to a 1986 commissioning date for the redeveloped airport. The Committee noted in its report that aircraft noise disturbance will be removed from 3,500 houses at that time. The Government is keen to take advantage of this noise reduction at the earliest opportunity in the interests of the people living in the noise affected area and this is one of the many benefits to be derived from the 1986 target commissioning date.
While the Committee has noted that it was satisfied with the broad master plan concept, it expressed concern that the public information program did not provide information on the master plan as put before the Committee. The public information program referred to was directed at the provision of the cross runway and hence did not cover the aspect of the full airport master plan layout. The basic airport master plan was first shown to the public in the media in 1971 and has been demonstrated on many occasions since. The Department of Housing and Construction and the Department of Transport are about to open a public information centre on the airport site and I can assure the House that the airport master plan forms part of the display in that centre.
The Committee suggests that the Department of Housing and Construction monitor the effects of dredging on the environment and on fishing and prawning. Such monitoring is being carried out and will continue. The estimated cost of the proposed work examined by the Committee was $16m at February 1981 prictls. The Committee recommended construction of the work in the reference. If the House agrees to support this motion, detailed planning can proceed in accordance with the recommendations of the Committee.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
CONSTRUCTION OF WORKING, LIVING AND AREA FACILITIES, WATSONIA, VICTORIA
Approval of Work: Public Works Committee Act
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (9.15)-1 move:
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which

the committee has duly reported to Parliament, namely: Construction of working, living and area facilities for Army and Navy personnel at Watsonia, Victoria.
The works will comprise: Working facilities for 126 Signals Squadron; refurbishment of two accommodation blocks; extensions to the dental centre; extensions to a kitchen and dining room; working facilities for the School of Music including renovation of an existing building; and provision of fitness training facilities including gymnasium extensions and sporting facilities.
The estimated cost of the work when examined by the Committee was $5m. The Committee has recommended construction of the work in the reference. If the House agrees to support this motion, detailed planning can proceed in accordance with the recommendations of the Committee.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
UPGRADING OF AIRPORT FACILITIES FOR WIDE-BODY AIRCRAFT
Approval of Work: Public Works Committee Act
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (9.17)-1 move:
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following proposed work which was referred to-the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which the Committee has duly reported to Parliament, namely: Upgrading of airport facilities for the introduction of domestic wide-body aircraft at the Coolangatta, Melbourne, Perth and Sydney airports.
The works to be provided by the Commonwealth will include, where necessary, alteration and expansion of terminal facilities; strengthening and extension of runway, taxiway and apron pavements; and associated engineering works. The Committee has reported favourably on the works proposed at the four locations I have mentioned and has recommended the construction of these works at the total estimated cost of $12.85m at August 1981 prices. In the original motion of 27 August 1981 the House referred to the Committee proposed works at six airports. The Committee has reported on four locations and the two remaining proposals at Adelaide and Hobart will be the subject of a later report. These two works are estimated to cost $1O.5m.
In paragraph 15/17 of its report, the Committee expresses some concern that five urgent works totalling $6.08m were commenced in 1980-81 to provide for the initial services for the new aircraft. The Committee feels that Parliament should be advised of the reason for what it suggests was a decision to by-pass the Committee. There was no conscious decision to by-pass the Committee but rather, as the works were urgently

2896 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Facilitiesfor Wide-body Aircraft

required at five different airports, each of which was estimated to cost less than $2m, they were commenced under the normal programming arrangements. Nonetheless, I take note of the Committee's observations. If the House agrees to support this motion, planning may proceed in accordance with the recommendations of the Committee.
Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh) (9.19)-1 thank the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) for giving me the opportunity to make a few comments. Obviously, the reference to the Adelaide Airport is one that concerns me and my constituents. I wish just briefly to refer to the Public Works Committee hearing that was set down for 19 October in Canberra. I attended with the intention of making submissions on the question of the extensions to Adelaide Airport but those submissions were so extensive that consideration of them was deferred until a hearing that has now been set down for 3 December in Adelaide. That meeting, of course, has not yet been held.
I direct the attention of the House to three particular matters: Firstly, to certain answers to questions about the Adelaide Airport given by the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) in Estimates Committee D on 17 September; secondly, to a statement by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) on 11 November of this year; and, thirdly, to a notice at Adelaide Airport and a letter of similar content received by me on 9 November. Firstly, the question of the internationalisation of Adelaide Airport concerns my constituents. During the hearings of Estimates Committee D, the following questions and answers took place:
Mr DUNGEY-Generally we hear rumours about Adelaide Airport becoming an international airport. Are they true or false?
Mr HUNT-We have a need to provide wide-bodied facilities at Adelaide Airport, which will require some fairly substantial changes to the existing terminal facilities at Adelaide. The Government decided to make provision for limited international services at Adelaide at the time of the modifications for the existing terminal to accommodate wide bodies. It will not involve any additional expenditure in respect of freight because wide bodies will have the same freight requirement as international carriers. It will require some additional facilities for quarantine and Customs, although it is probable that international flights coming in to Adelaide, if they ever eventuate, could be cleared for quarantine and Customs purposes at another airport.
Mr DUNGEY-Is the runway sufficiently long?
Mr HUNT-The runway is sufficiently long. There could be a requirement to do some additional work, I think, on the pavement in the apron area, but not once we have dealt with wide bodies.
The second matter I wish to refer to is the statement of the Prime Minister issued on 11 November, in which he said:

The Commonwealth has agreed to provide a separate international passenger terminal at Adelaide Airport.
The decision follows discussions on 6 November between myself-
That is, the Prime Minister-
and the Premier of South Australia. It recognises the importance-
So it goes on. I finish by referring to the third matter, that is, a notice placed outside Adelaide Airport on the Burbridge Road for all to see. The notice states:
Provision of Upgraded Facilities for the Introduction of Domestic Wide Bodied Aircraft for Department of Transport.
This proposal will be subject to a public hearing by the Commonwealth Parliamentary Public Works Committee.
Of course, I have said that that hearing is now listed for 3 December. The point I make concerns the conflict between the statement of the Minister during the hearing of Estimates Committee D on 17 September and the contrary statement by the Prime Minister onll November. Clearly, if the public works were not undertaken, the international flights would not be able to land and be accommodated at Adelaide Airport. The matter has been listed for hearing in Adelaide on 3 December.
The state of the problem in South Australia is such that we have confusion about statements from the Minister. We attempted to clear them up at the Estimates Committee. It appears from the Minister's answers which are on record that the flights will commence at Darwin or at some other airport and that the passengers will be offioaded in Adelaide after they have gone through quarantine, Customs and so on atDarwin, Perth or Melbourne. Yet, some six weeks later, the Prime Minister announced that there would be a new international terminal with quarantine, Customs and health facilities and so on. Its location is close to the residential area. The residents are extremely confused by the conflicting statements from the Minister, the Prime Minister and State Ministers. I hope that the Minister for Housing and Construction, who is at the table, will take note of the points that I am raising. They are of deep concern to the people whom I represent in this area. I pose this question to the Minister: If the hearing to deal with the works that the Minister has mentioned were to go against that work, what would happen to the statement by the Prime Minister, because it is my belief that the international flights could not take place?
Question resolved in the affirmative.

States Grants (Capital Assistance) Bill

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2897

STATES GRANTS (CAPITAL ASSISTANCE) BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 27 October, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr WILLIS (GelIibrand) (9.25)-The States Grants (Capital Assistance) Bill now before the House authorises the payment of capital grants to the States for the current financial year and for the first half of the year 1982-83. The first six months of next financial year are included to allow time for the Parliament to pass similar legislation next year. The capital grant which the Commonwealth has to pay to the States for this financial year as a result of this Bill is $436m, which is the same amount as last year despite an estimated inflation rate of 10.75 per cent for this financial year and which is almost the same money amount as the Commonwealth paid to the States in 1975-76 despite the fact that there has been rapid inflation throughout the period since then. In fact the real value of this grant has fallen by nearly half since 1975-76, that is, the grant the Commonwealth is proposing to make this year will buy only about half as much this year as it would have in 1975-76. Is it any wonder, therefore, that the States are protesting? However, I will come back to their reaction in a few minutes after discussing the Commonwealth's payment to the States more fully.

The second reading speech of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) began by explaining that capital grants by the Commonwealth to the States were introduced in June 1970 by a Liberal-National Country Party government. This ritual selfcongratulation appears in the Treasurer's speech on the States Grants (Capital Assistance) Bill every year. In fact I have the impression, on reading this speech, that the Treasurer has simply taken out last year's speech, changed the dates and the amounts-he has not had to change the amounts very much-and read it out for, as usual, the speech is repetitively self-justifying and misleading. Perhaps it is not surprising that the Treasurer wants to get the credit for making a grant to the States-even a small one-but he neglects to say by how much this grant has fallen in real terms over the last few years. It is certainly the task of the Opposition to provide this perspective.
This Bill authorises payment of the grant component of the Loan Council program for State Governments in 1981-82. The total funds available to State governments for capital works this financial year is $1,307m, of which the capital grant I previously referred to is one-third. The real value of these capital funds has fallen by 44.6 per cent since 1975-76, a very considerable decline indeed. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table which shows general purpose capital grants for State governments.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-

GENERAL PURPOSE CAPITAL FUNDS FOR STATE GOVERNMENTS 1975-76 TO 1981-82 ($m)

Capital grants

Total funds (including
borrowing)

Total funds.
1975-76 prices (a)

Percentage
change since 1975-76

1975-76
1976-77 1977-78 1978-79
1979-80 1980-81
1981-82

430

1,291

1,291

452

1,356

1,197

-7.3

478

1,434

1,172

-9.2

478

1,434

1,097

-15.0

415

1,245

848

-34.3

436

1,307

795

-38.5

436

1,307

716

-44.6

(a) Dellated by the implicit della tor for public gross fixed capital expenditure, and assuming an II per cent increase in the
dellator for 1981-82. Sources: Budget Paper No.7, Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities
1979-80 and 1981-82; ABS Quarterly Estimates of National Income and Expenditure, June quarter 1981.

Mr WILLIS-I thank the House. It shows the payments to State governments for general purpose capital funds for the years 1975-76 to 1981-82. It shows that there has been a steady decline in the real value of those funds throughout that six-year period. This means that the States'

finance for works such as schools and other capital works from which debt charges are not normally recovered has fallen dramatically under the Fraser Government. This is the reason for the inadequacy of many community facilities; it is why schools are not being adequately repaired; why the conditions of many prisons are appalling; why

2898 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

States Grants (Capital Assistance) Bill

the police often work in archaic buildings, and so on.
In his second reading speech on this BilI, the Treasurer tended to argue that this sharp fall in the real value of general purpose capitaI' funds for the States did not matter because other funds for the States have been increasing. He mentioned, for example, that total funds to the States from the Commonwealth are estimated to increase by 8.5 per cent this year in comparison with 1980-81. However, he neglected to mention that; in his Budget Papers, he presented an estimate of the rate of inflation for this year of 10.75 per cent. This means that the real value of total funds for the States from the Commonwealth is expected to falI by 2.25 per cent this year, that is, the 8.5 per cent increase in funds compared with the 10.75 per cent inflation rate. Further, this neglects the effect of population growth. During the last 12 months, the population grew by 1.6 per cent. There were 240,000 more people in Australia in June of this year than in June of last year. When the population is growing funds for government services have to expand or the quality of those services declines. The Government has made no allowance at all for this in its payments to the States. The real value of total Commonwealth payments to the States this year is almost 4 per cent per person less than in the last financial year. The Treasurer's comments are, therefore, severely misleading. Is'it any wonder that the States are having trouble balancing their Budgets and are being forced to raise their taxes and charges?

$807m. However, these go nowhere near compensating the State public sectors for the decline in the real value of their capital funds. In 1975-76, the last year of the Labor Government, a total of $4.2 billion was budgeted by the Commonwealth, under various headings, for State public sector capital works. By 1981-82 this amount had grown to $5.4 billion but this was a real decline, once inflation was taken into account, of 29.4 per cent. Thus, the real value of total capital funds available to the States fell quite sharply between 1975-76 and 1981-82.
That decline is substantial enough but as it relates only to the States it could be said that it does not necessarily show that the total public sector capital expenditure has been adversely affected because it does not show the situation for government as a whole when one takes into account the Commonwealth sector as well. To partly rectify that I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table showing real planned public sector capital expenditure for 1975-76 to 1981-82.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-
REAL PLANNED PUBLIC SECTOR CAPITAL EXPENDITURE, 1975-76 TO 1981-82
The Following figures compare planned capital expenditure in 1975-76 with planned capital expenditure in 1981-82, dellated by the national accounts dellator for public gross fixed capital expenditure, and assuming a della tor of II % for 1981-82. On this basis the public gross fixed capital expenditure dellator will have risen by 82.6% between 1975-76 and 1981-82 ($m). The Northern Territory was transFerred from the Commonwealth to State classification in 1978-79.

The Treasurer also tries to get some mileage out of the fact that the relative importance of specific purpose payments has fallen. Specific purpose
payments are allocated to a particular expenditure purpose and the States must spend them in that area. Whilst it is clear that the States want maximum control over what funds are available to them, the decline in the relative importance of specific purpose payments is completely irrelevant if it is not matched by a compensating increase in general purpose payments. In fact, the reduction in specific purpose payments is one of
the important reasons for the real fall in the value of Commonwealth payments to the States. Another ploy used by the Treasurer to cloud the issue is to talk about the increased borrowing approvals given to the States' semi-government authorities for infrastructure projects. Infrastruc-
ture projects relate to resource development, and include such things as power stations, coal loaders, harbour dt velopments and so on. Infrastructure borrowing approvals in 1981-82 totalled

Budgeted expenditure
1975-76 1981-82

Real change

CommonwealthCommonwealth budget
Commonwealth statutory authorities
Northern Territory

$m 567 1,095

$m 434
1,668 200

% -58.1 -16.6

Total Commonwealth pub-

licsector

1,662 2,302 -30,7

StatesPayments to States and State Loan Council programs
General purpose capital Funds
Specific purpose capital payments
Borrowing programs of state au thorities (excluding inFrastructure
Total excl. inFrastructure
InFrastructure borrowings

1,291 1,895
1,031 4,217

1,307
1,494
1,827 4,628
807

-44.6 -56.7
-3.0 -39.9

States Grants (Capital Assistance) Bill

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2899

Budgeted expenditure
1975-76 1981-82

Real change

Total capital funds available to the States

$m 4,217

$m 5,437

% -29.4

Total planned capital
spending Commonwealth, States and Northern Territory

7,541

9,839 -28.5

Sources: National Accounting Estimates of Receipts and Outlays of Commonwealth Government Authorities; and
Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and
Local Government Authorities.
Mr WILLIS-I thank the House. This table is very interesting. It shows the allocations in the 1975-76 Budget and the 1981-82 Budget, the one which operates for this financial year. It compares the amounts in real terms for the allocations to capital expenditure under various headings for the Commonwealth sector. The allocation from the Commonwealth Budget has declined by 58 per cent in real terms. The allocation in the Commonwealth sector for statutory authorities has declined by 16.6 per cent in real terms. The total Commonwealth public sector capital expenditure in real terms has decreased by 30.7 per cent. These are not just minor adjustments to the accounts. They are dramatic cutbacks in the size of public sector capital expenditures. They are enormous cutbacks which have horrendous effects on the abilities of the Commonwealth and the States to provide the level of services which was provided previously. They have enormous implications for the social infrastructure in particular. I will say a little more about that in the near future.
When we look at the expenditure by the States in this table we see that general purpose capital funds-the funds which are the subject of the Bill now before the House-have declined in real terms by 44.6 per cent, the figure I gave previously. That is an enormous reduction. Specific purpose capital payments have declined by 56.7 per cent, a reduction of more than half in real terms. The total payments to the States in the capital area, excluding infrastructure, have declined by 39.9 per cent. If we take into account infrastructure borrowings which began in 1978 and which have enabled the States to spend in particular areas in relation to resource infrastructure projects, we see that the total capital funds available to the States have declined in real terms by 29.4 per cent. That is an enormous reduction in the total amount of funds available to States for capital expenditures, including infrastructure borrowings. If we put all those areas together and

look at the total capital expenditures for the Commonwealth and State sectors and at the real movement in capital expenditures over the sixyear period we see a reduction of 28.5 per cent. That amounts to absolute sabotage of the public sector and its ability to maintain an appropriate level of capital works for this nation. They are quite devastating figures. They bring to light the enormous damage that this Government is bringing about in this country through its continued ideologically based cutbacks and slashes in the amount of real capital funds being made available to the public sector.
It can be said, of course, that the table shows only what has happened to funds which have been specifically earmarked for capital expenditure and that other funds are available to the State governments, for instance, through the general revenue grants which can be spent on anything although they are normally spent on recurrent expenditures. It is argued by the Government, not least the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) who is now at the table, that these funds are available to the States to spend on capital works if they so wish. To this let me make two comments. Firstly, the real value of total funds made available to the States by the Commonwealth from its Budget-not just total capital funds but total funds-this financial year is, as I mentioned before, 2t per cent less in real terms than the last financial year. If there is less money from the Commonwealth Budget as well as markedly less money for capital works specifically, it is impossible to argue that the States can easily maintain capital expenditures by utilising their general revenue grants unless the Commonwealth is saying to the States that they should spend much less on recurrent expenditures, including salaries for school teachers and workers in the public sector generally, which are the main areas of recurrent expenditures. If that were to happen it would clearly have implications for the level of services provided by the States.
Furthermore, if one looks at the total funds from the Commonwealth Budget to the States over the period from 1975-76 to 1981-82 one finds that there has been a substantial real decline in the level of funds made available. It has declined by approximately 10 per cent. I stress this figure to the House. There has been a 10 per cent reduction in real terms in the total amount of funds made available to the States by the Commonwealth in the period 1975-76 to 1981-82. In the period of this Governmerit's control of this country since the end of 1975 the real level of funds has been reduced by 10 per cent when the population has increased by 8 per cent. On a per

2900 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

States Grants (Capital Assistance) Bill

head basis, therefore, there has been a decline of 18 per cent in the real level of Budget funds made available by this miserly Government to the States. So much for the argument that lesser funds to the States from capital allocations in the Budget can be made up from other Budget payments not allocated to any particular purpose. It is clearly an absolute nonsense given the size of the total cutback in funds to the States of 18 per cent in real terms on a per capita basis. Furthermore, when one takes into account not only funds from the Budget but also funds available to the States and the Northern Territory from outside the Budget, that is through semi-government borrowing programs and the so-called infrastructure borrowing program, it is clear that there has still been a substantial real fall in funds made available to the States. Between 1975-76 and 1981-82 there has been a fall in the real level of all funds made available to the States from all sources in the Budget or outside the Budget of 5.3 per cent. Even if we include the borrowing programs of the States there is a 5 per cent reduction in the real amount of funds made available to the States. When we take, as we must, account of the fact that there has been a population increase in the period of 8 per cent we see that there has been a 13 per cent real decline in funds made available to the States by the Commonwealth from all sources inside the Budget and outside it.
Another point that has to be made in this regard is that because of this reduction in funds to the States, especially the drastic cutback in funds for capital expenditures, there has been a consec quential severe decline in the overall level of government investment in the country. The national accounts for the year 1980-81 show that the real level of public gross fixed capital expenditure in Australia-in short, government investment-during the period 1975-76 to 1980-81, the last financial year, declined by 11 per cent. That is a very substantial reduction in the real level of government investment in this country in that six-year period. Furthermore, we are saying that there is 11 per cent less government investment in to to in real terms than for 1975-76. If one takes into account the 6t per cent rise in population in those years, one sees that on a per capita basis the decline was 17t per cent.
This is a very severe reduction in the totalleve1 of government investment in this country. There has been a 17t per cent decline since the Labor Government was in office in the levels which operated last financial year, and they will presumably be down further in this current financial year. These are quite staggering figures. They give the absolute lie to Government arguments that

cutbacks in capital expenditures can be offset by the use of other expenditure. This Government knows from its own experience that it is far more difficult politically to reduce recurrent expenditure than it is to reduce capital expenditure. The result of this Government's actions in cutting back its own capital expenditures and slashing capital funds to the States is that government investment has been devastated by this Government. That process is continuing in this current financial year. The Bill before the House is clear proof of my assertion.
Four points flow from this fact. The first point is that the impact of this severe reduction on the economy as a whole is substantial. If one cuts back on the level of government investment-which is an important part of the economy-in such severe terms, then each year a negative growth factor is being built into the economy and the possibilities of obtaining substantial economic growth are to that degree lessened. In terms of the overall rate of economic growth and employment growth we see that such cutbacks are absolutely adverse. Secondly, there is the impact of these continuing reductions on the quantity and standard of services provided by government. If one continually slashes the real level of government investment, as this Government does year by year ahd continues to do in the Bill now before the House, inevitably one will find it more difficult to provide government services of a capital nature and of a recurrent nature. There is a cut back for the whole array of services provided through what is known as the social infrastructure; that is, the array of services which are needed by people if they are to live decent lives in this community such as in the area of education, decent hospitals, roads, public transport, welfare housing, child care and so on. All of these areas must be affected if the Government continually cuts back on the level of government investment.
Thirdly, by these cutbacks in government investment we have a severe unbalancing of the economy because within government investment that is occurring the growth area is resource industries infrastructure; that is, power stations, coal loaders, railways and so on. The social infrastructure, the areas that I have just mentioned a moment ago, are the areas which are taking the burden of the reduction. There is an overall reduction of government expenditure which is absolutely severe. Within that level of investment is a growth area of resource investment. So the social infrastructure, which is the rest of that investment, is where the burden of reductions is being felt. We are reaching the stage where that reduction is becoming thoroughly intolerable.

States Grants (Capital Assistance) Bill

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2901

Fourthly, there is the irony of the situation that despite this sabotage of public sector investment the Government still argues that government expenditure, particularly government capital expenditure, is the cause of increased interest rates. After today's report perhaps interest rates are very much in the news. I refer to the Government's argument that the cause of increased interest rates is the high level of demands for funds in this community and, therefore, what we need to do is to cut back government demand for funds. This has been the' continuing refrain of this Government and is a justification for the cutbacks in government investment in this -country. It hangs on the thread that interest rates are determined by the demand for funds in the capital market. Quite clearly, the increase in the demand for funds has not come from the public sector. How can it be said that the increase in demand for funds has come from the public sector when government investment has been slashed heavily?
I am sure that honourable members are all aware that the public sector borrowing requirement has been considerably reduced in the last year or two. How can it be said in that situation that the government sector is causing this rise in interest rates and that the appropriate response to that situation is to slash the level of government expenditure even further? It is an absolute absurdity to argue in that way. If we look at where the demand for funds is coming from, we need only to look at what has happened to business investment. Business investment last year went up by 23 per cent which is an extraordinary incre~se very much related to the resources boom. That Increase must be where the rapid increase in demand for funds has come from and to which one must describe the interest rate pressures if one says that interest rates are determined by the demand for funds in the capital market. In these circumstances it is absurd to argue that government investment is the cause of rising interest rates or that an appropriate response to rising interest rates is to further slash government investment. Such investment has already been sabotaged by this Government, as I have clearly shown. I move:
That all words after 'That' be bmitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not opposing the Bill, the House is of the opinion that the Bill, by further sharply reducing the real level of funds for State government capital works, is-
(I) making it impossible for the States to provide an adequate capital expenditure program;
(2) reducing the extent and standard of community services;
(3) undermining the efficiency and productive capacity of many industries especially the building industry;

(4) producing unbalanced development by facili.tating expansion of infrastructure for the resource mdustries while severely contracting expenditure on the social infrastructure;
(5) increasing unemployment, and
(6) intensifying pressure on the States to introduce a second income tax'.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)-ls the amendment seconded?
Mr Howe-I second the amendment.
Mr CHAPMAN (Kingston) (9.48)-The remarks we have just heard from the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) demonstrate that the Australian Labor Party is irretrievably wedded to big government and, more than that, to big spending government and, the~efore, either i~ evitably spiralling taxation or an lncreased deficit and hence increased government borrowing and spiralling interest rates. The Bi1l .that we. are debating, the States Grants (Capital Assistance) Bill, provides non-repayable capital grants to the States of $435.75m. This grant component of the Australian Loan Council program for State governments of $1,307.25m was agreed to at the June Loan Council meeting. These grants were initiated by a Liberal Country Party government in 1970.
Although the States are free to apply the grants as they choose, the major purpose at that time was to help finance schools. It is therefore appropriate in debating this legislation to discuss the relative responsibilities of Federal and State governments in the sphere of education. This is especially so in the light of the growing practice of gross misrepresentation of the attitude of the Federal Government towards education, especially as regards funding. The facts on the Federal funding of education do not support the hostile reaction that has been generated through teacher organisat.i~ns, academic staff associations and student poittIcal bodies in concert with the Labor Party. I therefore welcome the opportunity this debate provides to set the record straight. Over nearly six years since the Fraser Government came to office it has effectively fulfilled the proper role of the Federal Government in education by maintaining adequate funding. This was again demonstrated in the recent Budget with the provision of $3,254.7m for education this financial year. This represents an increase of nearly one per cent in real terms; that is after allowing for inflation over the period 1979-80. That, in turn, follows a one and a half per cent increase in real terms in that year as against 1978-79. When combined with funds provided by the State governments which in fact have the major constitutional responsibility for education, over $7000m per year or $20m every day is

2902 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

States Grants (Capital Assistance) Bill

being spent by governments on education in Australia. That takes 6.1 per cent of Australia's gross domestic product. So one could be excused for treating the criticism of the Federal Government's education policies and programs with some scepticism. That scepticism is as valid of criticism of its approach to the school sector as is its approach to other sectors of education.

would preclude this necessary and beneficial variation. Similarly, the decision to administer the Special Education Program through a nongovernment committee supervised by the Schools Commission rather than as previously by State education departments, removes a source of disagreement and recognises variations in need depending on the type of handicap involved.

One source of criticism of the Government's policy in regard to the school sector has been the minority statement by two members of the Commonwealth Schools Commission. It should be noted that this was a minority statement not supported by the other nine members of the Schools Commission. An examination of the minority statement reveals those criticisms to be totally without substance. The minority statement criticises other members of the Commission for not condemning the Government over guidelines given to the Commission. This completely ignores the fact that the annual report is not the appropriate vehicle for such comments. The role of the annual report of the Commission is to carve up the financial resources provided by the Federal Government following its consideration of the recommendations contained in the triennial report of the Commission. If any comment on the guidelines is justified, the triennial report is the appropriate vehicle, not the annual report.
The minority statement also criticiser the Government for its selective acceptance or rejection of single recommendations in the triennial report of the Commission. But surely that is exactly what the Government should do. The role of the Commission is to give public advice in its triennial reports to government as to what the Commission sees as needs in education. The role of the Government is to assess that advice in the light of its own policies and available resources and to determine priorities for action. If the Government merely gave blanket acceptance to advice by the Commission, in reality the Commission and not the Government would be governing.
The minority statement also criticises the removal of some discretionary powers from the Commission following recommendations of the Review of Commonwealth Functions, the so called razor gang. But every change made in this regard has been to the benefit of those to whom programs are directed. For example, the Government prevented the Schools Commission from laying down detailed guidelines for the Severely Handicapped Children's Program. This is because great variety exists in preferred methods of providing for the educrtion of severely handicapped children. Detailed guidelines of the Commission

Criticism of the Federal Government's allocation of financial assistance to schools in general and to government schools in particular is quite unjustified. The Government has provided $1,008.1 m for Schools Commission programs in 1982-an increase of 4.6 per cent in real terms after allowing for inflation. This provides for significant real increases in some programs and maintenance in real terms of most. The cuts in funding involve a modest reduction of $6.3m in a total Commonwealth expenditure on government schools of some $400m. This is quite justified in the light of declining numbers in schools due to demographic trends. The overall real increases are to the Government's great credit. They have been provided despite continuing restraint in Government spending overall and cuts in a number of other areas of Government spending. Thus the Government, in providing $269,174,000 in recurrent grants to government schools has maintained funding in real terms. When related to declining student numbers, this means that Commonwealth funding per student place in government schools has never been higher. It makesnon-. sense of criticisms of this Government's attitude to the government school sector. There has been consistent maintenance of effort by this Government with regard to government schools.
Mr Howe-You want to go around and tell that to a few teachers in your electorate.
Mr CHAPMAN-I have been going around telling teachers in my electorate exactly that. The result of this maintenance of effort has been that all government schools have reached ahead of target, and many have exceeded, the equipment and staffing goals set as desirable by the Karmel Interim Committee for the Australian Schools Commission. Federal Government assistance has achieved this, despite the fact that the major responsibility for funding government schools lies with the States, a responsibility which the untied grants provided by this legislation help to fulfil. The States provide some 89 per cent of capital and recurrent funding whereas the Federal responsibility is II per cent. The real responsibility of the Federal Government is to identify national needs which have been neglected by the States or forgone. The Federal Government thus has an

States Grants (Capital Ass,'tal'.ce) Bill

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2903

overseeing role. It must retain flexibility to move funds to fulfil identified national needs,
In the recent past, resource levels were a national need so a significant additional injection of funds to that area was justified, But, as I have just mentioned, the Karmel goals have now been achieved; so while it is important to maintain effort in that area, as has been done, it is quite wrong to criticise the Government for not providing further large increases in that area because the current major identifiable national need in education is that of transition from school to work, That is therefore the area to which any additional available funds should first and foremost be directed. The Fraser Government is fulfilling its responsibility with regard to school to work transition with a new program of $250m in real terms over five years initiated in 1980. Funds for this program have been increased by 26,6 per cent to $35,2m this year, a real increase of some 15 per cent. This large increase is a clear demonstration of the Fraser Government's commitment to areas of identified need and makes nonsense of the critics, This commitment is further demonstrated by increased funding to other areas of continuing national need-for example, the Special Education Program which is designed to supplement recurrent funding for special schools and schools with special classes to meet the needs of handicapped children and to provide support for the integration of handicapped children into regular schools. By providing $17,768,000 for 1982, the Fraser Government has provided a real increase of 5,7 per cent this year compared with 1981. Similarly, the English as a Second Language Program provides funds to improve the English language competence of students whose first language is not English. Funding has increased by 4.9 per cent in real terms for that Program.
The Federal Government has also been criticised in the minority statement of the Schools Commission and by others for its allegedly favourable treatment of non-government schools. But funding of non-government schools is predicated on a number of factors. Firstly, the Fraser Government believes it has a responsibility to encourage freedom of choice and diversity in education. This does not relate only to the nongovernment school sector. The Government has also provided funding for a program developing choice and diversity in the government school system. But the non-government school sector is the most significant element of the education system providing opportunity for choice and diversity, Of course, this is a basic tenet of liberalism,

Secondly, those who exercise this choice are entitled to some reimbursement of the taxation revenue they provide to the total education budget, but which they do not use through the government school system, Taxation has some income redistribution effects, not the least in education, but its major role is to pay for community services. It is therefore reasonable that the taxpayer, using an alternative service, receives some reimbursement for that. He or she still contributes to the bulk of the cost of using that alternative service through the payment of fees. To give effect to these elements of choice and partial reimbursement, the Federal Government provides minimum final).cial assistance per non-government school student of 20 per cent of the assessed average per student government school standard costs. The most recent data for these costs is $1,480 per student for government primary schools and $2,402 for government secondary schools, thereby providing minimum assistance of $296 per nongovernment primary school student and $480 per non-government secondary school student. It is quite dishonest to claim that resources are being transferred from the government school sector to the non-government school sector in this way. Clearly, grants to the non-government school sector go up only if costs and therefore resources of the government sector go up. Such grants go up by only a small proportion of that government sector increase.
Federal Government assistance to the nongovernment sector is also predicated on the fact that about 80 per cent of the non-government schools have recurrent resource levels about 30 per cent below those of the average government school. One reflection of this is that primary school student-teacher ratios are 24.4 : 1 for Catholic schools compared with 20.3 : 1 for government schools. Since 1975 the ratio for Catholic primary schools has come down from 27.4 : 1, whereas for government schools it has come down from 22.7 : 1. The comparison at secondary level is: Catholic schools 17 : 1 as against 12.3 : 1 for government schools, having reduced from 19.7: 1 and 14,2: 1 respectively in 1975. So, despite being in a significantly better position in student-teacher ratios initially, government schools have not been significantly outpaced in the improvements since then, retaining the significant advantage that they have over Catholic schools. That is why, for these schools, the Federal Government has provided per student grants greater than the basic 20 per cent over recent years,
To ensure that. the greatest funding goes to those non-government schools in greatest need the previous six resource categories have been

2904 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

States Grants (Capital Assistance) Bill

compressed to three with the previous level six So five basic reasons justify the Fraser Govern-

alone making up the new group three. Students in ment's allocation of funds to non-government

group two schools will receive assistance of 30 per schools. Not in any way is the non-government

cent of the government school standard costs to sector receiving favoured or special treatment at

which I earlier referred, while those in group three the expense of the government sector. The

schools will receive 38 per cent. For 1982 this progovernment sector contains 78 per cent of all

vides $444 per primary school student and $721 students but receives 89 per cent of government

per secondary school student in group two schools education funds. Non-government schools have

and $562 and $913 respectively for group three 22 per cent of students but receive only 11 per

schools. Group one school students will receive cent of government education funds.

the minimum of $296 and $480 which I men-

tioned earlier.

The Bill we are debating tonight provides for

However, one of the main reasons for the increase in funds to non-government schools is simply a matter of numbers. Over the last five years, the number of students in government pri-
mary schools has declined by about 1.7 per cent and that decline is projected to continue, while those in government secondary schools have declined by 6 per cent. Over the same period the number of students in non-government primary schools has increased by 5.6 per cent and the

untied capital grants to the State governments which they are free to apply in any way they choose according to their priorities. If there is a
demonstrated need, they can be applied to education. The Federal Government is therefore . fulfilling its responsibility to education not only directly but also indirectly by providing to the States on an untied basis, funds which they may choose to allocate to education. So the criticisms that have been made of various aspects of the

number in non-government secondary schools has increased by 6.1 per cent. That is a quite dramatic contrast. In effect, parents are voting with their feet in favour of non-government schools. Instead of bemoaning the fact that, quite justifiably, the funds are following this change in student numbers, those who object should have a good hard look at the reasons for the trend.
Why is it that parents are prepared to make the significant financial sacrifices required, notwith-

Federal Government's education policy are not justified.. There is no doubt that this Bill demonstrates the Fraser Government's continuing commitment to providing adequate funds for various projects which are primarily a State responsibility. The States have the opportunity to apply these untied grants to education if they believe there is a demonstrated need. It is on that basis that I support this legislation and urge its speedy passage.

standing government assistance, to educate their children in non-government schools? Among the reasons becoming evident is the lack of discipline in some government schools and the attitudes and values being transmitted to students by some teachers.

Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (10.7)-1 support wholeheartedly the amendment moved by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis). I think it points to some of the key areas of failure in Commonwealth-State financial relations. I am rather sorry that the honourable member for

Federal Government support for nonKingston (Mr Chapman) devoted the entirety of

government schools is predicated also on the fact his contribution on this matter, except for a few

that the Federal Government is the major source words at the conclusion, to the question of

of government financial assistance, as a supeducation because I think that might have been

plement to private effort, for non-government more appropriately considered in one of the edu-

schools, whereas the States are the major source cation non-debates that the House has managed

for government schools. The States provide 89 per to have over the last four or five weeks of this sit-

cent of total government funds for government ting. I believe that there are very important points

schools, whereas they provide only 33 per cent of to be made in this House on questions of

total government funds for non-government Commonwealth-State financial relations which

schools-that is, capital and recurrent funds. This are being evaded as a subject of parliamentary de-

requires a far greater effort from the Federal bate. I want to deal with them tonight. I want to

Government. However, the critics should admit look at this Bill as one key element of

that not just the Fraser Government has recogCommonwealth-State financial relations as they

nised the need of the non-government sector. have been restructured by this Government. In

State governments, Liberal and Labor, have also particular, I intend to consider the impact on

significantly increased recurrent funding in real Western Australia, my home State and the State

terms over the last five years, and by more than worst affected by recent and proposed changes to

the increase provided for the government sector. financial relations with the Commonwealth.

States Grants (Capital Assistance) Bill

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2905

The Commonwealth has allocated a total of $121m to Western Australia in general purpose capital grant funds for 1981-82, comprising $80.677m in approved Loan Council borrowings and $40.33m in interest free capital grants. Compared with the amount of $120.951m in 1981-82, the allocation to Western Australia this financial year represents a reduction in real terms of around $14.5m. The borrowing program for the State's larger authorities, excluding infrastructure financing, has been cut from a total program of $1l7.358m in 1980-81 to an estimated $101.6m in 1981-82. This represents a reduction in capital funds from this source amounting to around $31.4m in real terms. Approved Loan Council borrowings for special additions for infrastructure amount to $121.2m in 1981-82. Although Western Australia recevied the most favourable treat-
or ment in the total amount of approved borrowings,
the level approval represents around 65 per cent of the State's scheduled borrowings for infrastructure in 1981-82.
Notably, the Loan Council agreed to the States determining the allocation of the approved total between the projects for which the funds were sought. Sir Charles Court, the Premier of Western Australia, has always regarded the infrastructure financing as his project. In 1978-79 he referred to his formal submission to the Loan Council on the subject and went on to say that the new arrangements are a sensible and logical development in Commonwealth-State financial arrangements. In 1979-80 he again took credit for what he called the breakthrough that followed his submission. However, by the 1980-81 Budget, this new tier of borrowings had begun to backfire on Western Australia. Sir Charles Court expressed surprise and regret that general loans funds were being cut to compensate for infrastructure loan funds. This was a virtual admission that he had been conned by the Fraser Government into supporting a move that would clearly hurt Western Australia. The damage is already clear. The level of noninfrastructure loan funds has deteriorated to the point where it is now only slightly more than half the 1975-76 allocation in real terms, that is half the allocation effectively made in the last Labor Budget.
Time does not permit me to discuss the specific uses that the infrastructure funds are to be put to or what could have been done with more general works funds. Some of the proposed infrastructure expenditures are of doubtful value but the general situation of squeezing existing government services on the ground that it is more important to fund the great resources boom can clearly be seen as bad planning now so that even Government

Ministers try to dampen any talk of boom or any expectation of benefits for the people of Australia.
To understand the impact of these changes in the allocation of loan funds, it is necessary to outline the broader sphere of Commonwealth State financial relations and particularly this Government's so-called new federalism. After the Premiers Conference of 1976, at which the financial and administrative framework of the new federalism was established, Sir Charles Court stated:
I am confident that the scheme will now operate successfully and to the advantage of the States.
He went on to say:
These are history making developments and I belive the Premiers' Conference last week will be seen in future years as a turning point in Federal-State financial relations and the beginning of greater State independence and increased self reliance.
He was certainly right about it being a turning point. The direction has been around the bend ever since as far as Western Australian Budgets and the resultant State charge increases on the Western Australian population are concerned.
In 1975-76, total Commonwealth payments and Loan Council borrowings to or for the six States represented 39.1 per cent of total Commonwealth outlays. In 1981-82, the proportion of Commonwealth outlays allocated to the six States is estimated to be 33.4 per cent, even below the level of support in the last year of the McMahon Government at the turn of the decade-l 970-71. The net financial effect of the new federalism on Western Australia since 1976-77 and including 1981-82 is a total revenue loss amounting to over $350m. This figure includes the revenue loss of $49.1m which resulted from the abolition in 1980-81 of the guarantee that the State would not be worse off than it was under previous arrangements. This was the guarantee that Sir Charles Court had pinned his hopes on. New federalism for the people of Western Australia has meant higher State taxes and charges, a lowering of living standards and cutbacks in the standard range of essential community services such as health and education. In fact it has been a disaster.
The other factor that must be considered when assessing the impact of these Loan Council allocations over the next year is the Commonwealth Grants Commission review of tax sharing entitlements. The effect of the State factors recommended in the report of the Commonwealth Grants Commission, based on a six-State distribution, is a reduction in Western Australia's share of Commonwealth tax collections from the existing 12.284 per cent to around 9.826 per cent. The revenue effect amounts to an annual loss of

2906 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

States Grants (Capital Assistance) Bill

$160.7m, based on the amount available for distribution in 1981-82 and estimates of State population at 31 December 1981. The report of the Grants Commission has been referred back to the Commission for review. It is to be hoped that it will produce an upward revision in Western Australia's State factor, despite whatever incompetence there may have been in the presentation before it of the Western Australian case.
It must be admitted that the Commission's revenue needs assessment for Western Australia is basically accurate and sound. In particular the implicit c~iticism by the Commission of Western Australia's comparatively low revenue raising effort in the area of mining royalties is vindicated by the fact that the State Government has had immediate recourse to increasing royalties in its 1981-82 Budget. On the other hand, the Commission's assessment of expenditure and business undertaking needs does require drastic reconsideration. The review should expand the field under consideration to include a wide range of basic services such as power, water, housing and other essential services provided by business undertakings in the States. In addition, a more comprehensive analysis of the cost disabilities of providing services of an equal range and standard in remote areas of Western Australia must be undertaken.
The Commission report stated that, in conducting its examination of Western Australia several areas of interest were overflown at low altitude. I suggest that in future the Commissioners might decide to land and have a look at what is going on on the ground; perhaps then they might come to different conclusions about what ought to be done in Western Australia. The Western Australia Government's submissions to the Commission were, however, generally weak and uncoordinated. This could be a partial explanation, I believe, for Western Australia's relatively harsh treatment by the Commission. Clearly Sir Charles. Court failed to impress the Commissioners with his case for Western Australia.
Sir Charles Court attempts to convey the view to the Western Australian community that'he has been a solid, hard fighter for Western Australian interests. If Western Australians could only read that extraordinarily lengthy document-I do not blame them if they do not-they would see throughout it evidence of the failure of the Western Australian Government to press the points that it wished to make on matters of key interest to Western Australians. The effective exclusion of power, water and housing from the calculation of State need factors-and in respect of everyone of those items Western Australia is at a very severe

disadvantage-is an indication of the extent to which the Western Australian Government, despite the fact that these items were within the framework of the Commission's reference, failed to press Western Australia's relative disadvantage in these matters.
To sum up this tale of woe, these Loan Council allocations are but one part of a disastrous situation arising in Western Australia. They express the commitment to the mythical boom that affects the Commonwealth and Western Australian governments. Financial relations between the two have been extraordinary. In the name of States rights, Sir Charles Court has supported major moves by the Fraser Government to slash State spending. He has been conned time and again. It is only now when Western Australia is hundreds of millions of dollars worse off and facing the probability of another disaster from the Grants Commission that Sir Charles Court is beginning to wake up. If he had joined with the progressive State governments, such as that in New South Wales, in opposing these moves from the beginning, these attacks on the States may have been held off. If he had not been so persistent in attempting to bring down the Whitlam Government, his own situation and that of Western Australian consumers of electricity, water and State housing commission homes or whatever would have been far better off than they are now. What State rights have meant in Western Australian is the destruction of the Western Australian State Budget. It is interesting that Liberal governments, one by design and one by incompetence" have done more than any other government since Federation to cripple the State financially, all in the name of State rights.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (10.19)-In the past five years, we have seen a massive reallocation of <:apital spending in this country. The Government has sought to .redistribute negatively capital spending from the areas of social expenditure and social need-that is, education, health, transport and housing-providing more and more supp.ort for the corporate sector. As the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) pointed.out, there has been in real terms a cut of 29 per cent.in capital moneys made available to the States, including funds for infrastructure borrowing during the six years of this Government's period in office. The social effects of these transfers of resources are now apparent right across the country. They mean poorer services and reduced standards of living for ordinary people. The Government had undoubtedly hoped that, as a result of these transfers in the distribution of wealth, there would be a recovery in private capital expenditure; that is,

States Grants (Capital Assistance) Bill

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2907

companies encouraged by various incentives and tax reductions would embark upon an expansion of activity which would result in an increased rate of economic growth.
Central to this argument was the assumption that it would be possible to encourage a resources boom-indeed, a resources led recovery. There is no doubt that in part this strategy has had its successes. We have had-albeit unevenly-higher periods of economic growth. We have had an upsurge of investment in certain resource projects. However, this growth has not been subject to any careful planning and would appear to be faltering now with a sharp decline occurring in international markets for resources especially metal markets. The result that is now occurring is a scaling down of resource projects with a number of corporations pulling out of plant projects or threatening to pull out of them. There is a serious danger that, in the pattern of development that has been fostered by this Government, it will be the government sector which will suffer the risks implicit in it. It is quite clear that the public sector-that is, social expenditure but in the final analysis the people-has had to bear the sacrifices. This is apparent in many of the areas to which I have referred.
However, other risks exist to which the same attention has not been given. Much of the public investment which is accompanying resource based development will, in fact, be at risk because of the failure of major projects to go ahead. In 1978 the Government encouraged the States, through their semi-government authorities to go ahead with vastly expanded loan programs especially for electricity generation and other energy-related projects. The States did not need a great deal of encouragement from the Commonwealth and embarked on an enthusiastic program of borrowing. It appears that at this year's Loan Council meeting the Commonwealth indicated that it had had second thoughts about this program. However, we now have, in almost every State of Australia, major public works projects centred on producing more and more energy. Much of this additional electricity will be to service the aluminium industry.
Over the past few months we have seen a massive reduction in the expected levels of development of that industry. So far this year we have had abandoned projects which would have added 600,000 tonnes to aluminium production capacity by 1985. This is without the possible cancellation of the 'Portland smelter of Alcoa, which is under some doubt. In my view these problems flow from the failure of the Government to interest itself in fundamental policy issues. For example, at the

time in which the Federal Government was encouraging the States to embark on a massive expansion of loans for the accelerated development of electricity generation, it was also promising to produce a national energy policy, or at least a Green Paper designed to canvass the relevant issues. In fact the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) never permitted that Green Paper to see the light of day.
The Government achieved what it wanted out of its energy policy which was a massive infusion of revenue from petrol taxes or excise. It has no interest in looking to ensure that the Commonwealth developed an approach to energy. policy which related all of the sources of energy or the means of ensuring that epergy was distributed to consumers in an equitable manner, orthat in the long term we had policies which we would ensure for future generations security of supply. In my view this is an amazing situation. On the one hand we are seeking to conserve liquid fuels by pushing up prices, and on the other hand we are encouraging the use of other fuels, such as natural gas and coal, at a rate as fast as the international market will bear.
But surely the lesson of the last few years is that energy policy cannot be separated in the final analysis into liquid and solid fuels as if they bear no relation to each other. The price of energy is tending to rise domestically whichever fuel one is talking about,.. with the possible exception of uranium, because of the impact of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries crisis on overall national and international energy policies. I think we are beginning to see the result.
When the Federal Government moved from a cheap oil policy, it was moving towards a dear energy policy across the board. It did not admit this. But that is the direction in which we are being takenas we seek to make energy resources avail" able to the developed world. We cannot imagine for a moment that those companies with an interest in oil are keeping out of the solid fuel areas. Of course they are not. They are buying into alternative sources of energy to ensure that they will continue to dominate the supply of energy throughout the developed world. They have their corporate plans for Australia and it suits them for the Australian Government to continue to talk about the need to leave such matters to the so-called market.
In these circumstances a number of basic issues arise. One of those issues is the matter of energy pricing. With respect to oil we have moved to import parity pricing but with other fuels we have not taken international prices into account. Thus

2908 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

States Grants (Capital Assistance) Bill

it has been argued by the Department of the Treasury that we need at least to consider opportunity pricing in relation to electricity. Why should we export coal as aluminium at a price which bears no relationship to the price which it might bring as coking coal sold in Japan?
Of course, this is not a simple matter but at least the Government should have addressed itself to it. Similarly, the Government has not sought to require the States to reveal power prices to electricity consumers, such as aluminium producers, before giving loans for expanded electricity generation to meet the needs of those producers. I would have thought that was quite fundamental to the assessment of the viability of such projects.
The Government has made no study of the changing cost structure of the electricity generation industry and what the implications might be for the future. Thus it has been caught unawares by the exponential increases which are now beginning to take place in power prices in a number of States. Indeed, it was recently argued that if further funds are to be drawn by the authorities from tariffs for capital works, this can only mean further massive increases in tariffs. We have seen increases of the order of 40 per cent occur In Victoria over the past 18 months. However, the alternative measure has problems because it will result in the accumulation of a massive debt against future generations of taxpayers.
The Government has consistently taken the view that the planning of energy and energy intensive industries is a matter for the private sector. But there is a real danger that this will mean that the risks are increasingly borne by the public sector while the security and the profits will flow inevitably to the private sector. This in my view, is especially the case in relation to the aluminium industry.
The Aluminium Company of America is currently negotiating with the Victorian Government concerning its proposed smelter at Portland. The company, in the face of a difficult short term market situation, has been threatening to pull out of the project despite the $70m already invested. In the event that it does pull out the State Government will be left with massive commitments to power lines to Portland, and the construction of the Loy Yang power station, the costs of which have been escalating at the rate of $lm a day. The company argues that the enterprise will be only marginally profitable given the present state of international metal markets, especially the first two stages. However, this company is hardly operating in a true market situation, controlling as it does a substantial share of world production. It can

afford to plan over a very long period with some confidence that it will eventually be able to wield substantial control over world prices when we have another international economic upturn.
The Victorian Government, faced with an election in a matter of months, is undoubtedly being influenced to make a decision on the terms and conditions offered to the company, under the pressure of a threat to close down yet another major project in the State. For these reasons it is crucial that national policies be determined with respect to electricity and electricity pricing. As the Department of the Treasury has warned there are serious dangers that electricity is being offered to aluminium producers at rates which do not reflect the national economic interest. In part this reflects the fact that we have never faced up to the implications of a policy of electricity for export.
In the present circumstances it is not simply a matter of paying for costs, but a matter of getting a return on Australian resources. Given that we are expanding supply to take advantage of a changing international energy situation the marginal costs are also more relevant than they have ever been. But the marginal cost of supplying electricity is going up dramatically for a variety of reasons. There are the unprecedented high interest rates, the increased demand for expensive anti-pollution devices to be added to power stations, and the diminishing economics of scale associated with the very large stations which are more complex and appear to operate at relatively low levels of efficiency.
In summary, it is then a time in which we need to do some clear thinking. What are our national objectives with respect to energy? To what extent should we give consideration to the long term? Are we simply interested in exploiting resources at the fastest possible rate in a policy which seeks to define national energy objectives and then utilise our resources in conformity with those objectives?
I believe that we are moving along a path of development which poses extreme dangers in the future. I doubt that a country as geographically dispersed as Australia needs to have an energy policy which must mean expensive energy in the longer term. Also, given our resources it ought to be possible to guarantee relatively cheap energy for all our people. Cheap energy flows, in my view, not from rapid development of our resources but from attention to both the most effective forms of supplying energy and also the most effective and efficient forms of the utilisation of energy; that is, attention to energy conservation.

States Grants (Capital Assistance) Bill

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2909

The development of a comprehensive national energy policy is not an optional extra. It is absolutely fundamental. This is a government that has little or no interest in policy. It is interested only in the short term. It identifies the interests of the international corporate sector inevitably with the interests of Australia. It is not even interested in business in the broadest sense. It does not understand the inter-relationship between energy and employment policy. It does not understand, for example, that in a situation of surplus labour and diminishing energy resources different policies need to be adopted. The Government's relentless drive towards restructuring the economy around capital and energy intensive industries orientated towards uncertain international markets has built into it fundamental contradictions.
We as a nation need to make choices. Those choices need to be rational. But they should be made in the light of a comprehensive range of factors including the fundamental priority of maintaining and improving standards of living in Australia for all Australians. What this debate does is to provide an opportunity to point to the fact that the Government is sacrificing in the short term the well-being of ordinary people for the sake of a dream which I believe is not rooted in economic reality. We have no future as an advanced country if we develop around nonrenewable resources, owned by transnational companies, shipped overseas in foreign ships and not transformed past the semi-processing phase in Australia.
There is no doubt that industry in this country has had to be subsidised and supported by consumers and tax payers. Before we rush in to provide massive subsidies to resource giants we should carefully assess what their contribution
will be to the Australian economy and what they will do to advance our standard of living. The record of these companies in other countries, particularly in the Third World, would suggest that they would not make a great contribution. That is why we need to look for examples of where governments have been prepared to set objectives and to force these corporations to meet those objectives.
If the Victorian Government, and/or the Australian Government wishes to continue to encourage Alcoa to go ahead at Portland it should make absolutely certain that there is no degree of subsidy involved. The private inquiry carried out by Professor Cochrame does not give one a great deal of comfort that that, in fact, will be the case. These powerful companies which dominate the industry ought not to require subsidies. One would have thought that many members of the

Government parties would agree to that. It is what many of them argue. But if these big boys of industry require subsidies how can one criticise the competitive sector of the economy asking for assistance from the Government to ensure that it does not go to the wall?
In this mixed economy, for the most part, industry will not be able to pay its own way, particularly in times of flat demand and international recession. The question is: Who gets subsidies for what reason?
The States Grants (Capital Assistance) Bill reflects the fact that people are getting less and less support for basic services. The share of capital resources going to meet social needs is constantly being diminished. We should ensure that the funds that are available in this country, particularly in the public sector are not being transferred out of the country in the form of subsidies to international resource giants.
Finally, I speak in support of the amendment, particularly as it relates to clauses 2 and 4. I emphasise that clause 4 refers to producing unbalanced development by facilitating the expansion of infrastructure for the resource industries while severely contracting expenditure on the social infrastructure. This, indeed, has been the trend through the life of this Government. It isa trend which this amendment condemns. That has been the principal aim of my remarks with respect to the Bill.
Mr Hurford-Mr Deputy Speaker, I would like to explain that the Opposition is not dividing the House on this issue not because it does not feel strongly about it but because of the lateness of the hour and the amount of business that needs to be carried out before the House adjourns.
Amendment negatived.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved foithwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Wilson) read a third time.
NITROGENOUS FERTILIZERS SUBSIDY AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Secona Reading
Debate resumed from 27 October, on motion by MrMoore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.

291 0 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Bill

Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) ( 10.37)-The Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Amendment Bill increases the period for the payment of the nitrogenous fertilisers subsidy scheme and is of itself not one of the more important Bills introduced in this House. We on this side of the House do not oppose the extension of the period of payment for a further six months. However, the legitimacy of this form of subsidy requires some comment. In addressing myself to the Bill I fully realise that fertilisers of all sorts, particularly nitrogenous fertilisers, are one of the very important elements in food production in Australia. The production of food has reached a rather critical situation throughout the world. The use of fertilisers is vitally important to the well-being of millions of people.
There is a new development in the use of land which I would like to raise. It has some impact on the use of nitrogenous fertilisers and the use of subsidies. I refer to the approach throughout the world of using food-growing land and fuel crops for fuel. National programs to divert agricultural resources to produce fuel crops come at a time when efforts to expand world food output are losing momentum. Between 1950 and 1971 per capita grain production world wide increased by some 30 per cent leading to substantial improvements in nutrition not only in industrialised countries but also in much of the Third World. However, since 1971 growth in world output has slowed scarcely keeping pace with population growth.
The failure of the world grain output to match the increases in both population and income led to rising food prices during the 1970s. Throughout the 1960s and early 1970s the world had two major food reserves-large, often burdensome stocks of grain and a vast area of crop land idle under the United States of America farm programs. Together, these provided a period of unprecedented stability in world food supplies and prices. As recently as 1972 over 24 million hectares of United States' crop land was idle in the farm management programs. Since then most of that idle farm land has been returned to production. Even with this addition, the production of food in some years has not matched the growth in world demand.
As the 1980s begin the world has only one food reserve left, and that is its stocks of grain. These are at as Iowa level as they were in the 1972-73 period which led to savage increases in prices in 1974, creating problems for many people in the poorer parts of the world. In addition to the decline in reserves production has become more erratic. Efforts to double food output over the last

decade pushed agriculture into areas of marginal rainfall and on to marginal soils. The former is dramatically evident in the Soviet Union, where a crop failure every third year or so is commonplace in the virgin lands-that is, in the new areas brought into cultivation since the 1950s. Over the past decade world demand for grain has been expanding by some 30 million tonnes a year and of this total the bulk is needed to cover the increase in human numbers, leaving very little to upgrade diets.
While the world population growth has slowed, the absolute year to year increase remains at 70 million. In effect, the gradual decline in the rate of population growth has been offset by the increase in the size of the population. Rising incomes have also contributed to the increase in world food demand, particularly in areas where the consumption of livestock products and the grain to feed livestock has been rising rapidly. On the supply side, growth in the world food crop land base has slowed markedly since mid-century, expanding at only one-fifth the rate at which the population is expanding. Amongst all of this we have a new competitor seeking the use of land and fertilisers, and hence the use of nitrogenous fertilisers. I refer to the potential to produce alcohol to drive motor cars as against the use of the same land for food production. Even without the competition from energy crops, the world will be hard-pressed to avoid a decline in per capita food production during the decade ahead if the projected increase in population continues. As against this, we must look at the emergence of energy crops which will compete actively for the land available for food.
We have seen a large inflow of capital into this country, much of which in the last 18 months has gone towards buying up broad acres of land in Australia. It is interesting to note that much of the land that has been bought up is what I would term energy related land-land that eventually could be used for the production of fuel for motor cars as against fuel for human beings. We need only to look at what is happening in some other countries. For instance, the Brazilians signed a protocol in 1979 with the National Automotive Association confirming their intention of producing in the early 1980s 250,000 vehicles that would run entirely on alcohol. They have in effect planted some 200,000 hectares of crop land for sugar cane. Brazilian officials claim that the production of energy crops will be undertaken in addition to, rather than in competition with, other food crops. But energy crops compete not only for land but also for agricultural investment, water, fertilisers, farm management, fuels, farm market roads, agricultural credit and technical advisory services.

Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Bill

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2911

The immediate consequences of the Brazilian energy program may be more internal than external but the more recently launched effort in the United States has broader ramifications. If the United States crop land is shifted to energy crop production to fuel automobiles on a massive scale it will be at the expense of the exportable surplus of grain. Over the past generation the entire world has come to depend heavily on the North American grain export, with just over four-fifths of the total being for the United States, and all but
a handful of countries now import grain, mostly from North America. A year or so ago the United States Government set a target to produce 500 million gallons of fuel alcohol a year by the end of 1981. It looked to be hopelessly optimistic. Now that quantity appears likely to be exceeded. As more and more alcohol distilleries are built in the United States to meet the official goal of produc-
ing 7,500 million litres of ethanol by the mid-1980s, the exportable surplus of grain will be reduced accordingly.
In addition to the traditional buyers of the North American grain market-the flour millers and the feed lot operators-in the grain importing countries there will be a fourth potentially large group. That will be the distilleries. Exactly how high the price of grain could be driven by this approach is difficult to say but any high increase in the price of grain would cause problems. Obviously, the higher petrol prices go the more the distillers can afford to pay per bushel of grain. When petrol prices reach $2 a gallon, given the existing gasahol subsidies in the United States, those United States distillers could easily afford to pay $5 a bushel for maize and, should the price of gasoline reach $3 a gallon, distillers would be able to pay close to $6 a bushel for maize without any subsidies or credits. If the phase-out of oil price controls in the United States proceeds on schedule and the oil price moves to the world market level by the end of 1982, gasolene prices will rise accordingly. Under these circumstances United States distillers will be in a very strong position to bid for a growing share of the grain harvest.
This has implications for Australia. We have vast acres of broad land that could be used for growing cassava, sugar cane and grain for the production of alcohol. If we proceed in an unregulated way and government subsidies are unwisely used to encourage production it may not be in the best interests of this country. It would not be in the best interests of the production of food and it could lead to a lot of instability. I urge this warning on the Government: It should carefully assess just what the position is in regard to energy related land-land where crops will be

grown in the future for the production of alcohol fuels and thus will compete directly with food production. As I have said, both Brazil and the United States have major programs now to convert agricultural commodities to alcohol. Countries such as Australia and New Zealand, and to a lesser degree South Africa, are considering the conversion of crops to alcohol for fuel on a commercial scale. This new interest in fuel crops could be an historical landmark. If more and more oil refineries are replaced by alcohol distilleries the world agricultural economy will be transformed. This will have a dramatic effect on Australia and Australia would be attracted to producing crops for alcohol production. I know that at the moment very many problems are to be sorted out in relation to the economics and technology of producing alcohol but in 1981 we could see the start of what might be a crisis situation in regard to the use of land and the use of our fertilisers.
This leads me to ask a couple of questions in regard to the use of subsidies, particularly those which apply to these fertilisers. Fertiliser subsidies can be used to affect production in one, two or perhaps three ways. The first is to assist in raising incomes at times of non-profitable prices. for agricultural products. This is not a very good measure to be used because any subsidy used to assist one industry automatically goes across to the very profitable industries, and hence we pass public funds across to help people who are doing very well. The second point is that subsidies could be used to encourage production in the particular direction in which a government wishes agricultural products to develop. This could involve the legitimate use of a subsidy of this nature, namely, to direct production. But we in Australia are at present far past this stage where we need to use a subsidy of this nature right across the board to direct the production of agricultural products. The second reading speech of the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) reads:
The question of the future operation of the nitrogenous fertilisers subsidy is currently under inquiry by the Industries Assistance Commission.
The reporting date on the inquiry which was 16 October 1981-
This is the report on nitrogenous fertilisers-
has been extended to coincide with the reporting date of 28 February 1982 for the associated lAC inquiry into phosphatic fertilisers. This action was taken because of the commonality of the issues involved in both references.
The Minister referred in his speech to the fact that the subsidies on both phosphatic and nitrogenous fertilisers have a commonality, and the Industries Assistance Commission report which will come down in February will report on that matter. This raises a couple of interesting points, particularly

2912 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Bill

in the light of a policy-we should bear in mind that the Campbell report on the Australian Financial System was brought down todaybased very much on free enterprise philosophies. We have the Campbell report to look at and later in the year the Government will have the lAC report to look at. To counterbalance that I suppose we will have National Country Party pressures. Those pressures, particularly in regard to subsidies, will be in stark contrast to what the Campbell report says and possibly to what the lAC report will say.
Mr Braithwaite-How much is this subsidy worth?
Mr CUNNINGHAM-The nitrogenous fertiliser subsidy will cost some $2m for the next six months. Any subsidy paid to an industry which could be very profitable is an expenditure of funds out of the public purse which perhaps could go to other more needy people in the community. We .are finding at present that this Government is only too happy to reduce the funding for many needy sections of the community. We have only to look at many of the things that have happened in the last six months as a result of the razor gang to see that this Government has two standards when it comes to this type of thing. I am not one of those who say that there are not many reasons why the rural sector should not be encouraged and assisted, particularly when, as at present, this Government's policies are absolutely tearing the heart out of the value of the money that it is expecting to receive from exports. Many industries at present using this nitrogenous fertiliser receive money in one hand from the Government and have it completely taken off them by the Government's economic policies. There is not much point in putting nitrogen on a fruit tree when the product cannot be sold overseas simply because the Government's policies have virtually destroyed the value of our currency.
I conclude by saying that we will need to assess within the next six months the whole situation of the fertiliser subsidies. I hope that, when the lAC report on the nitrogenous fertilisers and the phosphatic fertilisers comes down, this Government will take a common-sense approach. We do not want to see nitrogenous fertiliser subsidies being placed in the hands of people who perhaps would develop an industry not in the best interests of world food production. Nitrogenous fertiliser subsidies could quite easily be spent, at the expense of food production, on the development of the production of sugar cane or cassava for alcohol fuels for the motor car. This sort of policy direction is something that the Government must look at

seriously and it must take it into consideration before subsidies are put forward. There may be a good case for a complete change in direction after the lAC report is brought down in February.
I am very concerned that over many years, particularly the 1970s, this superphosphate subsidy issue has been used more for political reasons than for good economic sense. I know that many members of this Government, particularly in the Cabinet, receive large sums from the public purse, simply because they use large tonnages of fertiliser. I cannot see the common sense in that approach, because in other countries there is usually a means test approach to subsidies on fertilisers. I have heard many speakers on the Government side push that approach only too willing when they are talking about pensioners, but we do not hear too much of it when they are talking about the tonnages on which fertiliser subsidies can be paid. I suggest that a limit of 50 tonnes would be ample. If it were really necessary for the existence of farmers for there to be a $12 a tonne subsidy on superphosphate or a $20 a tonne subsidy on nitrogenous fertiliser, a cut-off point should be put into the arrangement. In the first place, we have to be sure that a subsidy is justified and, secondly, we have to have a cut-off point.
I strongly oppose any across the board subsidy, because a very profitable enterprise could be using up to 500 tonnes of fertiliser and getting a $6,000 hand-out from the public purse when there is no need for it at all. Of course, the argument then is that such enterprises making big profits would be paying fair taxes and that some of that money would be going back to the Government anyway.
Even if they are paying 46c in the dollar in tax, 54c in the dollar is going from the public purse into the pockets of people who are doing very well without handouts from the public purse. While we support the proposal for another six months, I hope that at the end of those six months there will be a big adjustment by the Government to this type of approach and that it will put into operation some of the practices that it is so keen to im-
pose on other sections of the community. If it finds, after the lAC report is handed down, that there is justification for the continuation of some sort of subsidy, at least it should be directed to those in need of that subsidy and should not be paid across the board to big corporations and big farmers who are returning only half of it in tax and pocketing the rest at public expense.
Mr BRAITHWAITE (Dawson) (10.54) -'.The honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham), who preceded me in this debate, was going well during his set speech but, when he got to the impromptu areas of his speech, I am

Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Bill

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2913

afraid that he missed the point altogether. He was talking of massive subsidies. I remind the honourable member that the total amount of extra nitrogenous fertiliser subsidy is between $2m and $2.5m.
However, he talked about the massive profits that are coming back to some suppliers of our vital food and trade products. He mentioned a 50 tonne limit as a means test, but he did not even mention the type of fertiliser involved~whether it is straight nitrogeneous or another. I am afraid that he lost me once he got away from his set speech. Perhaps he might explain that to me later on.
I am very happy to see that the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore). who introduced this Bill, is at the table. I support this legislation because it means a carry over for the next six months. I think that the Minister is making a very fine job of the office he has taken over. I am certain that he will make sure that the investigation by the appropriate tribunal will be a fair one as far as rural industries are concerned. As I mentioned before, the extra cost of the subsidy is estimated at between $2m and $2.5m. The previous speaker did not seem to realise that this is a relatively small amount in comparison with subsidies given to protect other Australian industries, particularly industries such as the motor industry, where we are talking in billions and not millions of dollars. More than anything else I support this measure because of the cost to the Government

and to the consumer of protective subsidies and grants. I believe that industries in Australia receive too much protective support which prohibits innovation, initiative, restructuring and the use of modern technology. Might I say that that can apply to only one set of industries. The industries I represent, particularly the rural and mining industries, are innovative, they are prepared to restructure, and they use modern technology.
I spoke on similar legislation on 14 September 1978 and 11 October 1979. On both occasions I referred to a need for a further referral to the Industries Assistance Commission to update the program in terms of the 1980 situation and not that of 1974, when the matter was first raised. If we are to use grants and subsidies I believe they should be meaningful and appropriate. I agree with the previous speaker that they have to have a purpose. This legislation is being extended so that the lAC can complete a fresh inquiry to enable a decision to be made by 30 June 1982.
I mentioned the appropriateness of a subsidy. For instance, the rate per tonne of nitrogenous content has reduced from $78.74 per tonne in 1975 to $60 in 1976, $40 in 1977 and $20 since 1978. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a schedule which shows the increase in prices of fertilisers having a nitrogenous content, on -works, Brisbane, since February 1974.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

SCHEDULE SHOWING RISE IN PRICES OF FERTILISERS HAVING A NITROGENOUS CONTENT On Works Brisbane ($)

Feb.

Feb.

Jan.

Jan.

Jan.

Jan.

Sept.

OCt.

1974

1975

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

Urea-
46 per cent content per tonne
Aqua Ammonia20 per cent content per tonne
Ammonia Nitrate34 per cent content per tonne

87.20 27.00 78.20

113.00 49.62 117.60

140.60 46.89 130.20

151.40 52.53 130.40

159.60 58.76 138.80

\75.60 69.06 147.00

207.80 84.59 '159.60

266.60 102.95 242.20

Mr BRAITHWAITE~This schedule shows an increase in the basic costs of nitrogenous fertilisers since 1974 of 136 per cent for urea, 107.5 per cent for aqua ammonia, and 106 per cent for ammonia nitrate. This increase has occurred over a period in which the subsidy has decreased by 75 per cent.
The increases in the prices of fertiliser reflect the increase in world crude oil prices. Since 1974 prices have gone from $US11.25 a barrel to $US32 at June 1981, an increase of 84 per cent. For these reasons, farm costs~and farms are the

great users of fertilisers and fuels-have escalated at figures well above the consumer price index. Farm products are sold on world markets where more competition and changing exchange rates are depressing the market prices for those products. I mentioned before the $3m cost of the subsidy for all of 1981-82. This is insignificant in amount but important in principle, particularly in regard to the changes in other costs.
Could I for a moment refer to the fuel pricing

2914 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Bill

arrangements instituted many years ago. Basically, 1976-77 was the year in which the real impact of the policy took hold. The increase from $USI4.53 per barrel in 1979 to $US24 per barrel in 1980 was significant and resulted in severe criticism for many people, particularly from the Opposition. The present price of $32 per barrel shows a decline in that increase and a relative stabilising of the price. The results achieved by this policy, including decreased usage of fuel, a lessening dependency on overseas supplies, greater exploration and development, and a greater use of alternative energy resources, today stand as evidence and testimony to the wisdom and correctness of the crude oil policy.

that the review at that time would, or should produce a substantial increase in the domestic price that may not be palatable to the consumer. I believe that the review should be made sooner so that the increases will be regulated and more relevant to changes and not disruptive as they will be after the five years of the agreement. The National Country Party fully endorses this Bill, the six months extension and the lAC review, particularly if undertaken with a view to comparing the assistance given to manufacturing industries and the limited assistance available to rural industries. I support the Minister and the Bill.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.

The sugar industry in Queensland is a major Message from the Governor-General recom-

user of fertilisers having a nitrogenous content. mending appropriation announced.

The industry uses between 60 per cent and 65 per cent of the State's total tonnage and about 25 per cent of the Australian total. Fertiliser is an essential ingredient to the growth of sugar cane and the

Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.

industry is concerned not only for the price, but Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third

also for the long term availability of the product. I time.

am sure the industry welcomes the retention of the bounty and also the promised investigation, but I would point out that in cash terms the

STATUTE LAW (MISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS) BILL 1981

benefit to the sugar industry of the subsidy for

Second Reading

1981-82 will be only about $750,000. I mentioned Debate resumed from 27 October, on motion

earlier the escalating costs of farm production by Mr N. A. Brown:

which are well in excess of the consumer price index figure taken usually as the inflation rate.

That the Bill be now read a second time.

Farm inflation, in costs and new machinery is Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith)

greater than domestic inflation. This brings me to (11.4)-The House, when debating this Bill, is

the subject of the domestic sugar pricing arrangement, agreed between the Commonwealth and State Governments. It is relevant because increased costs of fertiliser and fuel are an indexing factor in the pricing formula.

dealing with a unique presentation. A Bill of this type relating to the Statute Law Revision Acts was presented earlier this year. We have no objection to the Bill making drafting amendments, repealing spent provisions or making technical , amendments by omnibus provisions but there are

When the five year arrangement was entered into on I October 1979 the formula was based on an increase of 70 per cent of the CPI to account for cash costs only. The formula took into account other factors, particularly the world sugar price change. Actually, on the occasion of the auto-
matic increase on I July, 1980 and 1981 domestic price increases were substantially less than 70 per cent of the CPI. The point I wish to make is that the formula does not reflect the increase in farm

certain provisions in this legislation which go beyond that description and should not be included in the Bill in this fashion. Some of the amendments we support but it makes it very difficult for the Opposition when there are amendments of substance to legislation in a Bill which, in its main section, amends 17 Acts of Parliament and in its Schedule amends 12 Acts and repeals another three. We are dealing with an enormous number oflegislative provisions in the one Bill.

costs so that the yearly price increases are conWere the Bill to consist solely of the type of

siderably less than they should be. The result is a amendment contained in the Schedule, which

shrinking domestic price in real terms at a time simply seeks to amend drafting errors and to bring

when the exchange rate is shrinking the world up to date drafting language, we would not have

market price in terms of real Australian currency. any basic objection. But some of the proposed

I suggest to the Government and to the sugar amendments in the various parts of the Bill can-

industry that they should not wait for the full run not be described in that fashion. For example,

of the five year period to 1984 as this would mean that an amendment such as that proposed to the

Statute Law Bill

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2915

Australian Capital Territory Evidence (Temporary Provisions) Act should be included in legislation of this kind is wrong. In 1971 the Senate disallowed an evidence ordinance for the Australian Capital Territory. The Act was passed to provide evidence laws in respect of criminal trials for the Territory. I do not believe it to be consistent with what occurred in 1971 for the Act, which gives effect to the ordinance, to be able to be amended or repealed by another ordinance. Of course, ordinances are made by the Governor General in Council.
At present the matter of evidence in Federal and Territorial matters is being considered by the Law Reform Commission. This legislation will allow the evidence law applicable in the Australian Capital Territory to be changed without any reference to the Parliament. If the Government wishes to give an undertaking that the ordinance to be passed in the future must be approved by the House of Assembly, we will find that acceptable. However, if, as at present, the recommendations of the Assembly are basically to be ignored we will insist on parliamentary approval of a new evidence law for the Australian Capital Territory. The only power that the Houses of Parliament have in relation to ordinances is the power of disallowance, not the power of amendment. If the Parliament were to disallow an ordinance providing for a new law of evidence for the Australian Capital Territory, that would lead us into precisely the same position as we were in in 1971; that is, there would be a vacuum in the law. That is a position in which the Parliament should not be placed.
Probably the major amendment contained in the legislation is that proposed to the Commonwealth Electoral Act. On 7 May the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) announced that in future the Government would treat citizenship as the appropriate basis for voting rights. As the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) pointed out, one must have residency in Australia for three years before one can apply for citizenship. We certainly do not believe that British subject ought to be given special rights. However, some consideration ought to be given to reducing the qualifying period for citizenship to, say, 12 months. As the honourable member for Port Adelaide pointed out also, the term 'British subject' appears in over 70 Acts of Parliament, quite apart from the Commonwealth Electoral Act. If a provison such as this, which we

welcome, is to be included in the Statue Law Revision Bill, which we find dubious, the opportunity ought to be taken in this legislation to remove the discrimination which continues to exist in other pieces of Commonwealth legislation.
We have no objection to the transfer of jurisdiction in bankruptcy, to the proposed amendments to the Designs Act or the proposed amendments to the Patents Act. The proposed amendments to the Petroleum Products Pricing Act, which was passed earlier this year, are interesting in that an earlier statutes revision Act has been misnamed, even though that Act was passed only this year. The amendment referred to the Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Revision) Act, whereas it should have referred to the Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act. It is perhaps a little ironic that statutes revision legislation should have to correct earlier statutes revision legislation. We hope that in future all statutes revision Bills carry the same title as the present Bill and that if more than one such Bill is introduced in a particular year those Bills simply be numbered, as was the case with the tax Bills-for example, tax Bills (Nos 1 to 9). If that is not done the titles of amending Bills will be extremely confusing and it will become very difficult to locate the revising Acts.
The proposed amendments to the Trade Union Training Authority Act simply recognise the fact that the Council of Australian Government Employee Organisations is no longer in existence, it having merged with the Australian Council of Trade Unions. The representation on the National Labour Consultative Council previously given to CAGEO will now be taken up by the ACTU. The Trades and Labour Council representation on the State councils for union training is to be correspondingly increased by one. Another proposed amendment of substance is that to the Aboriginal Councils and Associations Act 1976. Whilst that is a piece of legislation passed by the Fraser Government, I should point out that it is a piece of Australian Labor Party legislation which was introduced in the Parliament in 1975 and which would have been passed were it not for the Governor-General's intervention. The proposed amendment will allow the bodies incorporated under the Act to dispose of their assets to non-Aporiginal bodies or individuals. However, ministerial approval is still required. I deem that a little paternalistic.
While the amendments in themselves are welcome in that they improve the present position, ministerial approval is still required. Why Aboriginal councils and associations cannot deal with their own assets in the same way as anybody else I

2916 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Statute Law Bill

am at a loss to understand. The reason for land tenure being under what is called an inalienable freehold is not because there is distrust of what land councils or land trusts might do with the land but simply because of the relationship between Aboriginals and land which is quite different from the European concept which simply regards land as an asset which is readily transferrable. Provided that an Aboriginal councilor association is not acting ultra vires or in some way vexatiously, there is no reason in principle why the disposal of assets or interests should not be dealt with in any way that the councilor association thinks fit.
We support the amendments to the Australian Capital Territory Supreme Court Act. These amendments will enable judges to make their oaths or affirmations of allegiance before superior court judges, that is, High Court or Federal Court, instead of the necessity for this to be done to the Governor-General. The amendment has a slightly republican tone which we thoroughly support. I do not know whether it will get the ringing support of the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) in view of his comments in this place. The amendment to enable reserved judgments to be delivered by any member of the court is quite sensible and we support it. It places the Australian Capital Territory in its proper place as a supreme court. The same considerations apply to clause 16 of the Bill which enable the Attorney General rather than the appointee of the Governor-General to bring indictments for offences. Again there is a republican tone in this amendment. The other amendment to be made to the Australian Capital Supreme Court Act relates to the question of interest being payable on judgments for money. We support this amendment which is necessary particularly at this time of inflation.
The Opposition does not support the amendments to the Australian Overseas Projects Corporation Act. We find it difficult to understand why this legislation is being introduced in this fashion. The Government must be under the mistaken belief that the Corporation, established in 1978, is achieving some effective work. We cannot see that it has been able to do anything because of the strictures placed on it in the original Act. The Corporation cannot buy or sell goods either as a principle or an agent and it cannot compete with private enterprise. The Government continues to have a hang-up about the overseas trading corporation legislation which it rejected in the Senate when in Opposition. The question of an overseas trading corporation has nothing to do with communism or socialism. It is simply a fact of life that

there is a need for trading contracts to be established on a government-to-government basis. It is in the interests of private enterprise as a whole for this to be done.
However, the Government seems intent on protecting some sectional interests. The amendment states that the Corporation is not to take any actions which would result in a project being carried out where there is any government involvement. This is a ludicrous provision which will result in the loss of trading contracts. The Government seems to be unaware that we live in a mixed economy where the private and public sectors are intertwined. The building industry is in a slump due very largely to government cut-backs. Public sector involvement is vital to the Australian private industry particularly in the area of trade. While some individual private concerns may benefit from the amendments being moved Australian industry as a whole will not, and the Australian public certainly will not.
Subject to the reservations that I have stated we are prepared to support the Bill other than provisions of Part VII which we would ask the Government to delete. Those provisions relate to amendments to the Australian Overseas Projects Corporation. I make the point again that the original Bill really bound that project corporation hand and foot from the ability to operate in any competitive fashion. It could neither operate as a principal nor as an agent. If one looks at the profit and loss statement contained in the annual report for 1979-80, is it any wonder that we get into the position that all the report can show is a loss? We have a situation now where the accumulated losses to date are over $250,000. If one compares the Corporation's balance sheet with that of the Snowy Mountains Hydro-Electric Authority one will find the Snowy Mountains Authority operating at a profit. Why is this so? It is so because it can get out and compete both as a principal and agent. One has the ridiculous situation here that taxpayers' money is being given to an overseas projects corporation which is heavily in the red after two years and is unable to get out of it. How can it possibly start to earn money when it is not able to act either as principal or agent? If we look at the amendments now proposed it is prevented from even getting involved in any area where there is deemed to be an Australian authority. There is a specific prohibition in Part VII preventing the Corporation from getting involved in any public consortium or competing against any Australian private organisation or consortium. Proposed new section 8A provides that where the Corporation is aware that an Australian private organisation or an Australian private consortium

Statute Law Bill

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2917

is able and willing to carry out an overseas development project the Corporation is unable to take part in the project. But there has to be some logic in what we are about. It is ridiculous to think that this Bill provides that if a department of the Australian Public Service or a department of a State Public Service is involved the Corporation cannot assist. I think that is where we of the Opposition find this provision to be ridiculous.
I make the point again that the Corporation is operating at a loss. We want to see the Corporation get into the act of making a profit. In so doing it will readily accelerate the opportunity for the private sector to do the work. Surely the task of the Corporation is to assist with and to find the work. But to have it in a situation in which it cannot ever be a principal or an agent for another organisation and it has to drop out because some organisation allegedly is in the private sector or comes within the definition of an Australian authority which virtually bars the Corporation by statute is quite counter-productive. I know the House wants to complete this Bill this evening and the Opposition will co-operate in that regard but we will need to go into Committee just to deal with Part VII of this legislation.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
In Committee
The Bill.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (11.17)-1 refer to Part VII of the legislation which deals with amendments to the Australian Overseas Projects Corporation Act 1978. It can be seen from this Part that the Australian Overseas Projects Corporation cannot go near any organisation coming within the definition of 'Australian authority' in terms of being involved in development. The definition of'Australian authority' also includes a department of the Australian Public Service and a department of the Public Service of a State, but does not include the Corporation. Clause 24 seeks to insert proposed new section 8A, which reads:
Where the Corporation is aware that an Australian private organisation or an Australian private consortium is able and willing to carry out an overseas development project or a part of an overseas development project, the Corporation shall not take any action that would result in that project or that part of the project being carried out, in whole or in part, by an Australian authority or by an Australian public consortium.
There is a similar provision set out in proposed new section 8A (2). We of the Opposition find it quite ridiculous to think that the Corporation is so hamstrung. I have already made the point in my speech on the second reading that we do not think

the Corporation is doing as well as it should be doing. The taxpayers' money will not be wisely expended if the Corporation is to be hindered by legislative strictures. Accordingly, we oppose this amendment; that is, the whole of Part VII. We do noUntend to press it to a division because of the lateness of the hour.
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (11.19)-1 would like to take the opportunity to respond briefly to the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith (Mr Lionel Bowen) who has argued the opposition to Part VII of this Bill. I think the role which the Government has set for the Australian Overseas Projects Corporation will be seen quite clearly in the explanation I am about to give. I think the public will understand that it is a proper role which carves out for the Corporation an ability to assist Australian organisations to compete for contracts for development projects overseas. The Government has deliberately limited the powers of the Corporation so that existing Australian commercial organisations cannot be displaced by the Corporation in their normal activities. The actual execution of projects is a function of the private sector and the supply of goods needed to fulfil a particular project would be the responsibility of the Australian firms associated with the project.
I believe, then, that the Committee will ~ee that the role of the Corporation is complementary to that of private enterprise and existing Australian commercial organisations. It is intended that the Corporation assist those organisations without intruding into their normal commercial activities and without seeking, as I have said, to displace existing Australian corporations in their normal activities.
Bill agreed to.
Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.
Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr Viner)-by leave-read a third time.
ADJOURNMENT
Stock Exchange Markets-Computerised Legal Information Retrieval Systems
Motion (by Mr Viner) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (l1.22)-ln the 10 days before last year's general election, share market gamblers enjoyed a picnic in Australia. They manipulated the prices of Australian shares for no sound reason except to line their pockets with unearned, speculative profits. Further, they spread

2918 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Adjournment

gossip, rumour and lies to try to mislead the public this attempt to generate an irrational anti-Labor

about their activities. Just as seriously, they were hysteria. On October 9, the Prime Minister (Mr

supported, even encouraged, by brokers, by Malcolm Fraser) whipped up a Press conference

newspaper financial reporters and editorialists to claim:

and by Fraser Government spokesmen. But now, . . . what happened on the stock markets yesterday and

the truth about those 10 days can be better undertoday shows quite clearly how business and hundreds of thou-

stood. The subsequent performance of share prices has revealed the cynicism of these financial, media and political manipulators.
Let me begin by reminding the House of the facts. After a period of increasing share prices, by around 44 points over the preceding five weeks, on Tuesday, 7 October and Wednesday, 8 October last year, the Sydney Stock Exchange all ordinaries index fell 35 points from 692 to 657. The index rose again to 678 two days later, then fell to 662 on Wednesday, 15 October before rising to 675 on Friday, 17 October. The conservative forces had no doubt why these share price fluctuations took place. The Daily TelegraphMurdoch for the masses-headed its report on 8 October with 'Opinion poll rumours rock stock exchange. Panic as ALP Surges Ahead'. The story

sands of Australian investors view the prospect of a Labor Government.
The Prime Minister's business consultant and a renowned speculator himself, the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) said:
. What we are seeing is simply a foretaste of the way investment would dry up if Labor wins the coming election.
That was October 1980. Let me now challenge these high priests and prophets of conservatism. Do they still stand by those explanations? Is a drop of 36 points in the all ordinaries index still a 'panic', a 'black day', a 'collapse in a heap'? Does it still indicate that Australian business and the public have no confidence in the Government? If so, the Fraser Government has caused not simply a momentary decline but a momentous crash in investor confidence.

began:

I table a graph, prepared by the Parliamentary

Shares crashed as rumours swept Sydney Stock Exchange Library Statistical Service; which shows the Sydyesterday of a new opinion poll believed to show that the ALP ney Stock Exchange indices for all ordinaries and

has surged further ahead of the government parties.

for 50 market leaders between September 1980

On the same day, the business community heard and October 1981. Quite clearly, on at least eight

the same news from the Australian Financial different occasions since the Fraser Government

Review which stated:

was returned at the last general election, the index

Share prices suffered a pounding on national share markets fell as far and as fast as it did on 7 to 8 October yesterday as investors became increasingly nervous of the 1980. Worse still, the market fell in a long term

possibility of the ALP winning at the forthcoming Federal

election. The collapse of prices was one of the biggest single

day falls ever seen on Australian share markets.

-

Eight days later, on 16 October, the Australian Financial Review repeated this line when prices

trend from about 730 points in mid-April to about
560 points at the end of September this year-a fall of 170 points in less than five months. I
suggest the investors and brokers examine these
figures closely. I suggest the public-the target of

fell again. It stated:

their hysteria a year ago-also examine these

The Sydney Morning Herald-Age and Bulletin polls, givfigures. If last year's stories were honest, why are

ing Labor a comfortable lead, saw one of the market's biggest we not now seeing, daily, similar headlines and re-

plunges in the first hour.

ports? If last year's explanation was correct, why

Stock Exchange representatives took the same are we not now hearing, daily, acknowledgments

line. Unnamed brokers quoted in the Age of 8 from the Prime Minister that his Government has

October talked about the blackest day they had been a disaster for business and the Australian

seen in six months and said that 'the bottom's community? Or do we conclude that this collec-

fallen out of the market', at the prospect of a tion of share price manipulators and political

Labor election victory. On 10 October, Mr Denis cynics were simply spreading gossip, rumour and

Tricks, Chairman of the Australian Associated lies to try and con the public in the 10 days before

Stock Exchanges, was quoted as threatening 18 October 1980? If so, I trust we will be wise

further falls if Labor were returned to enough to reject these tactics next time.

government-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-

Mr Dawkins-Tricks?

Order! The honourable member's time has

Mr MILTON~Yes, well named, as the expired.

honourable member for Fremantle has implied. Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth) (11.28)-As

Mr Brent Potts, partner in the broking firm the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General

Rivkin and Co., predicted a stock marketcrash if meets in Perth on Friday I want to draw the

Labor won. The Fraser Government encouraged House's attention to the unsatisfactory position in

Adjournment

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2919

which private enterprises wishing to establish computerised legal information retrieval systems still find themselves. Honourable members will recall recent discussion in the media on the subject of difficulties public libraries and universities are having in complying with the amendments to the Copyright Act and in particular in relation to the copying of statutes, regulations and court judgments. No doubt honourable members have received numerous representations on the subject.
Less well publicised but equally important is government failure so far to allow electronic dissemination of primary legal source materialsstatutes, regulations and cases. It is this which is seriously impeding the establishment in Australia of the computerised legal information retrieval systems that I have referred to, whether it be by Computer Law Services Pty Ltd, Butterworths Pty Ltd or others. At the heart of both these problems is the Crown's copyright claim in respect of these legal source materials-cases, statutes and regulations.
Every person is presumed to know the law and this is indeed his duty. Such an onerous duty must surely carry with it the right of unimpeded access to primary sources of the laws. Governments should not have, or even claim, the right to impede the free dissemination of primary legal source materials, especially given their well known unsatisfactory record in providing up to date consolidated statutes and regulations. If private enterprise can produce a better access to the law then it must be in the public interest that it be able to do so in whatever media-electronic. or otherwise-it finds most convenient. It is for this reason that the Committee on Copyright and Law in the United Kingdom-the Whitford Committee-observed:
The statutes and Judgments, embodying as they do the law, should, on the face of it, be free of any possible copyright restrictions.
The House is no doubt aware that in this respect Australia is out of step with every other major common law countries. In the United States all statutes, regulations and judgments have, since the case of Wheedon v. Peters in 1832, been in the public domain and may be disseminated without government interference. In the United Kingdom the Crown, which has rights in relation to legislative materials but not judgments, does not assert those rights save in exceptional circumstances. In Australia the report of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions has recommended a relaxation of copyright; yet to date there has been no indication of any relaxation of copyright with respect to computerised electronic media. The reasons for this are not clear. The responses to

questions before the Estimates Committee C inquiry into the Attorney-General's Department's estimates for 1981-82 were not entirely satisfactory and indicated that discussions between the States and the Commonwealth with respect to the establishment of computerised legal data retrieval systems were far from resolved, particularly as far as the Commonwealth's position is concerned. Furthermore, details of discussions of and reports to the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General have been given very little public airing.
I believe that this position cannot be justified either on the basis of the Government's commitment to private enterprise or on the basis of my earlier comments with respect to the important right of unimpeded public access to the law. We need to facilitate that access. With the increasing importance ofcomputerised electronic media as a means of rapid dissemination of the law in the major common law countries, it is in Australia's national interests for the Government to forgo what could now be claimed to be a monopoly and to allow capable organisations which wish to disseminate information through computerised electronic media to do so. Again, noting that the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General is to meet in Perth on Friday, I urge that steps in that direction be taken forthwith.
Moti.on (by Mr Hodges) agreed to:
That the question be now put.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
House adjourned at 11.36 p.m.
NOTICES
The following notices were given:
Mr Kerin to move-
That this House censures the Minister for Communications for having misled the Parliament with respect to his knowledge of activities by the Australian Dairy Corporation when under his ministerial control.
Mr Scholes to move-
(1) That the House of Representatives requests the Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory, as a matter of urgency, to bring forward recommendations for a time tabled transfer of powers normally exercised by local government and state related functions to the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly.
(2) That the time table be based on the arrangements used for the transfer of powers in the Northern Territory, but not extend beyond 4 years.
(3) That the recommendations .be capable of a 2 stage transfer, the first stage to become effective following the next election for the A.C.T. House of Assembly and the remaining powers, including financial management, be the subject of negotiation between the incoming Assembly and this Parliament.
(4) That the Committee make recommendations on those powers which should remain under the control of the Commonwealth Parliament.

2920 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Papers

(5) That the Committee make its recommendations in time to be published and discussed before the next elections of the A.C.T. House of Assembly.
Mi' Scholes to move-
That-( I) this House supports the recommendation of the Committee of Privileges for the establishment of a joint select committee to inquire into all aspects of Parliamentary privilege;
(2) a message be sent to the Senate seeking its agreement in principle to the establishment of the proposed joint select committee and calling for urgent consultations between representatives of the 2 Houses for the purpose of drawing up appropriate terms of reference for the proposed joint select committee inquiry, and
(3) the Committee be required to report to this House not later than the first day of sitting of the 1982 Budget sittings.
Mr McVeigh to move-
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, the following proposed work be referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for consideration and report, namely; construction of additional training and sleeping accommodation at RAAF Base Laverton, Victoria.
Mr Sinclair to move-
That the orders of the day, government business, for the resumption of the debate on the motions to take note of the following papers, be discharged:
Schools Commission-Report for triennium 1982-84. Migrant assessment-Report of Committee of ReviewGovernment decisions-Ministerial statement. River Murray Waters Agreement-Ministerial statement and paper. Immigrants-Illegal entry-Ministerial statement. NabarlekUnauthorised release of water-Report. Community Youth Support Scheme-Ministerial statement. Air traffic controller shortage-Ministerial statement. Public Libraries-Policy on assistance-Paper and ministerial statement. Local government personal income tax sharing-State Grants Commission recommendations. National Accreditation Authority for Translators and Interpreters-Paper and ministerial statement. Telecommunications and postal services in AustraliaPublic inquiries-Ministerial statement. Aircraft accident investigation report. Defence integrated secure communications networkMinisterial statement. Migrant assessment-Committee of Review-Report and ministerial statement. Aborigines of the Northern Territory-Social impact of uranium mining-Papers. Overseas aid program-Ministerial statement. Housing industry-Indicative Planning Council-Paper and ministerial statement. Insurance brokers-Regulation-Ministerial statement.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 17 November 1981, pursuant to statute:
Air Navigation Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 308.
Australian Bureau of Statistics Act-Australian Bureau of Statistics-Proposal for collection of information1981-No. 6-Survey of families and alternative working arrangements, March to May 1982.

Australian National University Act-StatutesNo. ISO-Enrolment, Courses and Degrees Amendment
No.15. No. lSI-Faculties (The Faculties) Amendment No. 15.
Bankruptcy Act-Bankruptcy Rules-Statutory Rules 1981, Nos 304, 305.
Bounty (Agricultural Tractors) Act-Return for year 1980-81.
Bounty (Books) Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 303.
Canberra College of Advanced Education ActStatute-No. 46-Courses and Awards Amendment No.2.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 320.
Customs Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 309.
Dairy Industry Stabilisation Levy Act-RegulationsStatutory Rules 1981, No. 316.
Defence Act-Determinations-1981-
No. 49-Education and other Allowances. No. 50-Additional Continuous training Allowance.
No. 51-Cadet Forces Allowances.
Defence Amendment Act-Interim DeterminationsStatutory Rules 1981, Nos 313, 314, 315.
Export Expansion Grants Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 322.
Export Market Development Grants Act-RegulationsStatutory Rules 1981, No. 321.
Health Insurance Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 317.
Interim Forces Benefits Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules t981, No. 311.
Lands Acquisition ActLand acquired for postal services, Warners Bay, N.S. W.
Statements (3) of lands acquired by agreement authorised under sub-section 7 (I).
National Health Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No.318.
Nursing Homes Assistance Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 319.
Public Service Act-
Appointment-Department of Social Security-C.A. Ah Sam.
Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, Nos 306, 307.
Repatriation Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 310.
Seamen's War Pensions and Allowances ActRegulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 312.
Seat of Government (Administration) Act-
Ordinances-1981-
No. 37-Juries (Amendment).
No. 38-Family Provision (Amendment).
No. 39-Dividing Fences. No. 40-Motor Traffic (Amendment) (No.6).
Regulation-1981-
No. 23-(Motor Traffic Ordinance).
States Grants (Petroleum Products) Act-Amendments of the schedules to the subsidy schemes in relation to the States of New South Wales, Queensland, South Australia and Western Australia, dated 28 October 1981.
Telecommunications Act-Australian Telecommunications Commission-By-Iaws
Telecommunications (Charging Zones and Charging Districts)-Amendment No. 16.
Telecommunications (Community Calls)-Amendment No. 14.

Requestfor detailed information

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2921

REPLY TO REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION

Inter-Parliamentary Union

On 15 October 1981, Mr McLean asked Mr

Speaker:

.

What was the annual total cost to the Commonwealth Government of Australia's participation in the Inter-
Parliamentary Union for each of the years 1978-79 to 1980-81.

I.P.U. EXPENDITURE

1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

I. Members' Fares and Allo.wances 2. Secretary's Fares and Allo-
wances 3. 10+ Meeting April 1981
Canberra
4. Contribution to IPU Budget

$ 55,628 12,162
24,100

$ 66,941 13,686
27,530

$
72,309
10,454
10,120 25,245

Total

91,890 108,157 118,128

Mr Speaker-The President of the Senate has provided the following information in answer to Mr McLean's request:

It should be noted that Items I, 2 and 3 are funded by the
Department of the Senate, Item 4 is funded by the Department of Administrative Services which has provided this information.

2922 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Commitment to Youth Program
(Question No. 968)
Mr Hawke asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(I) How many young persons does the Government anticipate assisting under each of the 5 new initiatives of the Commitment to Youth Program announced by him on I October 1980.
(2) How many young persons have been assisted under each of these new initiatives as at 30 March 1981.
(3) How many extra Commonwealth Employment Service staff have been allocated nationally to cope with the increased workload involved in implementing these new initiatives and how have these staff been distributed in each State.
(4) What was the basis on which this staffing figure was calculated.
(5) Were relevant staff associations involved in the calculations of extra staff requirements; iF not, why not.
(6) Were these staff associations satisfied with the number of extra staff allocated to cope with the new initiatives; iF not, what was the basis For their dissatisFaction.
(7) What is the current $ituation concerning the Review to seek improved opportunities For youth jointly announced with the Minister For Education on 16 January 1981 and, in particular, the consideration of ceasing the availability of unemployment benefits For persons under 18 years of age.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Two of the five initiatives relate to the payment of a Transition Allowance. The allowance, equivalent to Unemployment Benefit plus $6 per week, is payable to young people aged 15-19 years who have been unemployed and away From Full-time education For at least four months in the last twelve months and who take part in approved full-time Commonwealth Funded School-to-Work Transition Program courses in T AFE. The same allowance is payable to all young people under the age of 25 years, unemployed and away from Full-time education For eight months out of the last twelve months and who participate in an approved Full-time T AFE course of up to twelve months' duration which is likely to lead to employment.
The Government anticipated that, in a Full year, up to 10,000 young people would be paid a Transition Allowance. The initiative came into effect on I February 1981 and by the end of March 1981, payment of an allowance had been approved to 2,722 young people.
A third initiative was the introduction of higher subsidies under the Special Youth Employment Training Program (SYETP). The new subsidies, set at $80 per week For the first 17 weeks and $55 per week For the remaining 17 weeks, are payable to employers who agree to take on and train young people aged 18-24 years who have been unemployed and away From full-time education For eight months out of the last twelve months.
The Government expected that up to 10,000 young people would receive subsidised on-the-job training under this initiative in a Full year. The new subsidies were also effective from I February 1981 and by the end of March 1981, payment had been approved in respect of 2,686 trainees.

A Fourth initiative involved a variation to the eligibility criteria for training under standard SYETP conditions. Eligi-
bility to such training has been extended to all young people who have completed a Full-time course in TAFE under the Commonwealth Funded School-to-Work Transition Program and who are in need of Further on-the-job training.

This variation in SYETP eligibility became effective at the end of November 1980 and to the end of March 1981, 63 young people had benefitted.

The fin;!1 initiative was the introduction of a special counselling and advice service within the CES. The Government intends that every young person under 25 years of age who has been continuously registered as unemployed for eight months will benefit From this initiative. ACOA bans on the collection of statistics in some States prevented the compilation of an accurate statistic For Australia.

(3) An extra 52 staff, allocated as follows:

New South Wales

16

Victoria

14

Queensland

8

South Australia

5

Western Australia

5

Tasmania

2

Northern Territory

I

Australian Capital Territory

I

(4) Staffing was provided on the basis of estimates of jobseekers who would be eligible For assistance under the pro-
gramme and the services which would be extended to the group.
(5) and (6) A meeting was held with the Administrative
and Clerical Officers' Association on 23 December 1980 prior to the introduction of the programme and at that meeting the Association was advised of the details of the programme, its
target and of the staffing arrangements which the Department proposed to make.
Subsequent to that meeting, the ACOA's Federal Execu-
tive recommended to its State Branches that the programme should not be the subject of any work bans, provided that the
Branches considered the proposed staffing arrangements were adequate. All Branches adopted the Federal Executive
recommendations. (7) The outcome of the Review was announced by the Min-
ister For Education in Parliament on 4 June 1981. Unemployment Benefit is still available to eligible young people under
the age of 18 years.

Superannuation Liability of Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Education

(Question No. 1326)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:

(I) What statutory authorities under his aegis have liabilities to the Commonwealth by way of employer contributions for superannuation which have not been paid or which have not yet been determined.

(2) If these contributions have not been paid, what are the amounts involved and how and when is payment to be made.

(3) IF the contributions have not yet been determined, when is the liability expected to be assessed and how is payment expected to be made.

Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2923

I refer the honourable member to answer to question No. 1320 (Hansard, 10 September 1981, page 1265) provided by the 'Minister representing the Minister for Finance.
Vehicle Conversion to LPG Usage: Department of Education
(Question No. 1560)
MrBungey asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many (a) cars, (b) commercial vehicles and (c) trucks wefe' being operated by his Departmt;nt, excluding vehicles supplied by the Department of Administrative Services, as at 30 June 1980.
(2) How many of these vehicles had been (a) converted to LPG usage and (b) purchased already equipped for LPG usage.
(3) Have plans been made to increase use of LPG in vehicles operated by his Department; if so, what are the details.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to answer to question No. 1563 (Hansard, 10 June 1981, page 3579) provided by the Minister for Administrative Services.
Vehicle Conversion to LPG Usage: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 1569)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many (a) cars (b) commercial vehicles and (c) trucks were being operated by his Department, excluding vehicles supplied by the Department of Administrative Services as at 30 June 1980.
(2) How many of these vehicles had been (a) converted to LPG usage and (b) purchased already equipped for LPG usage.
(3) Have plans been made to increase use of LPG in vehicles operated by his Department; if so, what are the details.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1), (2) and (3) I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Minister for Administrative Services, to Question No. 1563. (Weekly Hansard, 10 June 1981, pages 3579-80).
Capital Territory Health Commission Grant to Family Planning Association
(Question No. 1721)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How was the 1979-80 grant of $52,000 to the Family Planning Association of the Australian Capital Territory by the Capital Territory Health Commission determined.
(2) What grants were approved by him to similar organisations in the States during 1979-80.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) The 1979-80 Community Health Grant of $52,000 allocated to the Family Planning Association of the Australian Capital Territory was determined by the Capital Territory Health Commission, having regard to the estimates of expenditure for the year submitted by the Association to the Commission.
The Commission grant is to assist with the payment of salaries and operating expenses of the Association's education and training program.
(2) Commonwealth funds administered by the Department of Health for family planning organisations other than under the Community Health Program are provided through two channels, namely:
Family Planning Program-to assist with the provision of non-clinical services, i.e. education, training and information; and
Health Program Grants-to assist towards meeting costs of clinical services.
Allocations to State and Territory Family Planning Associations by the Commonwealth through the Department of Health in 1979-80 were:
FAMILY PLANNING PROGRAM

Family planning association

Approved 1979-80
allocation

New South Wales
Victoria
Queensland . . South Australia Western Australia
Tasmania Northern Territory
Australian Capital Territory

$ 149,000
76,000
50,000 24,000 37,500
17,800 28,750
20,000

HEALTH PROGRAM GRANT

New South Wales
Victoria Queensland . . South Australia
Western Australia Tasmania
Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory

$ 792,818
202,543 389,089
3.08,981 169,471 55,503 28,087
40,376

Private Health Funds
(Question No. 2020)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 5 May 1981:
(I) Further to the answer to question No. 377 (Hansard, 28 April 1981, page 1675) what are the individual organisations referred to in his reply to part (I) of that question.
(2) For each fund mentioned in part (I), what are the discriminating rules in each case.
(3) Has he considered using the powers of deregistration, to enforce compliance with this, and any other matter, such as repayment of moneys owing to Government or contributors, by the funds concerned.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) There are only two organisations, the Medical Benefits Fund of Australia Limited (M.B.F.)-operating in New

2924 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

South Wales, Queensland and Tasmania-and the Mutual Health Association (M.H.A.) South Australia, that have aspects of rules that are not completely acceptable.
(2) M.B.F. There are four unacceptable areas:
(i) a pre-existing exclusion on supplementary benefits may be applied for two years;
(ii) hospital benefits could be excluded where in the view of the organisation, hospitalisation is not 'essential';
(iii) supplementary benefits may not be payable to persons with Repatriation entitlements;
(iv) the rule referring to basic hospital benefits is incomplete in relation to benefits for outpatient services.
M.H.A. Two aspects are unacceptable:
(i) a pre-existing ailment exclusion and a waiting period of nine months for obstetric cases, in respect of basic benefits where a contributor falls more than two months in arrears on contributions;
(ii) a'pre-existing ailment exclusion could be applied to a new dependant of a contributor for supplementary benefits.
(3) Negotiations with these organisations are continuing.
Industrial Disputes and Accidents
(Question No. 2434)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:
(I) What was the (a) number of workers involved, (b) number of working days lost and (c) estimated loss in wages, as a result of industrial disputes in each State and Territory, and in Australia as a whole, for each of the last 10 years.
(2) What was the (a) number of workers affected, (b) number of working days lost, (c) estimated loss in wages and

(d) compensation and other payments made to victims of, industrial accidents and injuries, and occupational diseases, in each State and Territory, and in Australia as a whole, for each of the last 10 years.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Regarding information in respect of Part (1) the attached table sets out details of (a) number of workers involved (b) number of working days lost and (c) estimated loss in wages as a result of industrial disputes in each State, the Northern Territory, the Australian Capital Territory and Australia as a whole, for each of the last 10 years.
These statistics refer only to working days lost by workers directly involved in stoppages, and those indirectly involved at establishments where the stoppages occurred. They do not include time lost by workers indirectly affected at other establishments, nor the effects of bans and limitations.
Regarding information in respect of Part (2), (a), (b) and (c), uniform and comprehensive statistics of industrial accidents, injuries and occupational diseases for the past 10 years are not available. However, the Australian Bureau of Statistics is proceeding with initiatives to extend statistical coverage to include the Territories and Commonwealth Government employees and to standardise the existing statistics for the States. It is hoped then that reliable State, Territory and national statistics can be produced.
Calculations prepared for the Departments of Labour Advisory Committee on Industrial Accidents indicate that each year, there are at least 300 fatalities, and 300,000 disabling injuries (causing time off work of one day or more) and 1,000,000 weeks lost from work. These estimates do not include cases of occupational disease, or journey to or from work.
Complete information in respect of Part (2) (d) is not available.

INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES

AustraliaNo. of disputes
Workers involved ('000)
Working days lost ('000)
Wages lost ($'000)
New South WalesNo. of disputes
Workers involved ('000)
Working days lost ('000) Wages lost ($'000) VictoriaNo. of disputes Workers involved ('000) Wo~ki.ng days lost ('000) Wages lost ($'000)
Queensland-
No. of disputes
Workers involved ('000) Working days lost ('000)
Wages lost ($'000)
South AustraliaNo. of disputes Workers involved ('000) Working days lost ('000)
Wages lost ($'000)
Western AustraHaNo. of disputes
Workers involved ('000) Working days lost ('000) Wages lost ($'000) TasmaniaNo. of disputes
Workers involved ('000) Working days lost ('000)

1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980

2404
1326.5 3068.6 45241

2298 1113.8 2010.3 32074

2538 2809 803.0 2004.8
2634.7 6292.5 45207 128302

2432 2055 1398.0 2189.9 3509.9 3799.2 95761 114552

2090 596.2 1654.8
59674

2277 2042 2429 1075.6 1862.9 1172.8 2130.8 3964.4 3320.2 78404 148614 152022

1236 643.7 1887.5 28218

1174 516.1 866.8 13957

1299 387.5
1098.1 18775

1427 893.6 2665.0 54590

1053 496.4 1477.8 41150

955 914.9 1456.5 43426

1162 258.3
538.2 19162

1240 503.8
970.8 35162

1072 640.4
1369.9 52710

1245 383.1
1208.6 55936

362 380.1 689.6 9726

377 338.2 638.4 9656

431 189.8
780.5 13223

476 611.0 2386.6 46905

424 570.9
1221.7 31897

322 647.3 1420.0 42118

244 120.7 586.1 20752

303 227.0 468.1 16200

325 661.5
1486.1 53266

315 538.3 1115.4 45387

441 172.2 271.4 4009

442 156.5 292.2 4973

378 97.0
320.2 5476

312 141.2 529.5 12024

412 172.7 473.3 13499

319 317.7
426.0 13451

278 118.0 240.8 8870

231 195.8
360.3 14601

194 255.3
467.9 17688

253 136.2 618.7 32393

135 64.1 111.2 1485

111 49.8
60.9 858

159 56.9 130.6 2144

\80 116.3 316.5 6105

194 69.6
127.5 3168

118 130.4
151.8 4285

93 26.4
30.6 940

119 50.0 79.1 2639

96 92.5 186.5 6785

94 24.2
59.4 2598

132 35.8 69.4 1166

105 28.3
94.6 1677

160 37.6 117.3 2422

257 188.1
256.9 5828

236 53.8 100.7
3075

250 100.7
252.1 8462

229 54.9
220.5 8582

306 76.1
197.9 7736

252 169.5 348.1 14118

368 69.4
191.0 9613

46

48

63

79

57

43

39

46

53

52

14.7

15.2

17.5 33.6 20.1

30.9

7.9

17.1

21.1

9.6

20.6

19.2 140.1

88.5

40.6

62.2

26.7

35.4

59.8

91.5

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2925

1971

1972

1973

1974 1975

1976

1977

1978

1979 1980

Wages lost ($'000) Northern Territory-
No. of disputes
Workers in',olved ('000) Working days lost ('000) Wages lost ($'000) Australian Capital Territory-
No. of disputes Workers involved ('000)
Working days lost ('000) Wages lost ($'000)

317
41 9.6 15.7
272
II 6.3 3.3 47

305 2322 1801 1008 1793

32
3.5 15.1 267

31 5.5 18.9
361

52 5.9 18.9
485

37 9.9
33.4 878

29 7.8 15.3
521

9 6.2
23.1 380

17
Il.l
29.0
482

26 15.1
30.4 564

19 4.5 34.9
1086

19 13.1
15.4 496

928 1356 2276 4390

15 3.4 3.8 140

19 1.8 8.0
296

24 10.9 22.8 883

68 7.1
26.6 1271

30 6.5
8.0 301

13 4.0
11.2 414

26
11.6 23.3 888

34 4.9
9.0 434

NB.Where figures have been rounded, discrepancies may occur between sums of the component items and totals.

Care and Use of Animals in Research
(QuestioJl No, 2455)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:
(I) Has the National Health and Medical Research Council drawn up a Code of Practice in respect to the care and use of animals in research.
(2) If so, does this Code of Practice apply to (a) Government laboratories, (b) industry and (c) educational institutions.
(3) Does his Department carry out inspections of research laboratories to ensure compliance with the code; if so, how often are inspections carried out.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The National Health and Medical Research Council (NH&MRC) has, in conjunction with the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), drawn up a 'Code of practice for the care and use of animals in research in Australia'. It is an extensive document, covering aspects in relation to the manner in which experiments are conducted, the care and maintenance of animals and the training of laboratory personnel in the care of animals.
(2) The code of practice is a voluntary code and therefore, it is at the discretion of individual laboratories as to whether it is followed. However, it is a requirement that NHMRC grantees comply with the Code and compliance is generally monitored by the relevant Ethics Committee of the institution where the research is being conducted. In those institutions where there is no appropriate Ethics Committee, the grantee is required to abide by the Code of Practice, as a condition of the grant. Government laboratories such as the Commonwealth Serum Laboratory comply with the code which is administered through an Animal Experimentation Ethics Review Committee.
(3) My Department does not inspect research laboratories to monitor compliance with the code. It is the responsibility of State and Territory Departmental authorities to ensure the legislation is appropriately administered.
Job Training Programs ,
(Question No, 2504)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:
(I) Is (a) cabinet-making excluded from the building category for which $1,000 rebates are made available and (b) panel beating excluded from the metal trades category for which $1,000 rebates are made available under his Department's job training programs; if so, why.

(2) Has his Department received complaints concerning these exclusions.
(3) Will he consider amending the conditions of the training programs to include these trades; if not, why not.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) and (b) Yes. As cabinet-making is a furniture trade and panel-beating is a vehicle trade, they are outside the metal, electrical and building trades to which the CRAFT $1,000 rebate applied in the period I December 1980-30 June 1981.
(2) Yes.
(3) No. The metal, electrical and building trades were identified and agreed by Commonwealth and State Ministers of Labour as the areas where the greatest shortfall of skilled tradesmen may apply as a result of demands from the major development projects. The Government thereFore gave priority to increase the supply of skilled tradesmen in these areas.
Adyertising and Promotion: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 2667)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) What sum was spent by the Minister's Department on advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services during the period (a) I January 1980 to 18 bctober 1980 and (b) 19 October 1980 to 17 August 1981.
(2) What was the cost of each campaign undertaken.
(3) Under which item of expenditure were funds allocated for each campaign.
(4) Which advertising agencies or consultants were used for each campaign.
(5) What was the total sum paid to each agency or consultant for each campaign.
(6) How was each agency or consultant selected.
(7) By what percentage has the departmental cost of advertising increased or decreased each year from 1975 to 1980 and during the period I January 1981 to 17 August 1981.
(8) What is the estimated cost of advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services for 1981-82.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) $18,807.
(b) $162,372.
In addition advertising expenditure was incurred overseas. The details for the periods specified are not available in

2926 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Australia. Overseas expenditure for 1979-80 and 1980-81 r.:- spectively was as follows:

Britain: $258,784 and $52,024; Italy: $4,530 and $1,215;
The Netherlands: $17,977 and $1,906; France: - and $929; West Germany: $24,448 and $715.

(2) The following payments were made during the period I
January 1980 to 17 August 1981. In some cases further payments were made prior to I January 1980 or after 17 August 1981.

Regularisation of Status Program

$ 110,424

NUMAS Review . . . . .

16,344

Role of Ombudsman (on Radio 2EA and 3EA)

4,053

Advice to Overseas Visitors

2,776

Opening of TIS-Canberra and Hobart

31

Visits'of Hobart OlEA officers to N.W. Tasmania

2,595

Visits of Albury/Wodonga OlEA officer to district

towns . . . . .

1,270

Opening of A.C.T. Regional Office

128

Trans-Tasman Travel

28,473

Opening Adult Migrant Education Centre, Quean-

beyan . . . . . .

.

593

English Classes

13,025

English courses in industry

820

Home Tutor Scheme

331

Visits of OlEA officers to country districts,

Queensland

316

181,179

$

Visit of OlEA officers to Queensland country

districts

316

126,021

Gordon & Gotch (Aust.) Pty LtdVisits of Hobart OlEA officers to N.W. Tasmania
English classes

1,320 1,505

2,825

Neville Jeffress Advertising Pty LtdVisits of Hobart OlEA officers to N.W. Tasmania Visits of Albury/Wodonga OlEA officer to district towns Advice to Overseas Visitors Opening of A.C. T. Regional Office Regularisation of Status Program Opening Adult Migrant Education Centre, Queanbeyan English courses in industry
Home Tutor Scheme English Classes

1,247
226 2,244
92 327
593 820 258 5,299

11,106

Country Press Co-operative Ltd-

Regularisation of Status Program

Visit of Hobart OlEA officers to N.W. Tasmania

Visit of Albury/Wodonga OlEA officer to district

towns

.....

11\616 28
755

(3) Funding of Adult Migration Education advertising was from 360.5.01, Adult Migrant Education Program Vote.
Other advertising campaigns were funded from 360.2.10. information and Publicity Vote.

(4) The following Commonwealth master placing/charging agencies were used for media placement, for checking and monitoring media performance and for all accounting matters for the campaigns:
Doyle Dane Bernbach/Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd
Nevile Jeffress Advertising Pty Ltd Gordon and Gotch (Aust.) Ltd
Country Press Ltd
Country Press Co-operative Ltd
S.A. Country Newspapers Ltd
Fortune (Aust.) Pty Ltd

The services of the following agencies and consultants were used for production of electronic materials or for promotion of the Regularisation of Status Program:
Special Broadcasting Service
Canberra Television Ltd
Sir Garfield Sobers

Payment was also made to the Bruce Athletics Stadium, Canberra for display advertising of English classes.

(5)-

Doyle Dane Bernbach/Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd-
Regularisation of Status Program
NUMAS Review . . . . .
Role of Ombudsman (Radio 2EA and 3EA)
Advice to Overseas Visitors
Opening of TIS-Canberra and Hobart
Trans-Tasman Travel
English Classes

$
73,278 16,344 4,053
532 31
28,473 2,994

12,399

Country Press LtdRegularisation of Status Program . . . . .
Visit of Albury/Wodonga OlEA officer to district towns
Opening of A.C.T. Regional Office
Home Tutor Scheme

12,852
289 36 73

13,250

S.A. Country NewspapersRegularisation of Status Program
Fortune (Aust.) Pty LtdEnglish Classes
Special Broadcasting ServiceRegularisation of Status Program
Ethnic Broadcasting AssociationEnglish Classes . . . . . .
Sir Garfield SobersRegularisation of Status Program
Canberra Television LtdRegularisation of Status Program
Bruce Stadium, CanberraEnglish Classes

4,837 2,575 3,982
27 2,266 1,266
625

Total

181,179

(6) By the Minister for Administrative Services in the case of the master placing/charging agencies and by the Australian Government Advertising Service in consultation with the Department in relation to selection of agencies to provide technical services to plan, create and produce advertisements.
(7) Total expenditure for all types of advertisng in Australia by the department and the percentage changes between the fiscal years concluding in the years nominated in the question are: 1974-75 1975-76-Funded by Department of Administrative Services; 1976-77-$109,652;

Answers to Questions

17 November 198 J REPRESENTATIVES 2927

1977-78-$68,377; 1978-79-$37,274; 1979-80-$37,602; 1980-81-$213,118; I July 1981-17 August 1981-$50,614.
The Australian Government Advertising Service has advised that indexes of percentage increases in unit costs of Commonwealth departmental advertising since 1975 are:

1975 (Base) 1976
1977 1978 1979
1980 1981 (1 January-17 August)

Index of unit cost of Commonwealth
departmental advertising
\00 1\0 120 128 140 153 165

International Labour Organisation Conventions: Ratification
(Question No. 2713)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) Which International Labour Organisation conventions have been ratified by Australia and when were they ratified.
(2) Which conventions are still open to ratification by Australia.
(3) Which States have agreed to the ratification of each unratified convention which is deemed to fall within State jurisdiction.

In addition the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs spent the following amounts on advertising overseas:

$

%+ or-

1976-77
1977-78
1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

\09,651 117,931
245,006
305,739 56,789

+7.6 + 123.4 +178.8 - 48.2

Note: % increase/decrease using 1976-77 as the base year.

For the years 1974-75 + 1975-76 the information and pub-
licity function was provided and funded by the Department of Administrative Services.

(8) The estimate for 1981-82 is
Information and Publicity Vote Adult Migrant Education Vote

$ 129,000
15,000

135,000

In addition, estimate for overseas advertising is

1\0,000

(4) Is he able to say which conventions have been considered at meetings of the Labour Ministers and their officers during the last \0 years, and at which meetings each convention was considered.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) The table below lists all Conventions adopted by the International Labour Conference up to and including the 67th June 1981 Session.
The table shows the status of ILO Conventions at I January 1981, those Conventions that Australia has ratified, and the current situation in Australia concerning all other Conventions.
(4) As Australia is a Federal State, the consultative arrangements concerning the possible ratification of ILO Conventions are quite complex. All Conventions have been considered during the last IO years at various times at Technical Officers meetings, National Labour Consultative Council meetings, at the Departments of Labour Advisory Committee or at the Ministers of Labour Meetings.

ILO CONVENTIONS

Number Title of convention

Date of ratification
or States that have agreed to
ratification

I R2 "3 U"4 -5 -6
R-7 R8 R9
R-IO RII R-12
13 14 R-15 RI6

First Session (Washington 1919) Hours of Work (Industry) Convention, 1919 Unemployment Convention, 1919 Maternity Protection Convention, 1919 Night Work (Women) Convention, 1919 Minimum Age (Industry) Convention, 1919 Night Work of Young Persons (Industry) Convention, 1919
Second Session (Genoa, 1920) Minimum Age (Sea) Convention, 1920 . . . . . . Unemployment Indemnity (Shipwreck) Convention, 1920 Placing of Seamen Convention, 1920
Third Session (Geneva, 1921) Minimum Age (Agriculture) Convention, 1921 Right of Association (Agriculture) Convention,l921 Workmen's Compensation (Agriculture) Convention, 1921 White Lead (Painting) Convention, 1921 Weekly Rest (Industry) Convention, 1921 Minimum Age (Trimmers and Stokers) Convention, 1921 Medical Examination of Young Persons (Sea) Convention, 1921

No State 15.6.72 No State
Vic., WA, Tas. No State
28.6.35 28.5.35 3.8.25
24.12.57 24.12.57 7.6.60 Queensland No State 28.6.35 28.6.35

2928 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Number
*17 R*18
RI9 U20
R21
R22 C23
P*24 P*25
R26
R27 +28
R29 30
UO*31
+32 +33
+34 +35 +36 +37 +38 +39 +40
+41 R*42
43 P44
R45 046 R47 P48
49
NM50 051 +52
53 X54
55 P56 RO*57
*58

Title or convention

Seventh Session (Geneva, 1925)
Workmen's Compensation (Accidents) Convention, 1925 Workmen's Compensation (Occupational Diseases) Convention, 1925 Equality or Treatment (Accident Compensation) Convention, 1925 Night Work (Bakeries) Convention, 1925

Eighth Session (Geneva, 1926)

Inspection or Emigrant's Convention, 1926

Ninth Session (Geneva, 1926) Seamen's Articles or Agreement Convention, 1926 . . . . . . . . Repatriation or Seamen Convention, 1926

Tenth Session (Geneva, 1927) Sickness Insurance (Industry) Convention, 1927 Sickness Insurance (Agriculture) Convention, 1927

Eleventh Session (Geneva, 1928) Minimum Wage-Fixing Machinery Convention, 1928 . . . . . .

Twelrth Session (Geneva, 1929) Marking or Weight (Packages Transported by Vessels) Convention, 1929 Protection against Accidents (Dockers) Convention, 1929

Fourteenth Session (Geneva, 1930)
Forced Labour Convention, 1930 . . . . . . . . Hours or Work (Commerce and Offices) Convention, 1930

Firteenth Session (Geneva, 1931) Hours or Work (Coal Mines) Convention, 1931

Sixteenth Session (Geneva, 1932) Protection against Accidents (Dockers) Convention (Revised), 1932 Minimum Age (Non-Industrial Employment) Convention, 1932

Seventeenth Session (Geneva, 1933)
Free-Charging Employment Agencies Convention, 1933 Old-Age Insurance (Industry, etc.) Convention, 1933
Old-Age Insurance (Agriculture) Convention, 1933 Invalidity Insurance (Industry, etc.) Convention' 1933 Invalidity Insurance (Agriculture) Convention, 1933 Survivors' Insurance (Industry, etc.) Convention, 1933 Survivors' Insurance (Agriculture) Convention, 1933

Eighteenth Session (Geneva, 1934)

Night Work (Women) Convention (Revised), 1934

Workmen's Compensation (Occupational Diseases) Convention (Revised), 1934

Sheet-Glass Works Convention, 1934

............

Unemployment Provision Convention, 1934

Nineteenth Session (Geneva, 1935) Underground Work (Women) Convention, 1935 Hours or Work (Coal Mines) Convention (Revised), 1935 Forty-Hour Week Convention, 1935 . . . . . . Maintenance or Migrants' Pension Rights Convention, 1935 Reduction orHours or Work (Glass-Bottle Works) Convention, 1935

Twentieth Session (Geneva, 1936) Recruiting orIndigenous Workers Convention, 1936 Reduction or Hours or Work (Public Works) Convention, 1936 Holidays with Pay Convention, 1936

Twenty-first Session (Geneva, 1936) Officers' Competency Certificates Convention, 1936 Holidays with Pay (Sea) Convention, 1936 Shipowners' Liability (Sick and Injured Seamen) Convention, 1936 Sickness Insurance (Sea) Convention, 1936 Hours or Work and Manning (Sea) Convention, 1936

Twenty-second Session (Geneva, 1936) Minimum Al,e (Sea) Convention (Revised), 1936

Date or ratification or States that have agreed to ratification Tasmania 22.4.59 12.6.59
18.4.31 1.4.35
9.3.31 9.3.31
2.J..32 NoState
29.4.59 NoState
7.10.53 No State 22.10.70 No State
No State
No State No State 24.9.38 All States except New South Wales

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2929

Number
'59 '60 061 62
R63
64 65 X66 U*67
68 69 P070
xP7n1 73
74 X75 RO'76
77 78
79 RA80
R81 NM82
R83 NM84
R85 R86
R87 R88 U89
90
+91 92
RO*93 94 95 96
C97 R98
R99 RIOO
'101 102 103

Title of convention

Twenty-third Session (Geneva, 1937)

Minimum Age (Industry) Convention (Revised), 1937 . . . . . .

Minimum Age (Non-Industrial Employment) Convention (Revised), 1937

Reduction of Hours of Work (Textiles) Convention, 1937

Safety Provisions (Building) Convention, 1937

.....

Twenty-fourth Session (Geneva, 1938) Convention concerning Statistics of Wages and Hours of Work, 1938
Twenty-fifth Session (Geneva, 1939) Contracts of Employment (Indigenous Workers) Convention, 1939 Penal Sanctions (Indigenous Workers) Conventions, 1939 Migration for Employment Convention, 1939 Hours of Work and Rest Periods (Road Transport) Convention, 1939
Twenty-eight Session (Seattle, 1946) Food and Catering (Ships' Crews) Convention, 1946 Certification of Ships' Cooks Convention, 1946 Social Security (Seafarers) Convention, 1946 Seafarers' Pensions Convention, 1946 Paid Vacations (Seafarers) Convention, 1946 Medical Examination (Seafarers) Convention, 1946

Certification of Able Seamen Convention, 1946 Accommodation of Crews Convention, 1946 Wages, Hours of Work and Manning (Sea) Convention, 1946

Twenty-ninth Session (Montreal, 1946)

Medical Examination of Young Persons (Industry) Convention, 1946 . . . . .

Medical Examination of Young Persons (Non-Industrial Occupations) Convention,

1946

......

.........

Night Work of Young Persons (Non-Industrial Occupations) Convention, 1946

Final Articles Revision Convention, 1946 . . . . . . . . .

Thirtieth Session (Geneva, 1947)

Labour Inspection Convention, 1947

.......

Social Policy (Non-Metropolitan Territories) Convention, 1947

Labour Standards (Non-Metropolitan Territories) Convention, 1947

Right of Association (Non-Metropolitan Territories) Convention, 1947

Labour Inspectorates (Non-Metropolitan Territories) Convention, 1947

Contracts of Employment (Indigenous Workers) Convention, 1947

Thirty-first Session (San Francisco, 1948)
Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to organise Convention, 1948 Employment Service Convention, 1948
Night Work (Women) Convention (Revised), 1948 Night Work of Young Persons (Industry) Convention (Revised), 1948

Thirty-second Session (Geneva, 1949) Paid Vacations (Seafarers) Convention (Revised), 1949 Accommodation of Crews Convention (Revised), 1949

Wages, Hours of work and Manning (Sea) Convention (Revised), 1949 Labour Clauses (Public Contracts) Convention, 1949 Protection of Wages Convention, 1949 . . . . . Fee-Charging Employment Agencies Convention (Revised), 1949
Migration for Employment Convention (Revised), 1949 Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining Convention, 1949

Thirty-fourth Session (Geneva, 1951)

Minimum Wage Fixing Machinery (Agriculture) Convention, 1951

Equal Remuneration Convention, 1951

.....

Thirty-fifth Session (Geneva, 1952) Holidays with Pay (Agriculture) Convention, 1952 Social Security (Minimum Standards) Convention, 1952 Maternity Protection Convention (Revised), 1952

Dateof ratification or States that have agreed to ratification
Victoria No State No State All States except New South Wales
5.9.39
Victoria, Tasmania Victoria
No State No State
Victoria and South Australia No State
25.1.49
No State
No State No State 24.1.49
24.6.75
15.6.73
30.9.54 15.6.73
28.2.73 24.12.49
NoState
New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia 3.3.54 Victoria Queensland
No State 28.2.73
19.6.69 10.12.74
Victoria NoState No State

2930 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Number
104
RI05 106 107

Title of convention
Thirty-eight Session (Geneva, 1955) Abolition of Penal Sanctions (Indigenous Workers) Convention, 1955
Abolition of Forced Labour Convention, 1957 Weekly Rest (Commerce and Offices) Convention, 1957 Indigenous and Tribal Populations Conventi<m, 1957

CI08 ROlO9
1110 RIll
R*112 113 1114
UI15
RAI16
1117 118
119
120
121 RI22
R*123 124
1125 1126
127 CI28
129 CI30
RI31 132
0133

Forty-first Session (Geneva, 1958) Seafarers'ldentity Documents Convention, 1958 Wages, Hours of Work and Manning (Sea) Convention (Revised), 1958
Forty-second Session (Geneva, 1958) Plantations Convention, 1958 Discrimination (Employment and Occupation) Convention, 1958
Forty-third Session (Geneva, 1959) Minimum Age (Fishermen) Convention, 1959 Medical Examination (Fishermen) Convention,I959 Fishermen's Articles of Agreement Convention, 1959
Forty-Fourth Session (Geneva, 1960) Radiation Protection Convention, 1960
Forty-fifth Session (Geneva, 1961) Final Articles Revision Convention, 1961 . . . . .
Forty-sixth Session (Geneva, 1962) Social Policy (Basic Aims and Standards) Convention,1962 Equality of Treatment (Social Security) Convention, 1962
Fourth-seventh Session (Geneva, 1963) Guarding of Machinery Convention, 1963
Forty-eighth Session (Geneva, 1964) Hygiene (Commerce and Offices) Convention,. 1964
Employment Injury Benefits Convention, 1964 Employment Policy Convention, 1964
Forty-ninth Session (Geneva, 1965) Minimum Age (Underground Work) Convention, 1965 Medical Examination of Young Persons (Underground Work) Convention, 1965
Fiftieth Session (Geneva, 1966) Fishermen's Competency Certificates Convention, 1966 Accommodation of Crews (Fishermen) Convention, 1966
Fifty-first Session (Geneva, 1967) Maximum Weight Convention, 1967 Invalidity, Old-Age and Survivors' Benefits Convention, 1967
Fifty-third Session (Geneva, 1969) Labour Inspection (Agriculture) Convention, 1969 Medical Care and Sickness Benefits Convention, 1969
Fifth-fourth Session (Geneva, 1970) Minimum Wage Fixing Convention, 1970 . . Holidays with Pay Convention (Revised), 1970
Fifty-fifth Session (Geneva, 1970) Accommodation of Crews (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1970

134 Prevention of Accidents (Seafarers) Convention, 1970
Fifty-Sixth Session (Geneva, 1971) 135 Workers' Representatives Convention, 1971 136 Benzene I .orivention, 1971
Fifty-eighth Session (Geneva, 1973)

Date of ratification or States that have agreed to ratification
Victoria, Queensland and Tasmania 7.6.60 No State New South Wales Victoria, South Australia, Western Australia
15.6.72
15.6.73
15.6.71 No State
29.10.63
Tasmania, Western Australia, Victoria
South Australia
Queensland and Tasmania No State 12.9.69
12.12.71 Western Australia
Queensland No State
No State
15.6.73 No State
New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia No State
No State No State

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2931

Number Title of convention

Date of ratification
or States that have agreed to
ratification

RI37 138
139 140
141 142 143
RI44
145 146 147
148 149
150 151
152 0153
0154 0155 0156

Dock Work Convention, 1973 Minimum Age Convention, 1973

Fifty-ninth Session (Geneva, 1974)
Occupational Cancer Convention, 1974 Paid Educational Leave Convention, 1974

Sixtieth session (Geneva, 1975) Rural Workers' Organisations Convention, 1975 Human Resources Development Convention, 1975 Migrant Workers (Supplementary Provisions) Convention, 1975

Sixty-first Session (Geneva, 1976) Tripartite Consultation (International Labour Standards) Convention, 1976

Sixty-second Session (Geneva, 1976) Continuity of Employment (Seafarers) Convention, 1976 Seafarers' Annual Leave with Pay Convention, 1976 Merchant Shipping (Minimum Standards) Convention, 1976

Sixty-third Session (Geneva, 1977)

Working Environment (Air PoJ\ution, Noise and Vibration) Convention, 1977

Nursing Personnel Convention, 1977

........... .

Sixty-fourth Session (Geneva, 1978) Labour Administration Convention, 1978

Labour Relations (Public Service) Convention, 1978

Sixty-fifth Session (Geneva, 1979) Occupational Safety and Health (Dock Work) Convention, 1979 , Hours of Work and Rest Periods (Road Transport) Convention, 1979

Sixty-sixth Session (Geneva, 1980) No Conventions

Sixty-seventh Session (Geneva, 1981)

Promotion of Collective Bargaining Convention, 1981

........ .

Occupational Safety and Health and the Working Environment Convention, 1981

Equal Opportunities and Equal Treatment for Men and Women Workers; Workers

with Family Responsibilities Convention, 1981 . . . . . . . . . . . .

25.6.74 No State
No State No State
No State All States except NT No State
11.6.79
No State No State No State
No State No State
All States except NT Western Australia
No State No State __
NoState No State NoState

o Convention which has not yet received the required number of ratifications for entry into force.
- Convention revised by a subsequent Convention.
+ Convention no longer open to ratification as a result of the entry into force of a revising Convention.
X Conventions which have not received the required number of ratifications for entry into force and which are no longer open to ratification as a result of the entry into force of a revising Convention.
A Conventions which merely revise the final articles'.
R Conventions which Australia has ratified. P Conventions which are precluded from ratification by Australia as they are unsuited to Australian conditions.
I Conventions which are irrelevant or of limited relevance to Australia. U Conventions which are no longer seen as setting desirable objectives. NM Conventions which apply to non-metropolitan territories only.
C Conventions which are wholly within the competence of the Commonwealth.

Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 2862)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:

(2) If the scrutiny referred to in part (1) has not been completed, when will it be finalised and the results reported to Parliament.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) Further to the Review of Commonwealth Functions which called for Ministers to scrutinise all authorities within their portfolios (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1850) which statutory authorities within the Minister's portfolio are to be (a) terminated, (b) continued and (c) reviewed in depth.

(I) and (2) I refer the honourable member to the reply given by the Acting Prime Minister to Question No. 2839 (Hansard, 22 September 1981, page 1647).

2932 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Human Rights: International Labour Organisation Conventions
(Question No. 2948)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 8 September 1981:
(I) Does the International Labour Office list International Labour Organisation Conventions No. I 35-Workers' Representatives, 1971, No. 141-Rural Workers' Organisations, 1975 and No. 151-Labour Relations (Public Service), 1978 among the 10 conventions which deal with basic human rights.
(2) What have been the dates and form of the periodical consultations with the States which the Australian Government is obliged by Article 19 (7) (b) (ii) of the Constitution of the ILO to arrange with a view to promoting co-ordinated action to give effect to the provisions of such conventions.
(3) What attitude has each State expressed to the ratification of each convention.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) There are 11 International Labour Organisation Conventions which the International Labour Office lists as basic human rights Conventions. They are:
Convention No. 11: Right of Association (Agriculture), 1921
Convention No. 87: Freedom of Assoc1ation and Protection of the Right to Organise, 1948
Convention No. 98: Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining, 1949
Convention No. 135: Workers' Representatives, 1971 Convention No. 141: Rural Workers' Organisations, 1975 Convention No. 151: Labour Relations (Public Service), 1978 Convention No. 29: Forced Labour, 1930 Convention No. 105: Abolition of Forced Labour, 1957 Convention No. 100: Equal Remuneration, 1951 Convention No. III: Discrimination (Employment and' pccupation),1958 Convention No. 156: Workers with Family Responsibilities, 1981
(2) Convention No. 135-Workers' Representatives, 1971: Apart from correspondence between the Commonwealth and State Departments of Labour, and a request in January 1972 by my Department for State Department reports on the extent to which law and practice in their respective jurisdictions complied with the Articles of the Convention, Convention No. 135 has been considered at Technical Officers' meetings in November 1973, May 1974, December 1974, July 1975, December 1975, February 1977 and August 1979, Departments of Labour Advisory Committee in August 1973, February 1974, September 1976, September 1978, the Conference of Commonwealth and State Labour Ministers in September 1976 and February 1979.
Convention No. 141-Rural Workers Organisations, 1975: Convention No. 141 applies particularly to developing countries where organisations representing rural workers have not been established or, if they have, are in the formative stages of development only. The approach adopted in the instrument does not lend itself to adaptation to the Australian legal frameworks and institutional arrangements in the labour area and ratification would not be possible without quite fundamental changes to the Australian industrial relations system. Nevertheless this Convention has been discussed at Technical Officers' meeting in 1971 and 1977 and the position will be reviewed from time to time.

Convention No. 151-Labour Relations (Public Service) 1978: In addition to correspondence between the Commonwealth and State Departments of Labour, State Departments of Labour were requested by my Department in 1978 to provide detailed information on the extent to which law and practice in their respective jurisdictions complied with the Articles of this Convention. My Department is still awaiting those detailed responses. Convention No. 151 has also been discussed specifically at Technical Officers' meetings in October 1978, August 1979 and August 1980 and generally at the Departments of Labour Advisory Committee in September 1978 and at the Conference of Commonwealth and State Labour Ministers in February 1979.
(3) No State has agreed to the ratification of either Convention No. 135 or Convention No. 141. Western Australia has agreed to the ratification of Convention No. 151.
Western Australian Department ofAgriculture
(Question No. 2971)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 8 September 1981:
(I) Will the Minister provide a detailed breakdown of the funds allocated by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs to the Western Australian Department of Agriculture for (a) Ord River Station, (b) Kununurra Experimental Farm and (c) Fox River Station, during 1980-81.
(2) Have the funds been allocated for these same projects in 1981-82; if so, will the Minister provide a detailed breakdown of this allocation.
(3) How many Aboriginal people were trained under these projects in 1980-81 and over what individual periods were they trained.
(4) What did this training involve.
(5) Are any of these Aboriginal people now employed in the area in which they received training.
(6) Did the Department allocate funds for training programs on any Aboriginal-held pastoral leases in the Kimberley region of Western Australia during 1980-81; if so, which Aboriginal groups were funded and what was the level of funding involved.
(7) Are any Aboriginal-held pastoral leases in the Kimberley region of Western Australia to receive training funds in 1981-82; if so, what level of funding is involved in each instance; if not, why not.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question.
(1) and (2) The breakdown of allocations for projects in 1980-81 and proposed for 1981-82 are as follows:

Agriculture Department Ord River Station
Wages for up 9 Aboriginal trainees including oncosts
Workers Compensation Materials
Kununurra Experimental Farm Wages for up to 6 Aboriginal trainees including payroll tax Workers Compensation

1980-81
62,350 1,200 4,700
58,600 1,200

1981-82
63,400 1,300
60,700 1,300

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2933

1980-81 1981-82

----------------------

Fox River Station

Wages for up to 5 Aboriginal

trainees and payroll tax

40,000 45,300

Workers Compensation

800

1,100

Materials

3,500

3,600

(3) 47 persons were trained under these projects in 1980-81. Their periods of training are as follows:

Number of persons

Period

10

I month

5

2 months

7

3 months

6

4 months

2

5 months

8

6 months

9

7 months

In some cases training was not completed due to trainees making personal decisions to move on to another location.
(4) Training on these projects involved instruction on maintenance, operation and repair of farm machinery, recognition of warning signs, preparation of virgin soil for production, irrigation, crop rotation and use of fertilisers and the recognition of plant diseases and their subsequent treatment.
(5) An extensive follow-up survey of all persons trained has not been undertaken. However, a sample indicates that approximately 25 per cent of the trainees are now employed in areas relevant to those in which they received instruction. Three former trainees are now members of the permanent Department of Agriculture staff.
(6) The Department of Aboriginal Affairs provides funds for the employment of a specialist pastoral adviser for Aboriginal communities in the Kimberleys. Part of his role is to assist in training Aboriginal workers. The allocation for this position in 1980-81 was $43,600 and approved funding for 1981-82 is $58,300.
(7) Two Aboriginal-held pastoral leases receive allocations from my Department under the Western Australian Region's Grant-in-Aid Training program. Kadjina Community Inc. which operates Millijidee station has an approved allocation of $2,700 and the Bidyadanga Community which operates Frazier Downs will receive $7,400 in 1981-82 for training. In addition, the Ngangganawili Community has a special lease over the agricultural land and $17,500 has been approved under the training program for 1981-82.
The Aboriginal Development Commission has recently approved a grant of $116,000 for the establishment of a Kimberley and Pilbara Advisory Service. The role of this agency will be to provide advisers to Aboriginal-held pastoral operations with a view to encouraging and training Aboriginal workers in the interests of the successful self-management of enterprises.
South Australian Airfields Committee
(Question No. 3008)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(I) Further to his answer to Question No. 71 (Hansard,24 February 1981, page 55) has the South Australian Airfields Committee, which he expected to commence activities early in 1981, been established.

(2) If so (a) who are the members of the Committee and which organisations do they represent and (b) on what dates has the Committee met.
(3) Hit has not yet met, what is the reason.
(4) Why did he state that an early resolution of the question of a new airport site is not expected.
(5) Can he now say when the land will be purchased; if not, why not.
(6) Did a forward planning document prepared for him propose the purchase of land near Two Wells for $55m, as reported in the Adelaide Advertiser earlier in 1981; if so has any sum been set aside for this purpose in 1981/82.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) and (3) (a) The Committee comprises representatives of the Commonwealth (Department of Transport) and the State (Departments of Transport, Environment and Planning and Local Government).
(b) The Committee met on 13 July 1981 and 22 September 1981.
(4) Resolution of the question of a new airport site will require extensive work by Commonwealth and State Departments under the guidance of the South Australian State Airfields Committee. The magnitude and complexity of the task, and the limited planning resources available, preclude this work from being completed at an early date.
(5) It will not be possible to purchase land for a new airport until the completion of the State airfields Committee's task of identifying the site required.
(6) No. No funds for this purpose have been set aside in 1981-82.
Tenosynovitis: Department ofIndustry and Commerce
(Question No. 3012)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(I) Have any cases of tenosynovitis been reported to date, in the Department or statutory authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction.
(2) If so, will the Minister state (a) how many cases have been reported, (b) in what types of work the affected persons were engaged, (c) of the cases reported how many were in respect of (i) female and (ii) male employees and (d) what age brackets appear to be most affected, in the Department and each statutory authority.
(3) Will the Minister provide similar information in respect of carpal tunnel syndrome.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) (a) 69 cases of tenosynovitis.
(b) Repetitive work mostly, such as that performed by operators, process workers, production machinists and typists, but classifications include aircraft mechanic, painter, clerk, storeman, carpenter, crane driver, floorman, inspection viewer and laboratory assistant.
(c) (i) 39 females; (ii) 30 males.
(d) From 17 years to 53 years.

2934 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(3) (a) 22 cases of carpal tunnel syndrom'e.
(b) Mostly involving machinists, process workers or operators, but classifications include general duties hand, spray painter, toolmaker and furnaceman.
(c) (i) 16 females; (ii) 6 males.
(d) from 30 to 56 years.
Tenosynovitis: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 3016)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Primary Industry upon notice, on 9 September, 1981:
(I) Have any cases of tenosynovitis been reported to date, in the Department or statutory authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction.
(2) If so, will the Minister state (a) how many cases have been reported, (b) in what types of work the affected persons were engaged, (c) of the cases reported how many were in respect of (i) female and (ii) male employees and (d) what age brackets appear to be most affected, in the Department and each statutory authority.
(3) Will the Minister provide similiar information in respect of carpal tunnel.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes-in the Department of Primary Industry and in the Australian Wool Testing Authority.
(2) (a) six cases since July 1980.
(b) four persons were employed as meat inspectors and two as laboratory assistants.
(c) (i) two; (ii) four.
(d) the meat inspectors involved were 25, 37,44 and 51 years of age and the laboratory assistants were 27 and 48 years old.
(3) Of the reported cases of Tenosynovitis, two involved a carpal tunnel injury. The persons involved were a 44 year old male meat inspector and a 27 year old female laboratory as-' sistant. There was a further case of carpal tunnel injury in the Australian Wool Testing Authority involving a 43 year old female laboratory assistant.
Australian Gem Industry
(Question No. 3109)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 15 September 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that the Australian Minerals and Energy Council and the Commonwealth/State Industry Ministers' Conference established a Joint Study Group to inquire into the Australian gem industry.
(2) Is it also a fact that its report, dated June 1980, at paragraph 12, contained 10 recommendations to encourage the further processing ofgemstones within Australia.
(3) Has the Government taken action to implement these recommendations; if so, when; if not, why not.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Commonwealth-State Joint Study Group on Raw Materials Processing was established in 1978 following agreement between the Commonwealth, the States and the Northern Territory. The Joint Study Group reports to the Australian Minerals al'1 Energy Council and the Commonwealth/State Industry Ministers' Conference. A

number of studies on a range of raw materials processing industries have been undertaken by the Study Group and one of the published reports concerns the potential for expansion of the Australian Gemstone Processing Industry.
(2) Yes.
(3) The report was presented to the Australian Minerals and Energy Council in April 1981 and to the Commonwealth State Industry Ministers' Conference in August 1981. The recommendations cover responsibilities of both the Commonwealth and States and various authorities and Departments at both Commonwealth and State levels which have responsibility for matters referred to in the recommendations have been approached seeking their reaction to the relevant recommendations. On receipt of advice from these Departments and authorities, the Joint Study Group will be reporting to Government canvassing possible action on these recommendations.
Australian Gift Cheques: Business Practice
(Question No. 3123)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the business practice of the firm known as Australian Gift Cheques; if so, is he able to say whether a book of gift cheques sold by that firm cost $29.95, but purports to offer goods and services to the value of $826.
(2) Is he satisfied that the business practices of the company are completely in accord with section 52 of the Trade Practices Act.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) My attention has been drawn to the activities of the firm known as Lonsdale Promotions Pty Ltd, trading as Australian Gift Cheques, through a complaint lodged with the Trade Practices Commission on behalf of a garage proprietor. The complaint concerned a contract between Australian Gift Cheques and the garage proprietor whereby the proprietor was to provide services upon receipt of coupons from promotional booklets distributed by Australian Gift Cheques. I have no knowledge of the activities of the firm beyond what has been revealed by this complaint, and in particular I am unaware of the cost of the booklets and the claimed total value of any goods and services mentioned therein.
(2) With respect to the complaint mentioned in (I), I am advised the Commission was not able to establish that a breach of the Trade Practices Act had occurred. No other complaints concerning Australian Gift Cheques or Lonsdale Promotions Pty Ltd had been made to the Commission as at 26 October 1981, and I have no information that the business practices of these enterprises involve any contravention of section 52 of the Trade Practices Act.
Brisbane Airport: Environmental Impact Statement
(Question No. 3128)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
Is his Department's Draft Environmental Impact Statement of March 1974 on Brisbane's Airport Redevelopment methodologically unsound in that it failed to:
(a) justify the need for the project, for example, by suggesting that the airport was expected to reduce the pressure of air traffic through Sydney.

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2935

(b) establish the benefits that would accrue to the Australian or local community should the project go ahead and
(c) take account of planning parameters in regard to passenger and freight traffic to and from the airport.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
A Draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS), covering the airport development works, was prepared by the Department of Transport in 1978 and released for public comment in accordance with the Commonwealth's Environmental Protection Administrative Procedures. The final EIS was published in February 1979 following review of public comments on the draft EIS.
In relation to the particular issues which the honourable member has raised, the answers are:
(a) No.
(b) No.
(c) No.
By way of amplification, the EIS outlined the need for the project, and benefits to the local community. Exhaustive descriptions of these elements were not included in the EIS as such information had been provided to the community through various announcements in the news media and other public forums over a long period of time since 1971.
The EIS clearly indicated that in relation to access proposals, State Government environmental assessment procedures would apply.
Sydney International Airport: Immigration Clearance Booths
(Question No. 3130)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that 12 Immigration Clearance Booths at Sydney's International Airport were unattended on 12 July 1981, causing inbound passengers to queue for over 2 hours, and several passengers to miss onward connecting flights.
(2) If so, why have additional staff not been assigned to Clearance Booths to spare travellers and tourists from protracted delays.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) On 12 July 1981 eighteen primary officers were rostered for duty to cover arriving as well as departing passengers. To spare travellers and tourists from protracted delays a further eight officers were rostered, increasing the primary officer working strength to twenty six. Sixteen officers were deployed to process arriving passengers and crew and ten officers to process departing passengers and crew.
Between 9.30 am and 10.15 am, 1,640 passengers disembarked from 7 aircraft, 5 of which were off-schedule by periods of between 14 and 50 minutes. Passengers from these aircraft did wait for periods ranging up to 115 minutes to be cleared through the Customs/Immigration primary check.
Passenger overloads at the inwards primary line are caused largely by circumstances over which the Department has no control, such as the arrival of off-schedule aircraft which is what occurred on 12 July. I have been assured that all officers on that morning were utilised to the maximum advantage.
I have been advised that the Department has received no reports of passengers missing connecting flights.

Qantas Airways Ltd: Facilities in Mauritius
(Question No. 3136)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
(I) What funds have been expended by Qantas Airways Ltd in the acquisition or installation of facilities for airline purposes in Mauritius in the last 2 years.
(2) What was the date of the expenditure and what'use has been made of the facilities since the expenditure was incurred.
(3) What facilities were utilised by Qantas Airways Ltd in Mauritius during the provision of services to South Africa abandoned in recent years, what was the cost of those facilities and when were the facilities disposed of by Qantas.
(4) What proceeds were received by Qantas from the disposal of the facilities in Mauritius.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Nil.
(2) Not relevant.
(3) Qantas ceased operations to Mauritius in September 1977. The company shared a rented facilities building with Air Mauritius. Permanently stationed staff resided in rented houses. Some of the aircraft handling equipment owned by Qantas in Mauritius was returned to Sydney, but the following items were sold locally between 19 October 1977 and 8 February 1978: water replenishing unit; toilet unit; aircraft servicing van; aircraft servicing stand; Douglas tractor; Carrier air conditioner and two motor vehicles. The initial cost of the assets sold was $A40,642 and at the time of disposal they had a net value of $A8,940.
(4) Proceeds from sale of aircraft handling equipment in Mauritius was $27,454.

Bauxite Royalty Rates

(Question No. 3150)

Mr Leo McLeay asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 16 September
1981:

(I) Are Australian royalty rates for bauxite significantly lower than those set by other countries, for example, 76 cents
a tonne in Western Australia and $7 a tonne in Jamaica.

(2) Did Alcoa of Australia Ltd earn operating profits before tax of $267,000,000 between 1973 and 1977 yet pay only
$9,000 in tax.

(3) Did Gove Alumina Ltd earn $48.6 million in profits be-

tween 1973 and 1979 and pay no tax.

.

(4) Are aluminium smelters in Australia permitted to emit fluoride at levels considerably above those permitted in the United States of America.

(5) Does each job created by the aluminium industry in Australia require an investment of $800,000.

Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) I direct the honourable member's attention to my
answer to Mr Hayden's question upon notice No. 1041 (Hansard. 9 September 1981, pages 1122-1123).

(2) and (3) The Commissioner of Taxation has advised that he is precluded by the secrecy provisions of the income tax law from disclosing any information regarding the tax-
ation affairs of any taxpayer.

2936 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(4) I am advised that aluminium smelters in Australia are not permitted to emit fluoride at levels considerably above those permitted in the United States of America. The recom-
mended standard set by the United States Environmental Protection Agency for new aluminium smelters is one kilogram of fluoride per tonne of aluminium produced. Australian State environment authorities are seeking to adopt this standard for new smelters in Australia. Extension to existing smelters will also be required to meet this standard. In some existing

smelters retro-fitting of control equipment has taken place to reduce emissions.
(S) Total investment in alumina refining and aluminium smelting projects both under construction and planned is approximately $4.8 billion. Direct employment created by these projects will be 1O,3S0 jobs during construction and S,320 permanent jobs from the commencement of operations. A break up of the investment and employment created directly by each project is as follows:

Project
Alumina Refineries Gladstone Wagerup Worsley
Aluminium Smelters Kurri Kurri Gladstone Portland Tomago Lochinvar

Capacity ('000 tpy)

Investment ($m)

Employment
Peak construction

Permanent

300(e) 2,000(i) 1,000
4S(e) 206 132 220 236

230 1,000 1,000
151 600 SOO 600 674
4,7S5

4S0 1,100 2,SOO(ii)
400 1,600 1,200 I,SOO 1,600
10,350

70 1,000
6S0
200 1,000
500 800 9S0
S,320

(e) Expansion of existing capacity.
(i) Initial capacity of O.S million tpy is scheduled to come on stream in late 1982 or early 1983 and be expanded to 2 million tpy by 1992.
(ii) Figure includes employment generated by development of a bauxite mine and infrastructure in addition to the refinery. The mine will employ ISO persons permanently in addition to the 650 at the refinery.

Additional eml>loyment will be created as a result of the construction and operation of these plants, for example, in power stations and service industries. I am not in a position to quantify exactly the additional employment created, but a study on the 'Economic Impact of Industrial Developments at Gladstone' by T. D. Mandeville and R. C. Jensen of the Department of Economics of the University of Queensland dated January 1979 concluded that for each permanent job created directly by the Gladstone aluminium smelter, between 0.3 and 2.7 additional jobs would be indirectly created throughout Australia.
Secondary School Libraries
(Question No. 3153)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
I. What extra costs will be inciJrred by secondary schools to expand their libraries to cover the increased demand for books and journals as a result of increasing restrictions on the use of photocopying facilities by secondary teachers requiring sufficient duplicates for class course material.
2. Does the Government intend to provide financial support to those schools lacking the finance to provide the necessary extra books and journals.
3. Have there been any discussions with State Education Ministers or Departments regarding the effects on standards of education resulting from restrictions to photocopying; if so,

what was the outcome of the discussions; if not, will there be discussions.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I. It is not possible at this stage to estimate what extra costs, if any, schools will incur in expanding their libraries to meet 'any needs arising from the operation of the Copyright Amendment Act 1980. Such costs will depend in part on determinations to be made by the Copyright Tribunal in regard to the rate of royalty payable to copyright owners for multiple copying of their work.
The Act does not require schools to stop photocopying.
a What it does require is that schools should examine more
closely the amount they propose to mUltiple copy from particular work. Broadly speaking, a school may multiple copy up to I per cent of a work free of payment to the copyright owner. Up to 10 per cent may be mUltiple copied if the school is prepared to pay a royalty for the pages copied. When multiple copies of more than 10 per cent of a work are required, the school is expected to buy rather than copy, if the work is commercially available as a separate publication.
2. School funding is basically a matter for the State Governments and other bodies which operate schools. If, in due course, such bodies choose to document cost increases arising from the changes to copyright law, in their routine submissions to the Schools Commission, the Government will be in a position to decide whether or not those costs should

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2937

influence the level of funds to be provided for schools by the Commonwealth.
3. Proposed and actual changes to copyright law have been regularly discussed over a period of several years by the Commonwealth and State Ministers for Education, and by officers of their Departments. Some outcomes of the discussions have been:
(a) the establishment, in 1978, of an Australian Educational Council working partly on copyright law;
(b) representations to the Attorney-General's Department to ensure that the needs of education were met as far as possible when the new legislation was being. prepared;
(c) co-operation among the Education Departments in the task of preparing teachers and administrators for the new legislation; and
(d) -continuing discussions with the Attorney-General's Department on the needs of schools in regard to their use of audio visual materials, which in an area where further amendments to copyright law are envisaged.
A report on the current situation will be presented to the next meeting of the Australian Education Council which is to be held from 19 to 23 October.
Canberra: Domestic Air Transport
(Question No. 3159)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 17 September 1981:
How many passengers travelled by domestic air transport between (a) Melbourne and Canberra and (b) Sydney and Canberra during the period I March to I September for each of the years 1978 to 1981.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
During the period I March to I September for each of the years 1978 to 1981 the numbers of domestic air transport passengers who travelled between (a) Melbourne and Canberra and (b) Sydney and Canberra are as shown in the following table.
1978 1979 1980 1981
(a) Melbourne and Canberra . . . . . 165,698 164,747 178,933 158,745
(b) Sydney and Canberra 316,140303,472 301,476 238,565
Government-sponsored Employment Schemes
(Question No. 3176)
Mr Wallis asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 22 September 1981:
(I) How many youths have been employed by Australian National in each of its regions under the various Commonwealth Government-sponsored employment schemes for young people during the last 2 years.
(2) In what general classification have the youths been employed.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) & (2) Numbers of youths employed for period 1979-80-1980-81 are:

Northern Region: GOYA Scheme Apprentice fitter

NESAScheme

Junior clerical assistants

Apprentice fitters

2

Apprentice boilermakers

2

Apprentice carbuilder

1

Fettlers

3

Tradesmans helper

Central Region: GOYA Scheme

Apprentice fitters & machinists

. . .4

NESAScheme

Labourers

3

Storeman

Tasmanian Region: NIL all schemes

Special Youth Education Program
(Question No. 3177)
Mr Wallis asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 22 September 1981:
(I) How many cases have been brought to the attention of his Department of abuses by employers of the special youth education training program, in South Australia.
(2) What form have the abuses of the program taken.
(3) Have any of the abuses resulted in legal action being taken against employers.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The South Australian office of my Department has records of 16 alleged cases of employer abuse on file in respect of the Special Youth Employment Training Program (SYETP).
(2) Of these, 15 relate to various breaches of the training agreement and in the other case the employer appeared to be attempting to use the program as a means of obtaining a continuous supply of subsidised labour.
(3) No legal action was taken in any of these cases. However, rriy Department has refused to accept any further training vacancies from 7 employers, and terminated the training subsidy in another 7 cases. In the case of the remaining 2 employers acceptance by the CES of training vacancies was suspended until the employers agreed to abide by the provisions of the program including the training agreement.

Aboriginal Communities in Western Australia
(Question No. 3179)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 22 September 1981:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the fact that the West Australian Government and the State Minister for Community Welfare, have both enunciated and put into effect policies that are not in accord with the long term interests of the Aboriginal communities of Western Australia, for example, by opposing the growth of outstations throughout the Pilbara and Kimberley region of Western Australia.

2938 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) Has the Minister's attention also been drawn to the fact that the State Minister for Community Welfare has
prohibited officers of his department from having contact with the Kimberley Land Council.

(3) In this situation, how can an allocation of $274,000 to the Department of Community Welfare be justified to locate
Aboriginal people as welfare aides inside the Department of
Community Welfare and to add 6 vehicles to the lIeet of vehicles available to the Community Welfare Department.

(4) It is now appropriate that funds for the employment of field officers be channelled direct to the various Aboriginal aid organisations that are scattered throughout the State of Western Australia, that is, to organisations directly under Ab-
original control and responsive to the needs and aspirations of
the Aboriginal people rather than the whims of the State Government.

Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) I am aware that the State Government has expressed its reluctance to encourage outstations or splinter communities because of the difficulty and expense it sees in providi'ng basic services for small isolated groups.

(2) Yes. The State Government recognises the Aboriginal

Lands Trust as an official body for consultation on land

matters.

.

(3) The matters are not related. The Department for
Community Welfare carries out many important functions which serve high priority needs of Aboriginals. It is Commonwealth Government policy to encourage increasing partici-
pation by Aboriginals in services that directly affect them whether delivered by Government or non-government
agencies.

(4) Funds are made available by way of grants-in-aid to
various Aboriginal aid organisations, for example the Aboriginal Legal Service, Aboriginal medical services. Kulila, Milliya
Rumurra. There is room for diversity in agencies providing services for Aboriginals. State agencies may not always be as responsive as Aboriginal groups would like but they also have
access to large resources. By increasing Aboriginal involvement in the delivery of services, it is more likely that responsiveness will increase.

Importation of Butter for Re-export
(Question No. 3181)
Mr Cunningham asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 22 September 1981:
(I) Was butter imported into Australia during 1980 for the purpose of repacking and re-export.
(2) If so, was this to be a continuing program.
(3) Has the Australian Dairy Corporation played any part in the importation of the butter.
(4) What tonnage was imported during the period I January to 21 September 1981.
(5) What companies have been involved in the importation of butter.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Yes; 3553 tonnes.
(2) and (3) The Australian Dairy Corporation, after consultation with the Australian Dairy Farmers' Federation, the Australian Dairy Products Federation and the Australian Dairy Industry Conference, agreed to the importation of certain products for packaging and/or processing in Australia for re-export, subject to strict rules established by the Corporation. This decision was taken in the light of reduced Australian production of dairy products and in an endeavour to maintain overseas markets for Australian brand product. The decision was also taken in the interests of maintaining employment in Australian dairy factories.
The Corporation has insisted that the guidelines laid down for this import/re-export be rigidly enforced.
(4) 605 tonnes.
(5) Amalgamated Co-operative Marketers (Australia) Ltd, K. L. Ballantyne Pty Ltd, Murray Goulburn Cooperative Co. Ltd, UnigateAustralia Pty Ltd.
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority
(Question No. 3227)
Mr West asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 23 September 1981:
(I) Has there been a reduction of 5 in the staff ceiling of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority for 1981-82; if so, in what areas within the Authority is this reduction occurring.
(2) Has the section dealing with development of zoning plans and management been affected.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Chairman, Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, has advised that:
(I) Decisions notified to the Authority have reduced the full-time staff ceiling by eight for 1981-82;
Most areas have been or will be affected but the Authority has decided, having regard to provisional staff ceilings, that the most urgent staffing priorities are in the Planning, Research, Park Management and Information Sections.
(2) See (I) above.
Academic Staff
(Question No. 3233)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 23 September 1981:
What percentage of academic staff were (a) professors, (b) associate professors or readers, (c) senior lecturers, (d)-lecturers, and (e) tutors, for each Australian university in (i) 1960, (ii) 1970, and (iii) 1980.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(i) and (iii) -Table I sets out the information sought by the honourable member in respect of 1960 and 1980.
(ii)-Statistics on academic staff by grade for .1970 were not published in a form which enables 1970 data to be provided in the same detail as is shown above. Table 2 sets out the percentages of full-time equivalent academic staff by grade on a State by State basis; these are the only data readily available.

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2939

Table 1 PROPORTIONS OF ACADEMIC STAFF (a) AT EACH LEVEL, BY UNIVERSITY, 1960 AND 1980
(per cent)

1960(b)

1980

University

Associate

Senior

Professor! leclurer!

Professor

Reader leclurer(d)

Tutor

Associate Professor! Professor Reader

Senior Lecturer

Lecturer

Tutor

Sydney New Soulh Wales New England Newcastle Macquarie Wollongong
Melbourne Monash (c) La Trobe Deakin Queensland James Cook
Griffilh Adelaide Flinders Western Australia Murdoch Tasmania Auslralian Nalional (e)

5.9

4.1

63.2

26.9

7.8

10.0

22.2

23.2

36.8

4.3

2.9

76.0

16.8

8.7

10.5

24.8

31.4

24.6

7.9

5.4

60.2

26.6

8.1

8.9

25.6

25.1

32.4

11.8

12.4

32.0

30.7

\3.2

5.9

6.2

29.0

20.8

38.2

8.8

8.8

21.9

39.6

20.9

5.9

7.8

47.3

39.1

7.9

10.1

23.7

24.2

34.2

66.7

22.2

11.1

8.8

8.6

30.1

18.0

24.6

8.1

5.0

32.1

28.5

26.2

4.6

1.7

26.4

49.7

17.6

7.0

7.0

64.8

21.2

7.8

11.4

24.5

25.4

30.9

7.1

8.0

24.4

25.7

34.8

6.8

2.6

15.8

37.5

37.3

7.9

8.3

53.7

30.1

8.8

\3.5

35.8

13.1

28.9

14.9

11.2

38.6

15.9

19.7

9.8

7.1

54.3

28.8

9.3

10.1

24.6

22.4

33.6

10.0

4.9

19.5

33.9

31.8

14.2

5.0

63.8

17.0

11.8

12.1

35.2

25.5

15.5

\3.2

5.6

61.8

19.4

8.9

9.6

21.6

33.0

26.9

(a) Based on full-time and pari-time teaching-and-research and research-only academic staff. (b) Universities for which no information is shown had not commenced operations in 1960; data excludes Departments of External Studies. (c) Dala for 1960 based on slalfemployed allhe end of 1960. Monash UniversilY did nol commence leaching unlil 1961. (d) For 1960 the disaggregation of senior lecturer and lecturer levels is not available. (e) Dala for 1960 based on slalf employed by Ihe Canberra UniversilY College only. Note: Any discrepancies between the sum ofcomponenls and 100 is due to rounding.
Table 2
PROPORTIONS OF FULL-TIME EQUIVALENT ACADEMIC STAFF AT EACH LEVEL, BY STATE,1970
(percent)

State/Territory

Professor

Associate Professor/
Reader

Senior Lecturer

Lecturer

Tutor

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia
Tasmania Australian Capital Territory

5.2

4.7

12.3

22.1

55.7

5.5

4.7

15.9

17.6

56.4

4.2

5.2

11.1

21.9

57.7

5.7

4.4'

13.3

16.1

60.6

5.2

5.2

13.6

15.9

60.2

7.3

5.2

11.8

16.9

58.8

9.1

15.7

9.3

35.8

30.0

Australia

5.5

5.4

13.0

20.7

55.5

Note: Data in this table are not comparable with those in Table I as they are calculated on the basis of equivalent full-time staff and not actual staff numbers.

Commonwealth Employment Service: Professional Employment Office Section
(Question No. 3246)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 24 September 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that when the professional employment office section of the Commonwealth Employment Service closed, an instruction was issued that all files should be burned.
(2) If so (a) who issued these instructions and (b) will a similar practice be followed upon the closure of the Community Youth Support Scheme.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) No such instruction was issued.
(2) (a) Not applicable.
(b) The Government has decided that the Community Youth Support Scheme will not be terminated.
Australian Tobacco Leaf Exports
(Question No. 3335)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 15 October 1981:
(I) Has his Department obtained a legal opinion on whether arrangements for the export of Australian tobacco leaf by firms which import manufactured tobacco breach the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade provisions on export subsidies.
(2) Has the United States of America or any other country protested about those arrangements.

2940 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) On 26 March 1981 the Government announced its decision to provide a duty concession of 10 per cent ad valorem on one kilogram of manufactured tobacco imported for each kilogram (greenweight) of Australian leaf purchased. The concession is available contingent upon importers making specified purchases of Australian leaf.
The Department of Trade and Resources, under the direction of the Minister for Trade and Resources, has primary responsibility for Australia's participation in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT). This includes the negotiation of any agreements or understandings in the GATT, the handling of any representations by other GATT contracting parties on any Australian measures or practice which affects their rights under the GATT or under any agreement administered under the auspices of the GATT, and advice to the Government on the GATT implications of proposed courses of action.
Normally, any GATT contracting party, jUdging a practice of another contracting party to be harmful to its interests and not in conformity with the GATT, raises the matter under formal GATT procedures. In the case of tobacco, no such action has been initiated by any contracting party.
The only grounds for questioning Australia's action would be in terms of the GATT export subsidy provisions which, as far as agricultural products are concerned and as Australia itself is well aware, are not especially onerous. It is, in any case, widely accepted within GATT that concessional import duties, whether or not applied to agricultural products, are not regarded as subsidies. Accordingly, it is not surprising that Australia's actions on tobacco have not been questioned in GATT.
In terms of GATT practice, it was neither appropriate nor necessary for the Department of Trade and Resources to seek a further opinion concerning the consistency of the concession on manufactured tobacco with GATT provisions on export subsidies.
(2) Bilateral representations were, in fact, received from the United States concerning Australia's actions on tobacco shortly after they were announced. However, these representations were postulated with insufficient precision to permit a specific response. Since going back to the United States they have not pursued the matter further.
No other country has raised the matter.
Australian Tobacco Leaf Exports
(Question No. 3336)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 15 October 1981:
(I) What quantities and grades of Australian tobacco leaf were exported between March and September 1981.
(2) What was the export price for each grade.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Details of the quantities of leaf tobacco exported from Australia in the period March to September 1981 have not yet been finalised by the Australian Bureau of Statistics. They will be supplied to you when available.
(2) Neither the Australian Bureau of Statistics nor the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs records information on the grades of Australian tobacco leaf.

Australian Dairy Corporation
(Question No. 3396)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 22 October 1981:
(I) With reference to the Report by the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations on the Australian Dairy Corporation and its Asian Subsidiaries presented on 17 September 1981, when did he become aware of the alleged breach of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade arrangements.
(2) Did he or his Department ever question the legality of the original agreement negotiated by Mr McCartney of the Department of Primary Industry.
(3) If so, was he satisfied that the contract was legal and could not have been successfully challenged in court.
(4) If neither he nor his Department checked the legality of the contract, what was the reason for not doing so.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I first became aware of an alleged breach of the GATT Arrangement Concerning Certain Dairy Products as a result of a report published in the Australian Financial Review in September 1977. At that time, advice was provided to my Department that when the Australian Dairy Corporation became aware of the possible breach, the Corporation took steps to terminate it.
As explained to the House on 22 September 1981, my Department was -epresented at a meeting with the then Chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation on 13 October 1976 who stated that when skim milk powder prices reached the minimum specified under the GATT Arrangement, the Corporation had invoked the majeure clause in the contract in order to discontinue sales at prices which would have been inconsistent with the Arrangement.
(2), (3) and (4) The original agreement of December 1974 for the sale of skim milk powder to the Philippines was never referred to my Department and there would be no reason for the agreement as such to be so referred. At no time was Mr McCartney an officer of the Department of Primary Industry.
Meat Exports
Mr Nixon-On 9 September 1981 (Hansard, page 1058) Mr Wallis, the honourable member for Grey, asked a question without notice concerning the number of allegations of improprieties or breaches in meat inspection in the meat export industry which have been investigated by the Australian Federal Police and the results of these investigations. I undertook to provide a detailed list of the allegations that have been referred to the police over the years.
Since the Government's decision to establish a royal commission to investigate, inter alia, allegations of malpractice made over the past ten years, my Department has been identifying all relevant papers. This file examination has so far identified the following requests for investigation by the Police.

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2941

Date of allegation 28 October 1970 20 October 1971
31 July 1975
9 February 1976 21 June 1977 21 October 1977 27 August 1979 I I October 1979 15 October 1979 9 January 1980 23 May 1980 22 September 1980 12 February 1981 3 March 1981 29 April 1981
3June 1981
11 August 1981 31 August 1981 4 September 1981

Nature of allegation

Date referred to Police and outcome

Bribery of Commonwealth meat inspectors Mutton trunks substituted for legs
.Forgery and utterance of Common' wealth documents relating to shipment of frozen poultry
Boning operations being carried out out-of-hours Wide-ranging allegations that meat from non-export works was being exported Export of offal from an unregistered Establishment and possible contamination with salmonella organisms Boning operations being carried out out-of-hours Meat processed for export in nonexport works Substitution of mutton for beef
Bribery of departmental officer Counterfeit AA stamps in non-export premises
Meat processed for export in nonexport works
Product from local works found in export establishment
Discrepancies in transfer certificates
Illegal use of AA stamps
Fraudulent health certificate
Horsemeat suspected in export beef cartons labelled Establishment No. 140C Processing of horsemeat in boning room Horsemeat detected in export beef cartons labelled Establishment No. 622

10 November 1970. No evidence of malpractice.

2 December 1971. MrG. Kiernan charged with 18 charges of forgery and 18 charges of ultering under s.67 (b) of Crimes Act; fined $25 on each forgerycharge I charge of unauthorised use of an official stamp under S. 68 of Crimes Act; fined $100. Charges of uttering were withdrawn.
19 September 1975. Mr P. Rafferty charged with 2 charges of forgery and 2 charges of uttering under S. 67 (b) of the Crimes Act; fined $150 on each charge.
Mr E. Garing charged with forgery. Two years good behaviour in sum of $250 plus court costs of $54.
Proceedings against a third person were unsuccessful.
3 March 1976. No evidence to support allegation.

23 June 1977. Subsequent conviction of Mr G. Egan, on two offences under S. 233 (1) (c) of Customs Act and fined $1,000 with $200 costs.
Mid November 1977. Ascertained that allegations were unspecific and too general in nature to investigate.

27 August 1979. No evidence to support allegation.

11 October 1979. Insufficient evidence to support a prima

facie case.

--

I November 1979. Mr G. Eastaugh convicted on I count of 'False Trade Description' (R.16 (I) (b) Exports (Meat) Regulations); fined $100 with $12 costs.

11 January 1980. No evidence to support allegation.

3 June 1980. As three offenders had already been convicted under State legislation similar charges under Commonwealth legislation were dismissed.

23 September 1980. Police investigation suspended while NT Corporate Affairs Commission investigate affairs of suspect.

13 February 1981. Prosecuted by Victorian Crown Solicitor under Abattoir and Meat Inspection Act; fined $100 with $311 costs.

3 March 1981. Insufficient evidence to substantiate charges.

29 April 1981. Mr G. Lethborg and Mr H. Scott pleaded guilty to offences under S. 68 of Crimes Act. Lethborg
fined $100 plus costs of $158.10 and Scott fined $25 plus . costs of $47.10.

3 August 1981. Manager of Osminex Pty Ltd appeared in
Sydney Court 15 October on 7 charges under S. 233 (I) (c) of the Customs Act and 2 charges under S. 67 (b) of the Crimes Act.

13 August 1981. Mr R. V. Hammond appeared in City Court, Melbourne, 9 October on 71 charges under Commonwealth and State law.

2 September 1981. No evidence to support allegation.

4 September 1981. Investigations continuing.

2942 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Date of allegation 15 September 1981
23 September 1981 23 September 1981
3 October 1981

Nature of allegation
Rejected meat subsequently mixed with passed bagged beef and frozen on establishment
Broad ranging allegations against firms and departmental officers
Horsemeat detected in export beef cartons labelled Establishment No. 775
Mutton detected in export beef carton labelled Establishment No. 1360

Date referred to Police and outcome 6 October 1981. Investigations continuing.
14 October 1981. Investigations continuing. 23 September 1981. Investigations continuing.
3 October 1981. Investigations continuing.

Meat Species Testing Program
Mr Nixon-On 13 October 1981 (Hansard, page 1863) Dr Everingham asked the following question without notice:
(I) Can the Minister for Primary Industry inform the house of any results of the meat species testing program, including firstly, the number of firms and individuals detected substituting buffalo for other meats and secondly, the identities of fi rms or individuals involved in meat substitution and/or the use of adulterated meat for domestic consumption, export or both?
(2) Finally, can he say whether any of the adulterated meat was buffalo and whether some of this meat has been exported?
The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) To 13 October it is estimated that in excess of 12,500 species tests had been carried out as part of the testing program for export meat.
As the Commonwealth only has responsibility for meat produced for export, only export meat has been incl uded in the species testing program established by the Department of Primary Industry.
(b) No instances of substitution of export beef with buffalo meat have been detected by the monitoring program.
(c) Premises which have been deregistered as a consequence of the detection of substituted meat, and the firm in whose name the premises were registered, are as follows-
571 Victoria Street, Abbotsford, Victoria, registered in the name of Jason Meats Pty Ltd
leased portion of Protean Enterprises Pty Ltd, Barkly Avenue, Richmond, Victoria, registered in the name of Profreeze
84 Bastings Street, Northcote, Melbourne, Victoria, registered in the name of Steiger's Meat Supply (Aust) Pty Ltd.
(2) The Department of Primary Industry is unaware of any substitution of export beef with buffalo meat or of any suggestion by overseas authorities that this may have occurred.
Capital Territory Health Commission Grant to Calvary Hospital
(Question No. 1719)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(I) How was the 1979-80 grant of $6,439,339 by the Capital Territory Health Commission to the Calvary Hospital determined.
(2) In 1979-80 how many patients of each classification were admitted to Calvary Hospital and what was their average stay in the hospital.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The 1979-80 grant to Calvary Hospital Australian Capital Territory incorporated was determined according to an agreement between the Corporation of the Little Company of Mary, the Commonwealth of Australia, Calvary Hospital Australian Capital Territory Incorporated and the Capital Territory Health Commission. The agreement provides for the Commission to pay to Calvary Hospital a grant for operating expenses equal to the difference between income and expenditure for the financial year concerned based on a submission to the Commission of estimates of income and expenditure for the coming year. Calvary Hospital is also required to provide information and statistics relating to their estimates as required by the Commission. Calvary Hospital is entitled to participate in discussions on the funding and budget estimates for all public hospitals in the Australian Capital Territory. The Commission has the right to vary, after consultation witli the hospital, the approved budget at any time during the year.
(2) In 1979-80, 2507 patients were admitted to acute beds in Calvary Hospital. These admissions represented 849 hospital service patients with an average length of stay of 8.0 days and 1,658 private and compensation patients with an average length of stay of 8.3 days.
Advertising and Promotion: Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 2651)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) What sum was spent by the Minister's Department on advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services during the period (a) I January 1980 to 18 October 1980 and (b) 19 October 1980 to 17 August 1981.
(2) What was the cost of each campaign undertaken.
(3) Under which item of expenditure were funds allocated for each campaign.
(4) Which advertising agencies or consultants were used for each campaign.
(5) What was the total sum paid to each agency or consultant for each campaign.
(6) How was each agency or consultant selected.

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2943

(7) By what percentage has the departmental cost of advertising increased or decreased each year from 1975 to 1980 and during the period I January 1981 to 17 August 1981.
(8) What is the estimated cost of advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services for 1981-82.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Nil. Advertising by my Department during the periods mentioned related only to inviting applications for vacant staff positions and Press notices inviting the public to open days at official residences.
(2) to (6) Not applicable-see answer to (I).
(7) Cost information is recorded in financial years. Total annual expenditure for all types of advertising and changes from the previous year were:

Financial year

Expenditure

Varia tion from previous year

1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81
!981-82 (I July-17 August 1981)

$ 9,473 48,311 20,583 7,789 55,003 21,169
8,166

26% decrease 410% increase
53% decrease 78% decrease 606% increase 62% decrease 561 % increase on similar period in 1980

(8) The Department's 1981-82 budget estimates provide $18,000 for advertising vacant positions and $100,000 for publicity associated with all aspects of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. No provision has been made for advertising and promotion of Government programs and services.
Advertising and Promotion: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 2657)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) What sum was spent by the Minister's Department on advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services during the period (a) I January 1980 to 18 October 1980 and (b) 19 October 1980 to 17 August 1981.
(2) What was the cost of each campaign undertaken.
(3) Under which item of expenditure were funds allocated for each campaign.
(4) Which advertising agencies or consultants were used for each campaign.
(5) What was the total sum paid to each agency or consultant for each campaign.
(6) How was each agency or consultant selected.
(7) By what percentage has the departmental cost of advertising increased or decreased each year from 1975 to 1980 and during the period I January 1981 to 17 August 1981.
(8) What is the estimated cost of advertising and the promotion of Government program and services for 1981-82.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (6) No money was spent by my Department on advertising and the promotion of Government programs and

services during the period (a) I January 1980 to 18 October 1980 and (b) 19 October 1980 to 17 August 1981.

(7) Total expenditure for all types of advertising by the Department and the percentage changes between the fiscal years concluding in the years nominated in the question are:

1974-75
1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 I January 1981 to 17 August 1981

$ 19,403 25,051
14,843 25,502 26,017 28,826
25,223 12,250

+29% -41% +71%
+ 2%
+10% -13%

The Australian Government Advertising Service has advised that indexes of percentage increases in unit costs of Commonwealth departmental advertising since 1975 are:

Index of Unit Cost of

Commonwealth Department

Advertising

1975 (Base)

100

1976

110

1977

120

1978

128

1979

140

1980

153

1981 (I January-17 August)

165

(8) Nil

Advertising and Promotion: Attorney-General's Department

(Question No. 2662)

Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:

(1) What sum was spent by the Minister's Department on advertising and the promotion of Government pro~rams and
services during the period (a) 1 January 1980 to 18 October
1980 and (b) 19 October 1980 to 17 August 1981.

(2) What was the cost of each campaign undertaken.

(3) Under which item of expenditure were funds allocated for each campaign.

(4) Which advertising agencies or consultants were used for each campaign.

(5) What was the total sum paid to each agency or consultant for each campaign.

(6) How was each agency or consultant selected.

(7) By what percentage has the departmental cost of advertising increased or decreased each year from 1975 to 1980 and during the period I January 1981 to 17 August 1981.

(8) What is the estimated cost of advertising and the promotion of Government program and services for 1981-82.

Mr N. A. Brown-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:

(I) to (6) During the period in question there was no
expenditure by the Attorney-General's Department, or authorities within his responsibility, on advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services.

(7) Since 1975, expenditure on advertising for all purposes, has been:

1975 1976

$ 350,500 24,700

2944 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

1977 1978 1979
1980 1981 (I January-17 August)

53,000 33,600 48,200
84,700 34,600

The Australian Government Advertising Service has
advised that indexes of percentage increases in unit costs of Commonwealth departmental advertising since 1975 are:

Index of Unit Cost of

Commonwealth Department

Advertising

1975 (Base)

100

1976

110

1977

120

1978

128

1979

140

1980

153

1981 (I January-17 August)

165

(8) The Department has no plans for expenditure on advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services during 1981-82.

Advertising and Promotion: Department of Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 2673)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) What sum was spent by the Minister's Department on advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services during the period (a) I January 1980 to 18 October 1980 and (b) 19 October 1980 to 17 August 1981.
(2) What was the cost of each campaign undertaken.
(3) Under which item of expenditure were funds allocated for each campaign.
(4) Which advertising agencies or consultants were used for each campaign.
(5) What was the total sum paid to each agency or consultant for each campaign.
(6) How was each agency or consultant selected.
(7) By what percentage has the departmental cost of advertising increased or decreased each year from 1975 to 1980 and during the period I January 1981 to 17 August 1981.
(8) What is the estimated cost of advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services for 1981-82.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) (a) $18,498.88; (b) $1,117.46.
(2) The only campaign in the period was the publicity for alterations and increases in Repatriation Benefits announced in the 1980 Budget. Expenditure on this publicity totalled $19,337.89. The balance of $278.45, included in the answer to (I) (a), was part of the expenditure on the 1979 publicity campaign.
(3) 690/2/07 (1980-81) now 690/2/09.
(4) The following Commonwealth master placing/charging agencies were used for media placement for checking and monitoring media performance and for all accounting matters for the campaign:
Berrie Currie Advertising Pty Ltd Country Press Ltd (NSW) Country Press Co-Operative Company (VIC)

(5) Berrie Currie Advertising Pty Ltd, $15,654.39; Country Press Ltd, $2,359.90; Country Press Co-Operative Company, $1,323.60.

(6) By the Minister for Administrative Services in the case of the master placing/charging agencies and by the Australian Government Advertising Service in consultation with the Department in relation to selection of agencies to provide technical services to plan, create and produce advertisements.

(7) Total expenditure for all types of advertising by the De-
partment and the percentage changes between the fiscal years concluding in the years nominated in the question has been:

(Percentage

from

previous

$

year)

1975

- 107,883.89

1976

- 140,694.68

+30.4

1977

- 107,378.10

- 23.7

1978

.117,048.73*

+ 9.0

1979

- 108,867.64*

+ 7.0

1980

- 154,923.56*

+42.3

1981

- 180,757.64*

+ 16.7

* includes Defence Service Homes Corporation from
1977-78.

The Australian Government Advertising Service has advised that indexes of percentage increases in unit costs of
Commonwealth departmental advertising since 1975 have
been:

1975 (Base) 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 (I January-17 August)

Index of unit cost of Commonwealth Departmental advertising
100
110 120
128 140 153 165

(8) $26,333.

Aluminium Smelter Proposals, Queensland
(Question No. 2684)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(1) Have feasibility studies for Woongarra Shire and Bundaberg City Council, Queensland, concerning aluminium smelter proposals been disclosed to governments but witheld from the public; ifso, why.
(2) Is the Minister able to say whether the Queensland Coordinator General intends to disclose his recommendations to the Australian Government; if so, will these recommendations be made public; if not, why not.
(3) Will non-permanency rules be enforced in caravan parks housing smelter workers.
(4) Have any of the environmental reports referred to Walkerva1e School; ifso, will these references by made public.
(5) Are names of nominee land purchasers and developers published or disclosed to each level of government while objectors are required to present their cases against aspects of development in public documents to local authorities who then present these to the Co-ordinator General for determination without disclosure of his reasons to the objectors, discussion with them or checking of his decisions by the Australian Government.

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATlVES 2945

(6) Will Wide Bay-Burnett Electricity Board buy power from the State grid at about 3 cents per kilowatt hour (kWh), representing 1.068 cents for coal and 1.932 cents for capital costs, then sell to consumers at 6.48 cents/kWh to cover subtransmission costs, while Alcan pays 1.8 cents/kWh.
(7) Is the Minister able to say whether the aluminium industry paid (a) 3 cents in the United States of America, (b) 4 cents in Europe and (c) 8 cents in Japan per kWh in 1978.
(8) At the marginal export production cost of coal, does it cost $459 to smelt one tonne of aluminium.
(9) Are returns to Queensland from Alcan estimated at $252 per tonne.
(10) Is the Minister able to say whether there is any substance to the report in the Brisbane Courier Mail of 17 March 1981 that the Treasurer opposed State governments selling electricity below cost to attract smelter development.
(II) Will Alcan be required to reveal electricity prices to the (a) Commonwealth Government and (b) Parliament.
(12) Is the Minister able to say whether the relaxation of the demands of the Queensland Premier for health funds in May 1981 occurred in the context of relaxation of Federal monitoring of development projects.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Parts (I), (2), (3), (5), (6), (8) and (9) concern matters which come within the responsibility of the Queensland Government and various of its agencies.
(4) A draft Environmental Impact Statement was prepared and was available to the public for examination. I understand that the draft statement did not refer to the Walkervale School.
(7) There is no uniform price for electricity supplied to smelters in particular countries. It is also generally the practice for the price of electricity to smelters to be commercially negotiated and it is therefore not possible to determine the range of applicable prices. An industry spokesman did refer in 1979 to prices of the order cited. However, the precise connotation was not clear from the text. It would appear that the estimates referred to the incremental costs of electricity from new capacity and not to the average price of electricity to the then existing smelters which could well have been significantly lower.
(10) A search of the Courier Mail of 17 March 1981 revealed no reference to any views of the Treasurer on the appropriate selling price for electricity. There was, however, a report in Courier Mail of 7 March 1981 apparently reporting on a submission by the Treasury Department to the Senate Standing Committee on National Resources: the Development of the Bauxite, Alumina and Aluminium Industries.
(II) Major development projects typically, require some Commonwealth Government approvals. The approval process, particularly in relation to foreign investment guidelines, can involve provision, on a confidential basis, of a wide range of data relevant to the assessment of national benefits. Nevertheless, the determination of electricity prices is a responsibility of the State Government.
(12) There has been no relaxation of Commonwealth monitoring of development projects.
Moreton Bay: Site Reclamation Procedures
(Question 2728)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:

Has his attention been drawn to the site reclamation procedures of hydraulically pumping sand from Moreton Bay to accommodate the 02/20 runway in conjunction with the redevelopment of Brisbane's International Airport; if so, have any investigations been carried out into (a) possible adverse ecological consequences to micro-organisms in Moreton Bay fishing grounds which may produce ciguatoxin and hence conta'minate locally caught fish and (b) the effects of dredging on adjacent beaches,
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes, my attention has been drawn to the reclamation procedures.
With regard to investigations, my Department has been advised by the Department of Housing and Construction as follows:
(a) Expert advice provided since 1972 has never identified ciguatoxin. as a potential problem and consequently detailed investigations have not been undertaken. Ciguatoxin is associated with the destruction of coral substrate and is generally restricted to tropical waters. Dredging in Moreton Bay for the re-development of Brisbane International Airport is being conducted at Middle Banks, which is an area devoid of coral and not within tropical waters. Thus ciguatoxin is not likely to result from Middle Banks dredging,
(b) Yes. Investigations of the effect of dredging at Middle Banks on the beaches of Moreton Island by specialist advisers concluded that the effects will be be negligible, on the currently unstable Moreton Island beaches. Records existing since the mid ninteenth century confirm the unstable nature of these beaches. Direct monitoring of the western Moreton Island beaches commenced prior to dredging to identify any -changes.
Disabled Persons: Mobility Allowance
(Question No. 2768)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) Has the Minister received a submission from the Paraplegic and Quadraplegic Association of N.S.W. calling for the introduction of a mobility allowance for disabled persons.
(2) If so, what action has the Minister taken in respect of that submission.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) I refer the honourable member to my answer to Senate Question No. 941. (Senate Hansard, 29 October 1981,: page 1903).
Foreign Language Films
(Question No. 2823)
Mr Jull asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 25 August 1981:
(I) What provision is made by the Film Censorship Board for the classification of foreign language films.
(2) How many members of the board, or employees of the board, speak a foreign language, so that classification of imported feature films can be undertaken.
(3) Are provisions made to employ freelance interpreters to undertake classification of feature films.

2946 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr N. A. Brown-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(I) The registration and classification of foreign-language films can generally be based on synopses, sub-titles, dubbed dialogue and visual content or some combination of those elements.
(2) All nine members of the Film Censorship Board have a working knowledge of at least one foreign language encompassing French, Italian and Spanish. Two Deputy Censors are fluent in German and Serbo-Croatian respectively.
(3) Normal provisions exist for the employment of Government and freelance interpreters should this be considered necessary.
Repatriation Review Tribunal
(Question No. 2936)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 27 August 1981:
(I) How many cases to be determined by the Repatriation Review Tribunal have been waiting for review for (a) more than and (b) less than 2 ye&rs.
(2) How many formal representations has the Minister received in the last 10 months expressing concern with the delay in the repatriation determining system.
(3) What action does the Government propose to take to overcome these problems.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) On I September 1981 there were 7,310 applications awaiting decisions by the Repatriation Review Tribunal. Of this total 1,116 were lodged before I September 1979 and 6,194 were lodged on, or after, I September 1979.
(2) Approximately 50 formal representations have been received during the last 10 months expressing concern about delays in the Repatriation determining system.
(3) The Government is fully aware of the problems being encountered with delays in the repatriation determining system and changes have been made to improve the position. Three additional Repatriation Boards have been established with the object of lessening the backlog in cases awaiting determination. The number of Repatriation Commission delegates has been increased and approval has been sought for further delegates to be appointed. In addition, the Repatriation Act 1920 has been amended to provide the Repatriation Review Tribunal with a discretion whether or not to refer to the Repatriation Commission cases where additional evidence is presented.
While the above, and other, measures have assisted in reducing the average time taken to process claims and appeals, the delays in the system need to be reduced further.
The Government is concerned that some veterans are experiencing lengthy delays in establishing entitlement to Repatriation benefits and preliminary discussions on the problems have already been held with veterans' organisations to seek their views on further measures to streamline the determining system.
Public Service: Staff Reductions
(Question No, 2959)
Mr Lloyd asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 8 September 1981:

Further to his answer to Question No. 2158 (Hansard, 10 June 1981, page 3560) which revealed a dramatic increase in the percentage of 2nd and 3rd Division officers in -the Commonwealth Public Service since 1975, will he confer with the Public Service Board to ensure that (a) any further reductions in the Public Service are at least applied uniformly between the various divisions and (b) as positions become vacant in the 2nd or 3rd Divisions they will be abolished or left unfilled until the 1975 ratio is restored.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
While the Government decides the level of total staff resources to be employed in the Public Service, Permanent Heads of Departments and the Public Service Board, in the exercise of their statutory functions under the Public Service Act, have primary responsibility for the classification and Divisional status of positions.
As mentioned in my answer to Question No. 2158 there are many continuing factors which are leading to changes in the distribution of staff between the Second, Third and Fourth Divisions and there is no reason to expect that a distribution between those Divisions applying in anyone year is appropriate in subsequent years.
Drugs: Prosecution for Illegal Entry
(Question No. 2986)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 September 1981 :
(I) How many unresolved sightings of unidentified aircraft have been (a) reported to and (b) recorded by authorities since August 1979.
(2) How many instances of drugs illegally reaching Australia by (a) light aircraft, (b) other aircraft and (c) ships, have been succesfully prosecuted.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Department's records show that since August 1979, there have been 77 reports of unidentified aircraft, 18 of which were resolved and 59 of which remain unresolved.
(2) The Department's records show the following successful prosecutions in relation to illegal drug importations between August and November 1979.
(a) Light Aircraft-Nil (b) Other Aircraft-23 (c) Ships-4
As from 7 November 1979 prosecution action for all drug offences under the Customs Act is the responsibility of the Australian Federal Police.
Accordingly, questions relating to such prosections after 7 November 1979 should be directed to my colleague, the Minister for Administrative Services.
Tenosynovitis: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 3035)
Mr !.es McMahon asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2947

(I) Have any cases of tenosynovitis been reported to date, in the Department or statutory authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction.
(2) If so, will the Minister state (a) how many cases have been reported, (b) in what types of work the affected persons were engaged, (c) of the cases reported how many were in respect of (i) female and (ii) male employees and (d) what age brackets appear to be most affected, in the Department and each statutory authority.
(3) Will the Minister provide similar information in respect of carpal tunnel.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) (a) Five cases have been reported in the Department and the statutory authorities under my jurisdiction;
(b) The affected persons were involved in either the clerical or keyboard ca tegories;
(c) All were female employees;
(d) All were in the 30 to 40 year age group.
(3) There have been no cases of carpal tunnel reported.
Apprentices Employed by Telecom Australia
(Question No. 3149)
Mr Ewen Cameron asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
How many apprentices have been employed by Telecom Australia in each State for 1980-81, and what is the estimated number to be employed in 1981-82?
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Telecom Australia advises that the number of apprentices, including Apprentice Telecom Technicians, employed in each State at June 1981, and the estimated number for June 1982 are as shown below.

June 1981 June 1982

NSW Vic. Qld SA WA Tas. Total
620 439 393 117 29 39 1,637 596 413 428 84 49 30 1,600

Galbally Report on Migrant Services and Programs
(Question No. 3157)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 17 September 1981:
(I) What was the (a) Galbally recommended additional real funding and (b) Government's actual real expenditure for each year and each specific recommendation of the Galbally Report on Migrant Services and Programs.
(2) Which of the Galbally recommendations have not been completed to the extent set out in the Report.
(3) Has the Government announced or carried out any extensions of any recommendations; if so, in respect of which recommendations.
(4) Have any Galbally recommendations not been followed up by the Government; if so, which recommendations and what is the reason in each case.

Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) (I) The information sought is to be found between pages 14 and 28 of the Report of the Review of Post-arrival Programs and Services to Migrants (the Galbally Report).
(I) (b), (2) & (3) The information sought has been published annually in the Galbally Information Kit which has been tabled in Parliament in conjunction with the annual report to Parliament on Galbally Implementation. Expenditure details up to 30 June 1980 are to be found in the Galbally Information Kit, which I tabled on 18 September 1980 (Hansard, page 1479). Details for the period to 30June 1981 will be contained in the Galbally Information Kit which I expect to release before the end of the year.
(4) No.
National Employment Strategy for Aboriginals
(Question No. 3202)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 22 September 1981 :
(I) Did he recently send Members of Parliament a leiter renewing an invitation to those Members to provide training opportunities for Aboriginal people within their electorate or Parliamentary offices under the National Strategy for Aboriginals.
(2) When did his Department in Brisbane receive an application from me for a trainee under the National Employment Strategy for Aboriginals.
(3) Is it a fact that no trainee has been fourid since my application.
(4) If so, what is the reason for the shortage of trainees.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) 27 March 1981.
(3) Yes. Notwithstanding this, two potential trainees were identified, on separate occasions, to undertake training in the honourable member's office. One of these decided not to pursue the opportunity. The second person had agreed to commence until it became apparent that the honourable member's electorate office was to be relocated to Brisbane's northern suburbs. As the potential trainee resided in the southern suburbs it was agreed between the honourable member's electorate office staff and officers of my Department that it would be inappropriate to proceed with the proposal. The person in question was subsequently placed in the office of Senator Bonner.
(4) Delays may occur before training opportunities offered by parliamentarians are taken up. The issue is one of matching eligible trainees to the vacancies. In this my Department endeavours to ensure that the vocational needs of individuals receive primary consideration.
Computerised Axial Tomography Scanners
(Question No. 3221)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 23 September 1981:
(I) How many computerised Axial Tomography (C.A.T.) scanners are there in Australia.
(2) Where are they located.

2948 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(3) What proportion are in private practice.
(4) Does his Department have to approve the importation of each machine.
(5) How much does each cost.
(6) What is the medical benefits item number for their use in private practice.
(7) How many services were provided under this number in 1980-81.
Mr MacKelIar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) The most recent information available to my Department on the numbers and locations of CAT Scanners in Australia was compiled during December 1980. The situation at that time was as follows:
CAT Scanners in Australia

Location

Head Body Public Private Total

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Australian Capital Territory Northern Territory

I

9 (5) (5)

10

2

3 (2) (3)

5

2

2 (2) (2)

4

I

2 (2) (I)

3

I'

3 (2) (2)

4

I (I)

I

(I) (I)

Australia

7

22 (16) (13)

29

N.B. Other installations are likely to have been commissioned since December 1980. The commissioning of CAT scanners does not require the prior approval of the Commonwealth Department of Health.
(4) My Department does not have a role in the approval of the importation of CAT scanners.
(5) The cost of CAT scanning equipment varies according to whether the machine is a head scanner or a body scanner and also depending on the complexity of the equipment. Roughly, price ranges are as follows:
Body Scanners, $300,000-$800,000. Head Scanners, $190,000-$250,000.
(6) and (7) The Medical Benefits Schedule item numbers and descriptions for CAT scanning services and the number of services relating to these items in 1979-80 are set out below. Data are not yet available for 1980-81.

Medical Benefits
Schedule
Item No.

Description

No. of Services 1979-80

2960 2962
2964 2966

COMPUTERISED AXIAL TOMOGRAPHY-brain scan on a brain scanner, plain study
COMPUTERISED AXIAL TOMOGRAPHY-brain scan on a brain scanner, plain study and contrast medium study
COMPUTERISED AXIAL TOMOGRAPHY-brain scan on a body scanner, plain study COMPUTERISED AXIAL TOMOGRAPHY-brain scan on a body scanner, plain study and contrast medium study

727 3,573 2,482 15,691

Medical Benefits Schedule
Item No.

Description

No. of Services 1979-80

2968 2970

COMPUTERISED AXIAL
TOMOGRAPHY-body scan on a body scanner, plain study
COMPUTERISED AXIAL TOMOGRAPHY-body scan on a body scanner, plain study and intravenous contrast medium study

Total No. of services for private CAT Scanning .

1,842
3,165 27,480

Footnote: The number of services relates to benefit claims processed during 1979-80 by the private health insurance organisations and my Department's direct billing payment system.
Queensland Aboriginal and Islander Commission: Mrs Myrna Jerome
(Question No. 3263)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to claims by Mrs Myrna Jerome that she was sacked from the Queensland Aboriginal and Islander Commission because she was too critical of the Queensland State Government.
(2) If so, has the Minister caused any inquiry to be conducted into Mrs Jerome's allegations; if so, what was the nature of the inquiry and what was the outcome.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) Appointments to the Queensland Aboriginal and Islanders Commission are made by the Queensland Governorin-Council under s. 14A of the Queensland Aborigines Act. Under s. 14c of that Act, a Commissioner may be removed from office at any time. The Governor is not required by the statute to provide reasons for his decision under that section of the Act.
Persons Classified as Profoundly Deaf
(Question No. 3268)
Mr McLean asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:
How many persons in Australia are classified as being profoundly deaf.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No exact census of profound deafness has been undertaken in Australia. On the basis of available evidence it is estimated that there are approximately 15,700 persons in Australia who can be regarded as profoundly deaf.
Commonwealth Medical Benefits: Fitting of Contact Lenses
(Question No. 3288)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 13 October 1981 :

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2949

(I) Does the Commonwealth medical benefits schedule include an item for specialist consultations.
(2) Is it a fact that no item in the Commonwealth medical benefits schedule explicitly covers the fitting of contact lenses by specialists.
(3) Does the fitting of contact lenses require a full consultation with a specialist.
(4) Is it normal practice for the cost of fitting contact lenses to be the same as that of a specialist consultation.
(5) Does the Commonwealth medical benefits schedule also include an item covering follow-up specialist consultations.
(6) Is the cover afforded for this item half that provided under the item for specialist consultations.
(7) Does Medibank cover the fitting of contact lenses under the item for follow-up specialist consultations.
(8) If specialists regard the fitting of contact lenses as a full consultation and not a follow-up consultation, for what reason is the fitting of contact lenses covered under the follow-up specialist consultation item.
(9) Will he act to correct this apparent anomaly; if not, why not.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) No. As from I September 1981, a new item was included in the Medical Benefits Schedule with a fee in all States of$49.00 for-
'Attendance by a medical practitioner for the investigation and evaluation of a patient for the fitting of contact lenses, with keratometry and testing with trial lenses and the issue of a prescription-one attendance in any period of 36 consecutive months'.
Benefits are not attracted under this item unless the lenses are prescribed at this attendance. Evaluation and fitting without the issue of a prescription do not qualify under the item.
Benefits are payable for an initial referred consultation rendered in association with the fitting and prescribing of the lenses.
Subsequent follow-up attendances attract benefits on a consultation basis.
In addition, Commonwealth medical benefits are payable for the prescribing and fitting of contact lenses by optometrists who have undertaken to participate in the Government's Optometrical Benefits Scheme.
Unlike the new item covering the evaluation of a patient for fitting of contact lenses by a medical practitioner, the item covering the prescribing and fitting of contact lenses by an optometrist covers all attendances subsequent to the initial consultation in a single course of attention. This bulk item attracts a Schedule fee of $1 08.
(3) to (8) See (2).
(9) There is no anomaly.
Defence Service Home Loans: Female Members of Services
(Question No. 3271)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:

(1) Has his attention been drawn to statements by former members of the Australian Women's Army Service who ser-
ved during the Second World War, that they were enlisted for active service outside Australia because they were members of
Military Forces engaged in operations against an enemy and any of them could have been sent at any time to war zones outside of Australia.

(2) Is there any discrimination with respect to recognition of war service of female members of the Services when deter-
mining eligibility for Defence Service Home Loans.

(3) Under what circumstances are female members of the Defence Forces eligible to receive Defence Service Home
Loans.

(4) Does nursing qualify as operations against the enemy when nurses served in forward areas.

Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) Yes.

(2) Consistent with the basic principle adopted when the
Defence Service Homes Scheme was introduced in 1919, benefits under the Scheme in respect of service in World War
II have been available, in general, only to men and women who were enlisted in, or appointed to, Forces raised for service
outside Australia or who actually served outside Australia.

Accordingly, service in the wartime Citizen Military Forces

and Women's Services, which were not raised for service out-

side Australia, is not qualifying service for Defence Service

Homes benefits unless the member, man or woman, served

outside Australia.

--

(3) Female members of the Defence Force are eligible for a Defence Service Homes loan on exactly the same basis as are male members.

Eligibility for a loan was extended in 1973 to members of
the Defence Force who were serving on or after 7 December 1972 and who complete 3 years' effective full-time service.

In 1978 a separate eligibility test was introduced to apply to members whose service commenced on or after 17 August
1977. Those members are required to complete a period of 6 years' effective full-time service and to enter into a commitment to render further full-time service before becoming eli-
gible for a loan.

A member of the Defence Force who served after World War II and whose service terminated before 7 December 1972 is eligible for a loan if he or she:

(a) was allotted for duty in connection with the warlike operations in Korea between 27 June 1950 and 31 August 1957 (inclusive) or in Malaya between 29 June 1950 and 31 August 1957 (inclusive) and left the last port of call in Australia or other part of the Queen's dominions before I September 1957 to serve in connection with those operations;
(b) served on land betwen I September 1957 and 27 May 1963 (inclusive) in the area of Malaya or in the area of the Island of Singapore and its then dependencies other than Christmas Island; or
(c) served on 'special service' as defined in the Repatriation (Special Overseas Service) Act in a prescribed 'special area'.

(4) This is not a consideration in determining eligibility under the Defence Service Homes Act.

2950 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers 10 Questions

River Murray Commission: Consultants
(Question No. 330 I)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National De~elopment and Energy, upon notice, on 14 October 1981:
(I) How many consultants' reports have been commissioned by the River Murray Commission since 1965.
(2) What was the nature of the work undertaken by each consultant.
(3) When was each of the reports (a) commissioned and (b) completed.

(4) Which firm was engaged on each of the studies.
(5) What was the consultant's fee for each report.
(6) How was the consultant engaged in each instance.
(7) If tenders were called, was the lowest tenderer engaged in each case; if not, why not.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Three.
(2) to (7) Details are given in the table below.

Nature of works (2)

Report
Commissioned (3)

(a) Murray Valley
SalinilY Invesligations with a view to recommending salinity
levels in Ihe River Murray

1967

(b) Operational and
transmission losses of regulated flow of the River Murray (c) Feasibility of carrying oul a
major water quality management mathemat-
ical model study of the River Murray

1979 1979

Completed

Consulling
firm (4)

1970

GUlleridge, Haskins and Davey (Australia) in association with Hunting Technical Services
Limited (England)

1981 Maunsell and Partners Pty Ltd (Australia)

Consultants fee (5)

Engagement of consultant
(6)

Tenders (7)

$ 478,000
30.000

Selection was made following invitation extended to consulting firms, local and overseas, known to have the required specialised expertise
Bydirecl invilalion

Not calledFees for such work is in accordance with conditions laid down by the Associ-
ation of Consulting Engineers, Australia-Usually
on a time scale basis. As above.

1980 Maunsell and Partners Pty Ltd (Australia)

10.000 By direcl invitation As above.

Historical Aircraft
(Question No. 3308)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 14 October 1981:
Does the Government have an accurate list of rare vintage and historical aircraft remaining in Australia; if so, (a) who compiled this list and (b) has the accuracy of the list been checked and by whom was it checked.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No. However, the Australian Society for Aero-historical Preservation Inc. has, with the assistance and co-operation of aircraft collectors, museums and enthusiasts in Australia, compiled a useful index of vintage and veteran aircraft in Australia. The accuracy of this list has not been checked by my Department.
Historical Aircraft
(Question No. 3309)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 14 October 1981:

What group or individual advises the Government on the historical significance of an aircraft if an export application is received and what are their qualifications.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
As advised in my answer to the House of Representatives question No. 361, Hansard 13 May 1981 (page 2360), expert advice is sought from the Department of Defence, the Air Force Association, Australian War Memorial, Antique Aeroplane Association of Australia and The Australian Society for Aero-historical Preservation Inc.
Electricity: Production by Nuclear Power
(Question No. 3322)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 14 October 1981:
(I) Is he able to say what proportion of electricity output was produced by nuclear power in (a) Belgium, (b) Canada, (c) the German Democratic Republic, (d) France, (e) the Federal Republic of Germany, (f) Italy, (g) Japan, (h) the Republic of Korea, (j) Sweden, (k) Switzerland, (I) the United Kingdom, (m) the United States of America and (n) the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics during (i) 1975 and (ii) 1980.

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2951

(2) What are the Australian Atomic Energy Commission's best estimates of output for each of these countries for 1985.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answers to the honourable member's questions:
(I) and (2)-
PERCENTAGE OF ELECTRICITY OUTPUT CONTRIBUTED BY NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS (a)

1975 19801985(d)

Belgium Canada German Democratic Republic France Federal German Republic Italy Japan Republic of Korea Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom United States of America Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

16.5 23.3(c) 45

4.5

10

12

3.2(b) 9

16

9.8 23.5(c) 55

7.1 11.9(c) 18

2.6

1.2(c) 4

5.3

13

15

O.O(b) 7

22

14.9

27

42

17.8

28

36

11.2 12.1 (c) 22

8.4

II

17

1.9(b) 5

8

Notes: (a) Official statistics for electricity generation in a given year
often do not appear for some countries until at least one year after the close of that year. The figures for 1980 therefore consist of some officially quoted data while others are rounded estimates from usually reliable sources. (b) The marked 1975 figures are derived from UN Year Book of World Energy Statistics (magnetic tape version) while the remainder are derived from OECD energy statistics. (c) The marked 1980 figures have been derived from the EEC statistical office (Europe energy No. 135, 10 June 1981) while the remainder are rounded to the nearest whole number from other published information. (d) AAEC projections.
Education: Commonwealth Training Program
(Question No. 3343)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 15 October 1981:
(I) Prior to the establishment of the Commonwealth Transition Program what activities and courses had each State developed which the State authorities regarded as coming within the area of transition education.
(2) What impact on Commonwealth funding to each State for the Commonwealth Transition Program did the prior .existence of these activities and courses have.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Prior to the establishment of the Commonwealth Transition Program each State has developed activities and courses which they regarded as coming within the area of transition education. These included such activities as provision of pre-apprenticeship, pre-vocational and preemployment courses in TAFE, alternative courses for secondary students likely to experience difficulty in the transition to work, work experience programs for secondary students, link courses involving secondary students' participation in programs including elements of T AFE courses, and career education and guidance programs.

The extent to which specific activities had been developed varied from State to State.
(2) The allocation between States of the funds available under the Commonwealth's five year $150m School to Work Transition Program was made on the basis of the numbers of 15-19 year olds in the population in each State; the level of pre-existing activities in transition education in each State was not taken into account in that allocation in view of the wide range of activities concerned and the difficulty in making equitable comparisons of effort.
Treaties with Soviet Union
(Question No. 3383)
Mr McLean asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 21 October 1981:
Which countries have signed treaties of friendship and cooperation with the Soviet Union since March 1981.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The People's Republic of the Congo on 13 May 1981.
Flood Mitigation Strategies and Funding
(Question No. 3403)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 22 October 1981 :
(I) Has the Commonwealth co-operated with the Queensland Government in the preparation of future long term flood mitigation strategies and funding.
(2) If so (a) what areas are to be studied, (b) when will a report be available and (c) what is to be the likely cost of the study and, how will it be paid for.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) By the end of this financial year, the Commonwealth will have provided grants totalling $7.67m to Queensland for flood mitigation work on creeks in the Brisbane area, $0.73m for flood mitigation on the Proserpine River and $0.42m for flood mitigation works on the Don River.
(2) The Commonwealth is not involved at the present in co-operation with the State in the development of other long term flood mitigation strategies.
River Murray Commission
(Question No. 3608)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(l) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the comments of M r A. O'Brien, President of the River Murray Commission, as reported in RiI'erlander, May-June 1980, that it should be stressed that with its widened powers and responsibilities, the Commission will shortly find itself needing to make many difficult decisions, for example, (a) the decision between the conflicting requirements of quantity versus quality, (b) the effect of any policies concerning flood mitigation, recreation or environment on availability of water for irrigation and (c) it will be faced with decisions which could have significant effect across the State borders, and further that (d) the resolution of these conflicting requirements will often be made much more difficult by the certainty of short-term

2952 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

benefits on the one hand against the long-term detriment on the other and (e) in reaching its decisions on these complex matters, the Commission will need not only all the expert advice it can muster but even more importantly it must ensure that all relevant interests and persons are recognised and have a chance to put their case.
(2) As the changes to the River Murray Waters Agreement, referred to by Mr O'Brien, are now to proceed, what additional staff and rescources will be provided to the Commission to enable it to deal effectively with its additional responsibilities, and in particular where will the Commission obtain all the expert advice referred to by Mr O'Brien.
(3) What additional expenditure will be made available to the Commission, and for what purposes will this money be allocated.
(4) As one of the major concerns within the River Murray basin is land salinisation, what role will the Commission play in tackling this problem.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes
(2) and (3) These are both matters for the River Murray Commission which I understand is currently re-examining staffing and other requirements in the light of the recent agreement of the four governments to its water quality responsibilities under a proposed new River Murray Waters Agreement.
(4) Responsibility for action at government level to deal with land salinisation rests entirely with the States. However, the new Agreement will enable the Commission to make representations to the appropriate governments on land salinisation matters insofar as they affect the quality of water under its control.
Mexico 22 Nation Summit Conference
(Question No, 1069)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :
(I) What were the reasons for Australia being excluded from the proposed 22 Nation Summit Conference to be held in. Mexico in October 1981 to discuss North-South problems, following publication of the Brandt Report on International Development Issues.
(2) Were efforts made to secure an invitation; ifso, what.
(3) Did he receive the support of the Administration of the l)nited States of America or the Government of the United Kingdom in his efforts to secure an invitation.
(4) What reasons were given for Australia's rejection.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
For reasons which are well understood, the number of Heads of Government to attend the Conference at Cancun in Mexico in October 1981 was limited. Australia did not attend, but the Australian Government had long been concerned to do what it could to contribute to a successful outcome from the Cancun proceedings. North/South matters were prominent in discussions at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne, as Australia had hoped, and both CHOGM and the Cancun meeting were notable for their constructive spirit. Because of the great importance of these issues and my Chairmanship of the Commonwealth meeting,l had discussions earlier this year both with Commonwealth leaders and with other world leaders who would be attending

the Cancun Summit, including both co-chairmen. These discussions proved extremely useful in registering Australia's views on North/South matters and as a preparation for the Melbourne Commonwealth meeting. The Melbourne meeting achieved a substantial consensus on North/South matters and, in the Government's view, made a significant contribution to the deliberations at Cancun.
Co-ordination of Recurrent Grants
(Question No. 1714)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Is there any co-ordination of recurrent grants administered by the Capital Territory Health Commission and grants from other Commonwealth Departments.
(2) If so, did the Commission recognise the $8,000 grant in 1979-80 from the Family Support Scheme to the Canberra Women's Refuge when determining its recurrent grant of $57,800 for the same period.
Mr MacKellar-The answer t,o the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. An interdepartmental committee has been set up in the A.C.T. to co-ordinate funding of community organisations. Commonwealth departments and authorities represented on the IDC are:
(i) A.C.T. Schools Authority (ii) Attorney-Genera!'s Department (iii) Capital Territory Health Commission (iv) Department of the Capital Territory (v) Department of Home Affairs and Environment (vi) Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (vii) Department of Social Security
The Committee meets annually. Additional meetings are held whenever required.
(2) Yes. The Capital Territory Health Commission grant to the Canberra Women's Refuge is for salaries, administrative and operative costs.
The Family Support Scheme funded by an $8,000 grant from the Office of Child Care, Department of Social Security, is for the purpose of providing support and budget counselling for single parent families. Both the Capital Territory Health Commission and the Department of Social Security are aware of the total grant monies received by the Refuge and the purposes for which those moneys are provided.
Antarctica: Preservation of Mawson's Hut
(Question No. 1746)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What is the current condition of Mawson's Hut, Commonwealth Bay, Antarctica.
(2) What work has been done by (a) Australia and (b) other nations on the hut during the last 10 years.
(3) What are the current plans in relation to the preservation, maintenance and location of the hut.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) In January/February 1978 a party from the Antarctic Division visited Commonwealth Bay to inspect Mawson's Hut, to assess the feasibility of returning it to Australia and to do some restoration work. The party found that the condition of the hut reflected the severe weather conditions it has had to withstand. They reported that the outer timbers had been . reduced to half their original thickness and had shrunk leaving

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2953

gaps between the boards. The inner and main timbers were generally in good condition; however, some repairs and replacement would be necessary.
The party recommended that because of the condition of the hut and the variable weather conditions no attempt should be made to return it to Australia and that it should be restored on site.
(2) Only Australia has worked on the restoration of Mawson's Hut. Restoration commenced in the 1975-76 austral summer when roof hatches were repaired, but the main work was carried out in January 1978 when four expeditioners spent over a month at the site.
A number of tasks were undertaken by the 19711 party and they include:
temporary weather sealing of roof and outer timber lining of the hut;
excavation of workshop hut;
approximately 120 cubic metres of ice removed from the inside of the hut;
hut photographed inside and out and a film of restoration work made;
all items of historical importance catalogued and photographed.
In addition, meteorological data was collected to compare with that collected by Mawson's expedition.
(3) The Government has decided that Mawson's Hut should be restored on its present site. This decision has been endorsed by the Australian Heritage Commission which fully supports the arguments which led to this decision (these arguments are summarised on page 1124 of Senate Hansard 2 April 1981).
The next step is weatherproofing of the outer timber lining so that the hut can be cleared of ice and snow. Under present arrangements, restoration work will not recommence for several years. This is because of the present heavy commitment to the rebuilding of our Antarctic stations.
My Department has reviewed its program to see if restoration work can be brought forward. I have been advised that the demand on logistics for the rebuilding program will continue for several years. As the rebuilding program passes its peak, it will be possible to send vessels to Commonwealth Bay to continue the restoration work.
Mawson's Hut is a monument of great importance to Australia and it is my intention that restoration work will continue at the earliest possible date.
MANDATA System: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 2213)'
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(I) Has the MANDATA System been introduced in the Department of National Development and Energy and Government instrumentalities under the Minister's control; if so, what was the (a) cost of (i) the equipment, (ii) installation, (iii) site preparation, (iv) acquiring or renting sites and (v) other additional factors associated with the introduction of the system and (b) total cost of introducing the system.
(2) Were any reductions in the staff of personnel/establishment units achieved as a result of introducing the system; if so, what (a) reduction in staff and (b) cost savings were achieved in each year since its introduction.

(3) What staff (a) saving or (b) increase is expected with the termination of the MANDAT A System.
(4) What is the anticipated (a) extra cost or (b) saving resulting from the termination of the MANDA TA System.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes, in the Department of National Development and Energy. Much of the implementation work was undertaken by staff in the course of their normal duties and the marginal cost cannot be identified. Direct costs of the following order were incurred:
(a) (i) Nil (see also answer to Question No. 2209 part (I) (a) (i) and (ii) ).
(ii) $210 (see also answer to Question No. 2209 part (I) (a) (i) and (ii) ).
(iii) Nil.
(iv) Nil.
(v) $6850.
(b) $7060.
(2) No.
(3) (a) One officer has been redeployed.
(4) (a) Niland (b) the saving will bein terms of operating costs and the cost of the salary for the officer redeployed.
MANDATA System: Department of Veterans' Affairs
(Question No. 2231)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(I) Has the MANDATA System been introduced in the Department of Veterans' Affairs and Government instrumentalities under the Minister's control; if so, what was the (a) cost of (i) the equipment, (ii) installation, (iii) site preparation, (iv) acquiring or renting sites and (v) other additional factors associated with the introduction of the system and (b) total cost of introducing the system.
(2) Were any reductions in the staff of personnel/establishment units achieved as a result of introducing this system; if so, what (a) reductions in staff and (b) cost savings were achieved in each year since its introduction.
(3) What staff (a) saving or (b) increase is expected with the termination of the MANDATA system.
(4) What is the anticipated (a) extra cost or (b) saving resulting from the termination of the MAN DATA System.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes (ceased on 30 June.1981) (see answer to Question No. 2209 I (a) and (b) ).
(a) (i) There were no equipment costs.
(ii) Installation costs were $3,300.
(iii) Site preparation costs were $750.
(iv) No costs were incurred in site acquisition or rental.
(v) Salary costs were of the order of $500,000.
(b) Total cost was of the order of $504,000.
(2) No.

2954 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(3) (a) 17 staff from the MANDATA project have become available for re-deployment in the Department, although it is envisaged that some of these will be required to provide an alternative facility (see 4 (a) and (b) ) and (b) nil.
(4) (a) and (b) A basic alternative to the MANDATA System is being developed using the Department's own computer and staff. There are anticipated savings in salary payments and other costs as the Department's proposed system is far less extensive than was MANDATA.
Companies: Taxation Returns
(Question No. 2467)
Mr Uren asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:
(I) How many companies filed taxation returns in each year since 1970-71.
(2) What was the total value of profits attributed to those companies for each of those years.
(3) What proportion of those total profits in each year was attributable to:
(a) foreign controlled companies,
(b) the largest (i) 100, (ii) 200 and (iii) 400 companies ranked by assets, and
(c) the largest 100 companies ranked by capitalised market value.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The number of income tax returns that were lodged by companies in each financial year from 1970-71 to 1979-80 were as follows:
NO.OFRETURNSLODGED

1970-71
1971-72
1972-73 1973-74
1974-75
1975-76 1976-77
1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

179062 195788 209801 223156 235250 237596 243636 251 344 254374 263482

(2) The total value of profits attributable to these companies is not available from taxation statistics. Australian
Bureau of Statistics data are available on income of 'corporate
trading enterprises' and 'financial enterprises'. The income before tax of these companies from 1970-71 to 1979-80 was as follows:

Trading Financial Enterprises Enterprises

Total

1970-71
1971-72 1972-73 1973-74
1974-75 1975-76
1976-77 1977-78
1978-79 1979-80

$m

$m

$m

2965

395

3360

3079

438

3517

3680

476

4156

3999

425

4424

3841

325

4166

4367

689

5056

5436

793

6229

5510

709

6219

5670

1137

6807

6860

1248

8108

(3)(a) The ABS does not provide a breakdown of the data on income of trading and financial enterprises into the income

attributable to foreign-controlled enterprises and to Australian-Controlled enterprises. There are available data on profits and dividends payable abroad; these data enable a measure to be derived of the proportion of company income, after payment of tax, that is payable abroad. For the period 1970-71 to 1979-80, this proportion was as follows:
ADJUSTED INCOME PAYABLE OVERSEAS AS A PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL COMPANY INCOME
AFTER TAX

1970-71

29.0

1971-72

26.9

1972-73

31.2

1973-74

30.9

1974-75

25.5

1975-76

32.6

1976-77

34.1

1977-78

37.9

1978-79

32.7

1979-80

36.5

Source: Derived from ABS data.
My press release no. 35 of 31 March 1980 provided details of the method of calculating this proportion and outlined some qualifications about its use. In particular, the proportion is subject to a good deal of short-term fluctuation, as evidenced by the fall in the proportion in 1978-79 and the subsequent increase in 1979-80 (after preliminary data had indicated that the proportion had stabilised). Apparent trends in the proportion may be subject to reversal as revised and more recent data become available.
The proportion is not a reliable measure of the extent of foreign. participation in the economy and may also be affected by various influences in addition to the level of foreign ownership. These include a tendency for the profitability of foreigncontrolled enterprises to differ from the Australian-controlled enterprises, and for the profitability and taxation payments of sectors in which foreign ownership is relatively high to vary relative to other sectors. For these reasons considerable care must be excercised in drawing any conclusions relating to foreign participation from the proportion.
(3) (b) and (c) Data that would enable these proportions to be derived are not available.

Family Planning Organisations: COll'monwealth Assistance
(Question No. 2712)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) Do the services provided by Family Planning Organisations mitigate against unwanted pregnancies and assist in the reduction of abortions.
(2) What (a) direct and (b) indirect Commonwealth assistance will be given or is proposed to be given to Family Planning Organisations in 1981-82.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. There is evidence that a comprehensive family planning education program can be an important factor in reducing the number of unwanted births and abortions. The Government recognises this as an important overall objective of the Family Planning Program, through which it continues to make available financial assistance to family planning organisations for education and information activities.
(2) (a) Commonwealth funds are provided to family planning organisations through two channels, namely:

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2955

Family Planning Program-to assist with the provision of non-clinical services, i.e., education, training and information;and
Health Program Grants-to assist towards meeting costs of clinical services.
Funds provided under these two programs for 1981-82 are:
(i) Family Planning Program Allocations to Family Planning Organisations

Organisation

1'981-82 allocation

Family Planning Associations-

New South Wales

Victoria

Queensland

South Australia

Western Australia

Tasmania

Northern Territory

Australian Capital Territory

Australian Federation of Family Planning Assoc-

iations

........... .

Australian Catholic Social Welfare Commission

Adolescent Counselling, Treatment and Infor-

mation (ACTION) Centre

Action for Family Planning

$
153,400 78,250 56,300 37,000 45,000 20,000 29,600 20,600
58,850 166,450
70,200 20,000

(ii) Health Program Grant Monthly Advancesto Family Planning Associations-I 98 1-82

Organisation

1981-82-Level of advances
paid monthly

Family Planning Association New South Wales
Victoria
Queensland
South Australia Western Australia
Tasmania Australian Capital Territory
Northern Territory

$
77,021 22,519 34,180 29,280 18,454
6,523 7,420 2,863

-Note: The Health Program Grant funding arrangements are currently under review. Until such time as the review is completed, each Association is being paid a monthly advance which is fixed at the level of the advance for June 1981.
(2) (b) Indirect Commonwealth assistance is provided to both the A.C.T. Family Planning Association and the ACTION Centre, Melbourne in the form of rental subsidies. In 1981-82, the estimated cost of renting premises for the ACTION Centre is $21,000. While the A.C.T. FPA occupies its current premises on a 'peppercorn' rental basis, the notional cost of the subsidy is of the order of $4,000.
In addition, Commonwealth assistance towards family planning generally includes avenues such as subsidies on oral contraceptives through to Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme and through health insurance arrangements for family planning services provided by medical practitioners in the course of every day consultations,

Tax Deductions: Maintenance Payments
(Question No. 2741)
Mr Beazley asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:

(I) Is he able to say in which countries tax deductions are permitted for maintenance payments by divorced persons,
(2) If so, what amount is deductible in each case.
(3) Has the Australian Government considered a similar course.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) I am not able to list all of the countries in which tax deductions are permitted for maintenance payments by divorced persons, or the amount deductible in each case, and it would be misleading to give an incomplete list since the many countries that would not be included might or might not allow such deductions. It is, of course, known that a good many countries do allow deductions and while I am unable to speak with authority on the taxation laws of other countries, I can say that in some cases a deduction is allowed for the whole of the maintenance paid while in other cases there is a limit on the amount that may be deducted. In many cases allowance of a deduction is subject to various conditions being satisfied. The maintenance payments are often taxable in the hands of the recipient, at least up to the amount allowable as a deduction to the payer.
(3) The Government has, from time to time, considered representations received from persons proposing that tax deductions be allowed for alimony or maintenance payments by divorced persons to their former marital partners. However, to amend the law as has been proposed would be contrary to the basic principle of the income tax law that a deduction is only allowable for expenditure incurred in gaining or producing assessable income, Expenditure of a private nature is precluded from deduction. Furthermore, such a proposal would place divorced persons who pay alimony or maintenance to their former partners in a more advantageous position than a married taxpayer who contributes to the maintenance of his orher spouse during a year and who is limited to a maximum concessional rebate of $830 in respect of that maintenance.
Peace Studies in Schools
(Question No. 2752)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the article entitled 'the dove in the classroom' in The Guardian, London, 21 April 1981, and circulars from Parents and Teachers Against Violence in Education.
(2) What moves has the Minister's Department made towards planning and/or supporting a widening of peace studies in schools and colleges, including military training establishments, in the public service and elsewhere, in accordance with UNESCO principles and other international conventions and commitments.
(3) How do these moves compare with those of other countries and non-government school systems, including Quakers' schools, in Australia.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) As a Member State of UNESCO, Australia shares a concern that mutual understanding between peoples, respect for human rights and access to education and information are important among the foundations upon which a lasting peace may be built. The Australian National Commission for UNESCO has in recent years sponsored two seminars on the topics of 'Teacher Education for International Understanding' (1977) and 'Teaching of Human Rights' (at the tertiary

2956 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

and adult education levels) (1980). These seminars drew participants from a wide range of educational interests, and were infiuential in promoting consideration and study of the teaching issues involved.
In keeping with the obligations of its membership of the United Nations, Australia supports the inclusion in the whole school curriculum of studies, which will contribute to the promotion of peace and international understanding. The Commonwealth's national role in curriculum development has been carried out by the Curriculum Development Centre (CDC). In June 1980, the CDC published a discussion paper entitled 'Core Curriculum for Australian Schools'. Two of the eight areas of knowledge and experience nominated were 'social, cultural and civic studies', and 'moral reasoning and action, value and belief systems'. Studies related to peace and international understanding could be encompassed within these areas. The CDC paper has been considered by State and non-government education authorities, which are primarily responsible for the determination of curriculum matters.
(3) There is insufficient information available to enable .valid comparisons to be made.
Spouse Rebate
(Question No. 2763)
Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) Does a family with 2 wages have 2 tax-free thresholds and thereby save $2648 in tax.
(2) Does a family with one wage have one tax-free threshold plus an $830 spouse rebate thereby saving only $2172 in tax.
(3) If so, do families with one pay packet therefore pay nearly $1 0 a week more pro rata than a 2 income family on the same combined income.
(4) Would an increase in spouse rebate from $830 to $1342 redress this anomaly.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) If each wage was $4195 or more for 1981-82 the tax-free threshold of $4195 would apply in each case.
(2) The tax-free threshold is available to all individual taxpayers. Where a taxpayer wholly maintains his or her spouse a rebate of $830 is also available.
(3) The difference in tax in the two situations would depend on the level of the combined income and the proportions in which it was shared.
(4) The effects of increasing the spouse rebate to $1342 would also depend on the level of the combined income and the proportions in which it was shared. One effect would be that, under existing arrangements for shading-out entitlement to the spouse rebate by reference to the spouse's separate net income, a taxpayer whose spouse had a separate net income equal to the $4195 tax-free threshold would be entitled to a spouse rebate of$364.
Brisbane Airport: Development
(Question No. 2793)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) Have work projects undertaken in respect of the development of Brisbane Airport involved the extensive use by heavy vehicles of Kingsford Smith Drive; if so, during which

hours and on what days do the trucks use Kingsford Smith Drive.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that an increase in the volume of traffic along Kingsford Smith Drive due to the development of Brisbane Airport, has been a source of annoyance and concern to residents living next to the road.
(3) In connection with which projects involved in the Brisbane Airport development will trucks be using extensively (a) Kingsford Smith Drive (b) Sandgate Road (c) Gympie Road and (d) Nudgee Road from January 1981 to January 1982.
(4) In those cases where tenants residing in flats adjacent to roads which experience a significantly increased volume of traffic due to the airport development, vacate those flats because of an increase in noise, will any form of compensation be made to the owners of those fiats.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Work projects undertaken as part of the redevelopment of Brisbane International Airport have. involved delivery of gravel and fill material by truck to the site both along Kingsford Smith Drive and via the Sir James Holt vehicular ferry. Trucks using the ferry would account for about 10-15 per cent of the total operations. These operations commenced in mid October 1980 with the delivery of about 500 truck loads over 10days.
-Subsequent hauling operations in November and December 1980 of filling material for construction of bunds for the rehandling basin peaked at about 200-250 truck.loads per day.
Except for the trucking of approximately 2,000 cubic metres of gravel during February and March 1981, haulage operations did not resume again until May 1981. These operations have continued to the present with a maximum hauling rate of about 120 truck loads per day.
Some works at the existing Eagle Farm Airport have also involved trucking operations with approximately 50 concrete trucks and 1,000 gravel trucks proceeding to the existing Airport via Kingsford Smith Drive and approximately 550 trucks via Nudgee Road during the period from 30 June 1981 to 30 Septem ber 1981.
Trucking operations have been confined to daylight hours on six days per week, generally not earlier than 7.00 a.m. and not later than 6.00 p.m. on weekdays and 2.00 p.m. on Saturdays. These operations have been in accordance with Brisbane City Council and State Government regulations.
(2) I understand the Member for Lilley's office sought information from the Department of Housing and Construction on 24 November 1980 following complaints from Kingsford Smith Drive residents. It was advised that two airport projects involving improvements to Sugarmill Road, and the construction of a bund for the rehandling of spoil had generated some truck traffic along Kingsford Smith Drive.
Further information was sought by your office on 21 May 1981 as to the trucking traffic. The Department advised that contractor's trucks were restricted to daylight hours and to legal load limits. I have been advised that at the time of this enquiry, a considerable number of trucks were also using Kingsford Smith Drive for trucking coal for export.
(3) Further projects on the airport redevelopment will involve the haulage of construction materials to the site. At this stage it is not possible to predict the traffic distribution between Kingsford Smith Drive, Sandgate Road, Gympie Road, Nudgee Road and the vehicular ferry as the routes to be trafficked will depend on the location of source material and other factors determined by contract bidding at the time.

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2957

(4) The various non-airport developments taking place in the lower reaches of the Brisbane River and in the north- /north eastern suburbs of the city are generating a steadily increasing volume of traffic on Kingsford Smith Drive.
The current traffic volume along Kingsford Smith Drive during daylight hours is understood to be about 11,000 to 14,000 vehicles in each direction including 2,600 to 2,800 heavy vehicles. Undoubtedly this volume will increase as a result of the widening of the road from three to four lanes by the BrisbaneCity Council, from grants provided by the Commonwealth for developmental roads.
Despite increased usage with widening and improvements to Kingsford Smith Drive, which will be completed shortly, it is expected that these measures will smooth out the flow of traffic and contribute to a reduction in traffic noise.
The extra truck traffic generated along Kingsford Smith Drive by the Brisbane Airport development represents only a relatively small proportion of the total trucking traffic and it is not considered to have been the specific cause of any deterioration in amenity for local residents.
Even at its heaviest, the airport trucking traffic only represents a small percentage of the total heavy vehicle movements along Kingsford Smith Drive. Furthermore, Kingsford Smith Drive is a public road, along which a high volume of heavy traffic has passed for many years.
Accordingly, I do not consider that compensation by the Commonwealth is appropriate to flat tenants along Kingsford Smith Drive who vacate because of noise.
Indian Ocean: Trident Submarines
(Question No. 2882)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 27 August 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the Australian of 24 August 1981 which quotes a report from the United States of America Department of Defence indicating that the Trident submarine would be deployed in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans and not the Indian Ocean.
(2) Will he seek assurances from the US. Government that Trident submarines will not be introduced into the Indian Ocean, as it would extend the nuclear arms race in that area; if not, why not.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) No. Although the u.s. has stated publicly that it does
not routinely deploy its ballistic missile submarines through the Indian Ocean, to constrain those submarines from entering the Indian Ocean would simplify efforts to detect and track them and might thereby make vulnerable the principle element of the US. nuclear deterrent force. This would be prejudicial to international security.
Reyiew of Commonwealth Functions: Manpower Reyiews
(Question No. 2942)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 27 August 1982:
(I) Which Commonwealth Government Departments have completed their manpower reviews stemming from the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions.

(2) What staff movements have occurred in these Departments as a result of (a) natural wastage, (b) resignation, (c) redeployment and (d) retrenchment.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Over and above the staffing adjustments which will be required in particular departments in implementing specific Government decisions following the Review of Commonwealth Functions the decision to achieve a further 2 per cent reduction in staff ceilings over two years will affect departmental staffing generally. In respect of this latter decision and other decisions requiring progressive implementation over a period of years manpower review will be a continuing process.
(2) (a) Staff separations (,natural wastage') from Commonwealth Departments and other bodies staffed under the Public Service Act for the period I May 1981 to 30 August 1981 were as follows:
Permanent staff 4,562; Temporary and exempt staff 3,129; Total staff 7,691.
(2) (b) Comprehensive statistics on resignations for the period I May 1981 to 30 August 1981 are not yet available. Statistics on separations from the Australian Public Service during calendar year 1980 published in the Public Service Board's 1980-81 Annual Report indicate that resignations comprise about 76 per cent of separations of permanent staff.
(2) (c) Redeployment most commonly involves the movement of staff within a department from lower to higher priority activities and does not involve the use of the provisions of the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act. The redeployment of staff in this way occurs on a day to day basis and statistics on such ll}jwements are not available.
However, as a result of decisions stemming from the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions a total of 62 staff have been declared under the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act as being eligible for redeployment because they were surplus to the requirements of their departments. As at 15 October 1981, 18 of the 62 have been redeployed. Action is continuing in relation to all others with a view to effecting their redeployment as soon as possible.
(2) (d) No officers have been compulsorily retrenched; three officers of the Department of Defence and one from the Australian Electoral Office have elected, under the Public Service Arbitrator's Determination No. 509 of 1977, with the Board's approval, to have their employment terminated and have thereby qualified for the benefits associated with retrenchment.
Exports of Bauxite and Alumina
(Question No, 2953)
Mr Howe asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 8 September 1981:
(I) Further to his answer to question No. 2257 (Hansard, 19 August 1981, page 507) in which the Member for Reid requested information on the number of departments which have access to data regarding exports of bauxite and alumina by country of consignment, why did he mention the Australian Bureau of Statistics, the Bureau of Customs, the Reserve Bank and the Department of Trade and Resources but not mention the Australian Taxation Office.
(2) Does the omission of the Taxation Office from his answer mean that the Office does not have access to this information; if so, does this explain the inability of the Office to control transfer pricing practices in the industry

2958 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Departments reFerred to in my answer were mentioned because they receive this inFormation on a continuing basis for the purpose of their own administration. The Taxation Office does not receive or need this inFormation on that basis.
(2) Although the Australian Taxation Office does not receive bauxite and alumina export data From the Australian Bureau of Statistics, the Commissioner assures me that his ability to deal with unacceptable transfer pricing practices does not depend on his receiving that kind of information and, if it did, there are other available sources from which he could obtain it. I also refer the honourable member to my second reading speech on the Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981 on 28 May 1981 in which [ foreshadowed the Government's intention to bring before the Parliament legislation to permit the Commissioner to deal more effectively with the transfer pricing problem, wherever it might arise.
Export of Dog and Cat Pelts
(Question No. 2995)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(I) [s he able to say whether New Zealand has outlawed the export of dog and cat pelts since 1953.
(2) [s it a fact that Australia has no regulations prohibiting the export of dog and cat pelts.
(3) How many (a) dog and (b) cat pelts were exported for each of the years 1976-77 to 1980-81 and to what countries were they exported.
MrMoore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Information available to me indicates that New Zealand banned the export of cat skins on 21 August 1969. However, it appears that New Zealand does not prohibit the export of dog pelts.
(2) Australia does not have regulations prohibiting the export of the pelts of cats or dogs. This matter is presently under consideration.
(3) The relevant Australian Bureau of Statistics item for the export of tanned and dressed furskins is Item 613.00.00 which is not species specific but covers furskins derived from all species including kangaroo, wallaby, possum, fox, goat, hare and rabbit skins.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics have advised that from f January 1982 specific export sub-items will record the export of dog and cat skins.
Libyan Claim to the Gulf of Sidra
(Question No. 3002)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(I) [s he able to say whether the Libyan Arab Republic's claim to the Gulf of Sidra is based on international law dealing with historic bays.
(2) Is the Gulf included in papers and memoranda on Historic Bays prepared by the United Nations Secretariat.
(3) [s he also able to say whether (a) Italy, (b) Malta, (c) Egypt, (d) Tunisia, (e) the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics or (f) any Mediterranean littoral countries recognise Libya's claim.

Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) [n October 1973, Libya announced that the Gulf of Sidra 'constitutes an integral part of the territory of the Libyan Arab Republic and is under its complete sovereignty'. Libya claimed that 'through history and without any dispute, the Libyan Arab Republic has exercised its sovereignty over the Gulf'.
(2) Neither the United Nations Secretariat's Memorandum of 30 September 1957 entitled 'Historic Bays' nor its study of 9 March 1962 entitled 'Juridical Regime of Historic Waters, including Historic Bays' make any reference to the Gulf of Sidra or to Libyan claims to the Gulf.
(3) We are not aware, on the information available to us, that any of the countries listed, or any of the littoral countries of the Mediterranean, has expressly recognised the Libyan claim to the Gulf of Sidra.
Tenosynovitis: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 3022-)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 8 September 1981:
(I) Have any cases of tenosynovitis been reported to date, in the Department or statutory authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction.
(2) If so, will the Minister state (a) how many cases have been reported, (b) in what types of work the affected persons were engaged, (c) of the cases reported how many were in respect of'(i) female and (ii) male employees and (d) what age brackets appear to be most affected, in the Department and each Statutory Authority.
(3) Will the Minister provide similar information in respect of carpal tunnel.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) Although my department does not maintain comprehensive records by definition of injury/illness, examination of available files relating to officers who have applied for compensation under the provisions of the Compensation (Commonwealth Government Employees) Act indicates the following:
(a) [n 9 cases tenosynovitis has been accepted as an injury for the purposes of the Act. An additional 8 cases are currently awaiting determination by a delegate of the Commissioner for Employees' Compensation;
(b) With the exception of one officer who was engaged in clerical duties, all cases involve staff performing keyboard related duties;
(c) All cases are in respect of female staff;
(d) On the information available, those staff in the 32-49 years age group appear to be most affected by tenosynovitis; however, the age range for all cases was 19-56 years.
(3) No claims in respect of carpal tunnel have been received to date.

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2959

Parliamentary Liaison Officers under the Minister for Education
(Question No. 3040)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 8 September 1981:
How many Parliamentary Liaison Officer positions have existed in the Minister's Department and each statutory authority under the Minister's jurisdiction in each State, the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory for each year from 1970 to 1981.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Since the establishment of the Department of Education in 1966 one position formally nominated as a full time Parliamentary Liaison Officer has been in existence. The position is currently filled, but this has not always been the case.
Both in the Department and statutory authorities within the portfolio, a number of positions primarily concerned with the preparation of replies to Ministerial correspondence also perform some minor parliamentary liaison functions as required.
All positions are located in the A.C.T.
Superannuation Fund Contributions: Tax Deductibility
(Question No. 3079)
Mr Beazley asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 10 September 1981:
(I) In assessing income tax payable, why are non-employer sponsored superannuation fund contributions deducted from net income (item 37 of form A) while employer sponsored superannuation fund contributions form part of the basic concession of $1 ,590.
(2) Are the maximum deductions of $300 for rates and $100 for funeral expenses related to average expenditure on these items; if not, how are the figures determined.
(3) Will he take action to raise these maximum deductions.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) In introducing the income tax concession for personal superannuation contributions by self-employed persons and employees without employer-sponsored superannuation arrangements, the Government sought to match the taxation position of those taxpayers as closely as possible with that of employees who are members of employer-sponsored superannuation funds. The latter are able to benefit both from the fact that an income tax deduction is available to the employer for amounts contributed for the employee's benefit and by their own contributions qualifying as rebatable expenditure under the concessional rebate provisions of the income tax law. The new concession provides broadly comparable deductions for persons who do not have tax-subsidised employer contributions made for them.
(2) No; the maximum amounts of $300 for rates and $100 for funeral expenses are not related to average expenditure of these kinds by taxpayers and are not designed to offset the full cost of such expenditure. They represent the extent to which, with due regard to revenue commitments, it has been found possible to grant tax relief to taxpayers incurring such expenditure. They are expenses of a private or domestic nature and as such have no claim in taxation principle to constitute a deduction in determining taxable income. The concessional allowances made in respect of them is by way of a tax rebate to the extent that all reba table expenditure exceeds $1,590.

(3) Concessional tax allowances are reviewed in the context of the Budget.
Uranium: Export Shipments
(Question No. 3085)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 10 September 1981:
(I) How many export shipments of uranium have been made from Australia in each year since 1976.
(2) What was the (a) volume and (b) source of each shipment.
(3) What was the (a) customer company, (b) customer country and (c) immediate destination of each shipment.
(4) Through which countries has each shipment passed and at which plants has processing taken place.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(\), (2), (3) and (4) To preserve commercial-in-confidence information I am unable to give all of the details sought on individual shipments. The following information from records held by the Department of Trade and Resources indicates the quantity of material approved for export pursuant to approved contracts.
There have been a total of 102 shipments of uranium concentrates out of Australia between 1977 and 30 September 1981 totalling approximately 6,000 tonnes U,O,.

Year

No.of Shipments

Total quantity

1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 (to 30 Sept)

(tonnes U,O,)

14

1,493.1

21

1,066.9

28

1,245.1

24

1,117.0

15

1,034.9

These exports have taken place from Brisbane (81), Townsville (\), Sydney (14), and Darwin (6). The uranium
concentrates were produced at Mary Kathleen in Qu'eensland, Nabarlek in the Northern Territory and approximately 1,800 tonnes was made available from the Commonwealth's uranium stockpile. The uranium was exported by
Mary Kathleen Uranium Ltd, Queensland Mines Limited, Peko-Wallsend Operations Ltd, and the Electrolytic Zinc Company of Australasia Limited to customers in Finland,
Japan, the Federal Republic of Germany and the United States of America where in each case, the 'uranium was for use
in electricity generation. These shipments have taken place under approved contracts with:

Commonwealth Edison Company of the US. The Chubu Electric Power Co. Inc. of Japan The Chugoku Electric Power Co. Inc. of Japan The Kyushu Electric Power Co. Inc. of Japan
The Shikoku Electric Power Co. Inc. of Japan The Tokyo Electric Power Co. Inc. of Japan Kernkraftwerke Brunsbuttel GmbH of the FRG, and Teollisuuden Voima Oy of Finland.

Leaving aside ports at which material was transshipped, the immediate destination of each shipment for conversion to uranium hexalluoride was either Canada (Eldorado Nuclear
Ltd.), France (Comurhex), the UK. (British Nuclear Fuels
Ltd.) or the US. (Allied Chemical Corp.). Enrichment has

2%0 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

taken place in France (Eurodif) and the US. (the Department of Energy) and in the future, enrichment may also take place in the USSR (Techsnabexport).
Indexation of Personal Income Tax
(Question No. 3137)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
(I) If full indexation of personal income tax based on movements in the CPI and without any discounting had been applied each year, then instead of the tax free threshold being $4,195 in 1981-82 what would it have been using the tax free threshold for (a) 1976-77 and (b) 1977-78 as base.
(2) What is the estimated number of taxpayers in 1981-82 who will have a taxable income of (a) below $4,195 and (b) between $4,195 and the threshold which would have applied had full tax indexation been applied each year since 1976-77.
(3) What is the estimated total tax which will be paid by those taxpayers included in part 2(b).
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) Effectively the tax-free threshold for resident individuals subject to tax at the general rates for the 1976-77 income year was $2,845, the maximum level of taxable income at which the gross tax payable was exceeded by the general concessional rebate of $610. [f this tax-free threshold had been increased in line with the changes in the CPI from the average of the 4 quarters ended March 1976 to the average of the 4 quarters ended March 1981, the threshold would have been $4,662.
(b) The tax-free threshold for the 1981-82 income year based on the 1977-78 income year figure of $3,402, moved up in a similar manner to I (a) by the full CPI, would have been $4,908.
(2) (a) The relevant income tax statistics of non-taxable individuals relate only to those who have occasion to lodge in-- come tax returns and exclude, for example, dependent wives, children and certain recipients of social security benefits. The estimated number of taxpayers who will lodge returns for the 1981-82 income year, but will not be subject to tax because their taxable incomes will be less than $4,195, is about 1,300,<)00.
(b) The number of individuals who will have taxable incomes in the range $4,196-4,662 for the 1981-82 income year is estimated to be about 150,000.
(3) The estimated total income tax payable for the 1981-82 income year by taxpayers referred to in part 2(b) is about $lOm. However, all other taxable individuals have part of their taxable income within the range $4,196 to $4,662. The total tax payable on all taxable income falling within this range in 1981-82 income year will be about $900m.
International Year of Disabled Persons: Sport and Recreation Needs of the Disabled
(Question No. 3141)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
(I) What considerations were taken into account when the Government decided to Ret up the Committee on the sport and recreation needs of th~ disabled.

(2) [s this committee under the chairmanship of Mr [an Wilson, MP, and is it the only committee that the Government has decided to set up in this International Year of Disabled Persons; if not, what other committees have been established.
(3) What funding will be made available to implement decisions that are made by the Committee.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) The National Committee on Sport and Recreation for the Disabled was created as an advisory committee to the Government as part of a new Government policy on recreation and sport for mentally and physically disabled persons. It is indicative of the measure of concern of the Government for [YDP and is intended to extend beyond 1981. The policy of the Government is to assist and encourage physically and mentally disabled persons to participate in sport and recreation.
The objectives of the Committee are to assist the integration of disabled athletes with non-disabled athletes and to enable the best of the disabled athletes to compete at the international level. Its chairman is Dr Jeffrey Miller, Principal of the Cumberland College of health Sciences and a member of the Nationa[ Advisory Council for the Handicapped.
Other committees the Government has established to coordinate planning for IYDP in Australia are:
the Council of Commonwealth, State and Territory Ministers for IYDP which co-ordinates Australia's national response to IYDP;
an Officials Committee, chaired by the Director-General of Social Services, which supports the Council and consists of nominated representatives of each Minister on the Council,and
the IYDP National Committee of Non-Government Organisations, established in conjunction with ACROD (Australian Council for Rehabilitation of Disabled), which is responsible for co-ordinating the non-government sector's response to IYDP.
(3) The 1981-82 Budget allocated $200,000 to the Department of Home Affairs and Environment for programs and projects for sport and recreation for disabled people. Applications for funding were solicited through all major daily newspapers in mid-September. The National Committee on Sport and Recreation for the Disabled will be advising the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment of its recommendations for program and project funding in the near future.
Department of Social Security: Welfare Staff
(Question No. 3152)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to a recent circular letter from the Australian Social Welfare Union; Queensland Branch, claiming that recruitment freezes and staffing restrictions have allowed less than half of the Social Security offices in Queensland to fulfil their allocation of 2 welfare staff, even in districts where no other trained or trainee social workers are available, and that the 3 Aboriginal Welfare Officer posts, all in Brisbane, are unfilled.
(2) If so, is it a fact that problems, some with no solution in these circumstances, are constantly being referred in growing numbers to members and senators, and to voluntary and State bodies.

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2961

Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) & (2) The circular letter from the Australian Social Welfare Union has been brought to my attention.
The situation is that as a consequence of the Review of Commonwealth Functions, the Government directed that the Public Service Board, in consultation with my department, review the activities of departmental social workers against the background that social work activity is to be confined to that directly related to the delivery of social security benefits, Commonwealth programs and rehabilitation services.
As to the specific references in the honourable member's question about the staffing levels for welfare staff in the offices of my department in Queensland, every attempt is made to ensure that each regional office has the services of at least one social worker.
In fact, with the exception of Bundaberg and Maryborough regional offices where recruitment action is currently underway, all regional offices in Queensland have at least one position of social worker staffed.
All 3 Aboriginal Welfare Officer positions in Brisbane are currently staffed.
Tax Deductions: Car Telephone Units
(Question No. 3154)
Mr Scholes asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
Will luxury car phone units plus rentals, recently introduced by Telecom with costs exceeding several thousand dollars, be allowable tax deductions for vehicle users able to write-off car use, etc., as a business or company cost.
Mr Howard-The answer-to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am advised that mobile telephones may be either purchased or rented from Telecom. Where a taxpayer establishes that a mobile telephone is used in the course of gaining or producing assessable income, an income tax deduction would, where the instrument is purchased, be allowable by way of depreciation based on its cost and, where the instrument is rented, in respect of the rent paid. The deduction would, however, be appropriately reduced if the telephone is also used to an extent for private purposes.
Social Welfare: Pension Income Test
(Question No. 3171)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 17 September 1981:
(I) Are interest payments derived from long-term deposits averaged out to arrive at weekly income when the pension income-test is applied by the Department of Social Security.
(2) If so, is the pension income-test on income derived from long-term deposits applied prospectively or retrospectively.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Under the provisions of the Social Services Act pensions are payable at an annual rate and that rate is determined by taking into account the annual rate of a person's income, including the annual rate of income from long-term deposits. Pensions are paid in fortnightly instalments, the amount of

each instalment being one twenty-sixth of the determined annual rate of pension.
(2) As indicated above, the income test is applied having regard to a person's annual rate of income at the time of assessment. For example, a pensioner with $10,000 invested in long term deposits at a rate of interest of 10 per cent would be assessed as having an annual rate of income of$1 ,000.
Social Welfare: Liquidation of Income-producing Assets
(Question No. 3172)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 17 September 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that new provisions under the Social Services Act to guard agair.st deliberate deprivation of income on the part of pensioners sanction the liquidation of incomeprod;Jcing assets for the purchase of (a) a car, (b) a home or (c) holidays.
(2) If so, do these provisions require that these items must be for the immediate use of the pensioner concerned.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) As I announced in the Senate on \3 October 1981, there will be some delay in introducing the legislation to strengthen the provisions of the Social Services Act against schemes contrived to circumvent the income test. When the legislation has been introduced further announcements will be made as to its operational aspects. However, as I mentioned in my statement of 18 August 1981, it is not intended that the new provisions will operate to penalise people if they liquidate .income-producing assets for reasonable purposes, such as the purchase of a home or a car for their personal use or for a holiday.
Sales Tax on Bulk Cartage Grain Vehicles
(Question No. 3265)
Mr Kerin asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:
(I) What was the reason that 17.5 per cent sales tax was imposed on bulk cartage grain vehicles in the 1981-82 Budget.
(2) Were there widespread examples of abuse of the previous concession.
(3) Is it a fact that this imposition will be heaviest in areas where there is not a well developed or close location of silos.
(4) Is it also a fact that vehicles used by cartage contractors cost up to $80,000 and that the tax will add severely to wheat growers' costs.
(5) Does he expect that contractors and farmers will seek to exceed truck weight limits due to the imposition, thereby causing higher costs for local road maintenance.
(6) Is he concerned that the imposition will tend to discourage the production of grain in newer areas of agricultural activity.
Mr Howard-The answers to the honourable member's questions are:
(I) The provision under which exemption had been gained for bulk grain vehicles was not intended to cover such goods. It was designed to cover grain storage and handling plant at grain silos and terminals at railway sidings and ports. The wording of the provision was such, however, that bulk grain

2962 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

vehicles were included. This fortuitous exemption was contrary to the general policy in the sales tax law that road vehicles used in the transportation of goods, whether rural products or secondary products, are subject to sales tax. The taxing of bulk grain vehicles is consistent with this general principle.
(2) Yes.
(3) No. In the more developed areas trucks are required to cart the grain from the field to the silo.
(4) The tax is significant but it is no greater than that imposed on other similar transport vehicles which for many years have borne tax.
(5) No.
(6) It is not expected that the sales tax will, in any significant way, discourage the production of grain in newer areas because vehicles used to transport other primary products have always been taxable and there is no evidence that this has discouraged activity in these areas of primary production. Also, it is a fact that many general cartage contractors paid tax on vehicles used to cart grain before the unintended exemption began to be exploited and their cartage rates would have been based on a tax-inclusive purchase price for their vehicles. Similarly, general purpose trucks used to cart grain at harvest time are purchased at a tax inclusive price. Rates fixed by reference to this have not discouraged the opening up of new areas of grain production.
Sales Tax on Pet Food: Guide Dogs
(Question No. 3269)
Mr Scholes asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:
(I) With respect to changes to the sales tax rates announced on 18 August 1981, will blind guide dog owners be granted exemption from sales tax on pet food.
(2) Will volunteers who undertake care and training (that is, puppy walker) of young dogs prior to final training and

placement as guide dogs be exempted from paying sales tax on pet food.
(3) Will greyhound trainers similarly be exempted from paying the sales tax.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) Yes.
Uranium: Exports
(Question No. 3292)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:
In relation to export contracts for Australian uranium (a) who was the supplier, (b) who was the purchaser, (c) what quantity was involved, (d) what price was involved, (e) what was the expected or contracted annual export quantity and (f) where will conversion and enrichment be undertaken, for each contract concluded as at 12 October 1985 for export from 1975.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
In the period 1970-72, the then Government approved contracts for Australian companies to supply uranium to a number of overseas power utilities in Japan, the United States of America and the Federal Republic of Germany with deliveries through to 1986. Since its decision in August 1977 to proceed with the further development of Australia's uranium resources, the Government has approved additional contracts for the supply of Australian uranium to overseas utilities and companies by Australian companies.
Details of these contracts are as follows:

Seller

Buyer

Apprond 1972 or earlier

Mary Kathleen Uranium Ltd Mary Kathleen Uranium Ltd Mary Kathleen Uranium Ltd Mary Kathleen Uranium Ltd Mary Kathleen Uranium Ltd
Energy Resources of Australia LtdPeko-Wallsend Operations Ltd and Electrolytic
Zinc Co. Australasia Limited Queensland Mines Limited Queensland Mines Limited

Commonwealth Edison Co. (USA) Tokyo Electric Power Co. Inc. (Japan) Chugoku Electric Power Co. Inc. (J apan) Shikoku Electric Power Co. Inc. (Japan) Kernkraftwerke Brunsbuttel GmbH (Federal Re-
public of Germany) Kyushu Electric Power Co. Inc. (Japan) Chubu Electric Power Co. Inc. (Japan)
Shikoku Electric Power Co. Inc. (Japan) Kyushu Electric Power Co. Inc. (Japan)

Approved since 1977

Peko-Wallsend Operations and Electrolytic Zinc Co. Australasia Limited
Queensland Mines Limited Peko-Wallsend Operations Ltd and Electrolytic
Zinc Co. Australasia Limited Energy Resources of Australia Ltd
Energy Resources of Australia Ltd
Energy Resources of Australia Ltd
Energy Resources of Australia Ltd
Energy Resources of Australia Ltd

Korea Electric Co.
Teollisuuden Voima Oy (Finland) Indiana and Michigan Electric Co. (USA)
Rheinisch-Westfaelisches E1ectrizitaetswerk AG (Federal Republic of Germany)
Saarberg-Interplan Uran. GmbH (Federal Republic of Germany) . . . . .
Urangesellschaft mbH (Federal Republic of Germany) . . . . .
Japan Australia Uranium Resources DevelopmentCo. Ltd (Japan)
Oskarshamnsverkets Kraftgrupp A.B. (Sweden)

Quantity Period (st U308)

1976-85 1977-86 1976-86 1977-79
1976-81 1977-86 1977-82
1977-85 1977-83
1983-92
1981-89 1982-90

2,125 1,100 1,000
407
664 2,000 1,300
2,230 1,000
2,500
900 2,250

1982-96
1982-96
1982-96
1982-96 1982-96

9,094
5,456
5,820
13,413 3,150

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2963

Seller

Buyer

Quantity Period (st U308)

Energy Resources of Australia Ltd Queensland Mines Limited

Synatome Societe Anonyme of Belgium Electricite de France

1982-94 1982-88

1,575 2,600

In tween

addition, 1982 and

Queensland 1988.

Mines

holds

Letters

of

Intent

with

Japanese

utilities

for

the

supply

of

1,790

short

tons

U3

Os

be-

In each of the above contracts the quantities stated are nominaf figures. Quantities under the contracts can vary up to 10 per

cent. There has also been a good deal of re-scheduling of delivery dates and quantities under the pre-I 973 contracts and in some

cases deliveries may be completed before the time indicated.

Conversion will take place in Canada (Eldorado Nuclear Ltd), France (Comurhex), the United Kingdom (British Nuclear

Fuels Ltd) and the United States of America (Allied Chemical Corp. and/or Kerr McGee Nuclear Corp.) with enrichment in

France (Eurodif), the USA (Department of Energy) or the USSR (Techsnabexport).

To preserve commercial-in-confidence information I am unable to provide contractual information on pricing details.

- Following formation of Energy Resources of Australia Ltd rights under this contract for deliveries from 1982-1986 were

assigned to it by Peko-Wallsend Operations Ltd and Electrolytic Zinc Co. Australasia Limited.

Repatriation General Hospital, Daw Park, South Australia: Operating Theatres
(Question No. 3302)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 14 October 1981:
(I) Does the Minister recall my repeated questions relating to the urgent need for the replacement of the operating theatres at the Repatriation Hospital, Daw Park, South Australia.
(2) Did the Minister state in reply to question No. 2370 (Hansard, 27 August 1981, pages 960-1) that (a) the Specialist Advisory Committee had expressed concern to the Deputy Commissioner in South Australia about the theatres, (b) the Committee had also expressed concern about the future of the hospital if a decision on replacement of the theatres was not soon made and (c) the Minister was unable to provide any details about the date of commencement of the project.
(3) Did the Treasurer state in the 1981-82 Budget Speech that the Government has had before it a number of proposals .for capital expenditure at the repatriation Hospitals, one of which had been considered by the Parliamentary Public Works Committee and it was not possible to announce a decision on any of these proposals, which involve the expenditure of many millions of dollars, but the Government would be giving further consideration to Repatriation hospitals later in 1981.
(4) Were reports and administrative recommendations for the replacement of the operating theatres formulated as long as 4 years ago; if so, did the recommendations support the replacement of the theatres as a matter of urgency.
(5) Are approximately 4000 operations performed annually in these theatres; if so, would it be impossible for these operations to be performed in other hospitals in the Adelaide area during the same period.
(6) In view of the mounting concern of staff, patients and in particular the Returned Services League and the South Australian Consultative Council of Ex-Servicemen's Organisations who have actively supported the need to up-date not just the operating theatres but the Hospital as a whole, and in view of the undertaking contained in the 1981-82 Budget statement, when will the Minister announce his decision appropriating the funds necessary to ensure that these outmoded operating theatres are replaced as quickly as possible.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

The concern about the facilities at Repatriation General Hospital, Daw Park should be allayed by my Press Statement of I November 1981 indicating that the Government has decided that plans should be put to the Standing Parliamentary Committee on Public Works for the construction of four new operating theatres and surgical wards and associated facilities at the hospital, estimated to cost about $6.6m. These proposed new facilities would meet almost all the surgical needs of the veteran population in South Australia, both in terms of the number of operations and of the increasing complexity of modern surgical procedures.
The plans for re-developing part of the Repatriation General Hospital, Daw Park, were announced simultaneously with the Government decision to reaffirm its commitment to the maintenance of a separate Repatriation hospital system for the treatment of entitled veterans. The Government considers that adequate funds should be provided for capital and operational expenditure at these hospitals.
These announcements should dispel any doubts about their long term future.
Announcement of Government Initiatives
(Question No. 3354)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 20 October 1981:
(I) Further to the Minister's reply to my Question No. 2810 (Hansard, 9 September 1981, page 1144) in which it was stated that the Minister would be rather surprised to hear that the Opposition was anxious to announce Government initiatives and would certainly not think it appropriate for them to do so, does the Minister appreciate the difference between Government initiatives such as the Government's decision to end direct funding of women's shelters, and a Government decision to approve continuation of funding for, say, a charity, or a nursing home, within an Opposition Member's electorate.
(2) Would the Minister be surprised to hear that an Opposition backbencher would be interested in communicating to an organisation and to the public the result of an application for Commonwealth Government funding lodged by that organisation and publicly supported by that Opposition backbencher.
(3) In cases where a routine application for funding is received from an organisation within an Opposition Member's electorate and is supported by that Member.in representations to the Minister, is it regarded by the Minister or by the Department of Social Security that an announcement on a decision of the application would be inappropriate if it were made by the local, albeit Opposition, Member.

2964 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(4) Are all announcements involving routine Funding allocations a matter of partisan privilege.
(5) Is the Minister prepared to reconsider the Department's practice of denying to Opposition Members the right to announce decisions on routine Funding applications on the grounds that those Members are not Liberal or National Country Party Members; iFnot, why not.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) I am aware that not all Government initiatives are likely to receive the enthusiastic support of Opposition members.
(2) to (5) I regard the announcement of Government initiatives within my portFolio, including the approval of Funding For local projects, as a matter For me personally or For some appropriate Government spokesman. Since I do not consider Opposition backbenchers as appropriate Government spokesmen, I have no intention of changing my current practice in these matters. I do not understand the honourable member's reFerence to 'routine' applications For Funding, since all such applications are treated on their individual merits.
Medical Fee Increases
(Question No. 3372)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 20 October 1981:
(I) Is it a Fact that the Australian Medical Association uses average weekly earnings to calculate net income when setting recommended medical Fee increa,es.
(2) Has the Commonwealth Government in the past reFerred to wage indexation outcomes to calculate net income and to arrive at Government scheduled medical Fee increases.
(3) What is the basis For determining the Government's scheduled Fee increases Following the abandonment of wage indexation.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) This is a matter yet to be determined in the context of the Government's submission to the next inql'iry into Medical Benefits Schedule Fees. It should be noted that the Government itselF does not establish the overall levels of Schedule Fees. These have, For some years, been determined by independent inquiries, the most recent having been that handed down on 30 September 1981 by Deputy President J. E. Isaac of the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission.
Soviet Union Military Presence in other Countries
(Question No. 3382)
Mr McLean asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 21 October 1981:
Is he able to say in which countries the Soviet Union maintains a military presence, provides military assistance and military advisers, or in some other way provides tangible deFence support.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Soviet Union maintains a military presence in the Following countries whi~h are members of the Warsaw Pact:

Czechoslovakia, The German Democratic Republic, Hungary and Poland. (Although members of the Warsaw Pact, Romania has no significant Soviet military presence on its territory and Bulgaria has no Formed Soviet combat units.) Soviet combat units are also maintained in AFghanistan and Mongolia, and a small Soviet combat brigade is stationed in Cuba. The Soviet Union maintains a naval presence in Ethiopia, the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen and Vietnam.
In addition to the above countries, the principal recipients of Soviet military assistance in the Form of equipment and, in some cases, military advisers are as Follows: Algeria, Angola, Congo, Guinea, India, Iran, Iraq, the People's Republic of Korea, Libya, Madagascar, Mali, Mozambique, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Peru, Syria, Tanzania, the Arab Republic of Yemen, Yugoslavia and Zambia.
Inter-Parliamentary Union
(Question No. 3384)
Mr McLean asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 21 October 1981:
Which countries are presently official members or observers oFthe Inter-Parliamentary Union?
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
According to the Preliminary Documents For the 68th ConFerence of the IPU (Havana, 15-23 September 1981) published by the Secretariat of the Union (1981), the National Groups of 94 countries were affiliated with the Union. The countries were:
Albania, Algeria, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Democratic Yemen, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, France, Gabon, German Democratic Republic, Germany (Federal Republic of), Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Ivory Coast, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Togo, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United Republic of Cameroon, United States of America, USSR, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia.
2. The List of Delegates to the 68th ConFerence included the following additional countries:
Benin, Congo, Guyana, Uganda, Zimbabwe.
3. The List of Delegates made no mention of observer countries. However, the Following bodies were listed as observers:
United Nations, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, League of Arab States, Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, Arab Parliamentary Union, Latin American Parliament, Palestine National Council.

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2965

Department of Veterans' Affairs: Processing of Entitlement and Pension Claims
(Question No. 3417)
Mr Free asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 22 October 1981:
(I) How many staff were engaged in the processing of entitlement and pension claims in the Sydney office of the Department of Veterilns' Affairs as at 21 October 1981.
(2) What is the (a) average and (b) maximum time lag between receipt of a claim and a final decision.
(3) How many staff were engaged in these tasks during 1975.
(4) What was the (a) average and (b) maximum time lag during 1975.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) As at 21 October 1981 there were approximately 339 staff involved in the processing and determination of pension and entitlement claims and appeals; distributed as follows:
8 Repatriation Boards each comprising 3 members; 3 Delegates of the Repatriation Commission; 4 Repatriation Review Tribunal (R.R.T.) panels, each comprising 3 members; approximately 300 staff were engaged in processing.
(2)entitlement claim (a) 286 days (b) 600 days-
Commission appeal on entitlement (a) 332 days (b) 500 days
R.R.T. application on entitlement (a) 495 days (b) 600 days-
application for pension increase (a) 192 days (b) 600 days-
R.R.T. application on assessment (a) 338 days (b) 600 days-
- Time taken is recorded on 0-600 day scale. It is not possible to give the time beyond 600 days without intensive file examination.
(3) During 1975 there were, on average, 383 staff involved in the processing of pension and entitlement claims and appeals; as follows:
3 Repatriation Boards each comprising 3 members; 2 Delegates of the Repatriation Commission; 2 Assessment Appeal Tribunals (W.P.A.A.T.), each comprising 3 members; 2 Entitlement Appeal Tribunals (W.P.E.A.T.), each comprising 3 members; approximately 360 staff were engaged in processing.
(4)entitlement claim (a) 184 days (b) 300 days-
Commission appeal on entitlement (a) 89 days (b) 300 days-
W.P.E.A.T. appeal on entitlement (a) 249 days (b) 300 days*
application for pension increase (a) 116 days (b) 300 days*
W.P.A.A.T. appeal on assessment (a) 122 days (b) 300 days-
- In 1975 the time taken to process was recorded on a 0-300 day scale. It would not be possible to specify the maximum time taken.

By way of general comment, it should be understood that the systems applying in 1975 and at present are not identical. The legislation has been amended and there is now a requirement that reasons for decisions be given.
Action is being taken to reduce delays in finalising claims and appeals (see answer to Senate Question No. 1408).
Uranium Advisory Council
(Question No. 3449)
Mr Scott asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 28 October 1981:
With reference to the letter dated 22 April 1981 on page 23 of the Uranium Advisory Council's Annual Report for 1980-81, from the Chairman of the Council, Mr L. R. McIntyre to him, in which the Chairman recommended that the Council's report on the review of the Atomic Energy Act and the submissions received be made available to other interested parties as early as possible, will he release this report and the submissions, as recommended; if not, why not.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am able to advise the honourable member that the report of the Uranium Advisory Council on its review of the Atomic Energy Act and related matters, together with submissions which the Council received on this matter in response to its public call for submissions, are available to interested parties.
As is the usual practice with reports and advisings to the Government from the Uranium Advisory Council, the report of the Council in relation to this matter appears in its annual report in Appendix H. I refer the honourable member to page 2 of the annual report of the Council, under the heading 'Submissions by the Public', which indicates that 46 public submissions on the review of the Atomic Energy Act were received by the Council, some of them quite extensive. The report states that bound volumes containing copies of submissions are held by the Council library. They may be perused there by interested parties or may be borrowed for a limited period. Additionally, I have arranged for copies of bound volumes containing the public submissions to be placed in the Parliamentary Library.
Defence Service Homes Loam.
(Question No. 3458)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 28 October 1981 :
(1) What is the current waiting time for applicants for Defence Service Homes Loans.
(2) Is it a fact that the Defence Service Homes Corporation claims it cannot extend loans to servicemen already buying a home; ifso, is it because of the limited capital available.
(3) Is it also a fact that in 1980-81, an appropriation of $12m to augment the capital of the Defence Service Homes Corporation, was not drawn; if so, why.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) A waiting time of 10 months applies to loans for the purchase of a home. The waiting period does not apply to loans for the construction of a home.
(2) In accordance with a Ministerial Direction issued in 1973 the corporation may not grant a loan for the discharge of a mortgage entered into without the prior approval of the Corporation unless the terms of the mortgage are considered

2966 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

to be onerous and payment of commitments under this mortgage is causing serious hardship. This Direction varied a previous Direction issued in 1951 by permitting consideration to be given to whether the terms of the mortgage are onerous by current standards. The policy applies not only to serving members of the Defence Force but to all eligible persons.
The cost of relaxation of the policy cannot be estimated with confidence, but it could be expected to be sufficiently high to require a substantial additional Budget allocation or an extension of the waiting period.
(3) At the time the 1980-81 Budget was prepared it was estimated that a capital appropriation of $12m would be required to meet the' shortfall between the cost of the estimated demand for loans ($111.5m) and the funds estimated to become available from the Corporation's operations, mainly repayments of existing loans. In the event, expenditure was lower than estimated and funds available for re-Iending were higher, principally because of the number of loans prematurely discharged. The estimation process was complicated in 1980-81 by the decisions to increase the maximum Defence Service Homes Loan by $10,000 to $25,000 and to reduce the waiting period from 14 months to 10 months.
Sales Tax
Mr Howard-On 8 September 1981 (Hansard, page 987) Mr Lloyd asked me, without notice:
Can the Treasurer clarify the present confusion, and the charges of discrimination between horses, dogs and cats, in the application of sales tax to manufactured pet food, saddlery and harness? [s a person who earns his living by breeding, training or racing dogs able to purchase food and other goods for those dogs free of sales tax while someone who earns his living from training or racing horses is not exempt from paying sales tax on their food or other goods such as saddlery? Does a breeder of horses, dogs or cats have to earn his total income from this pursuit to be exempt from sales tax on food for those animals? [f not, at what percentage of income does the tax apply? Are all breeds of dogs exempt if the other criteria are met or only breeds of working dogs? Finally, is the proprietor of a supermarket or other shop retailing pet food required to remove the sales tax on presentation of an exemption certificate number, or can the proprietor force the purchaser to buy his pet food only from a wholesaler?
The answer to the honqurable member's question is as follows:
(I) The tax on pet foods applies only to foods for animals kept as domestic pets. Horses are not regarded as domestic pets but dogs and cats are. Food for horses and for dogs and cats not kept as domestic pets is exempt. All saddlery and harness is now taxable except where it is purchased for use in agricultural industry exclusively, or primarily and principally, in carrying out agricultural operations.
(2) Persons breeding or training racing dogs or training or racing horses are entitled to purchase foods for the dogs or horses free of tax. Equipment for racing dogs, such as muzzles, collars and leads, is taxable as is saddlery and harness for racing horses.
(3) A horse or dog or ca t breeder does not have to earn his or her total income from such pursuits for exemption to apply for food for breeding animals. [t is a question of fact whether a person operates a breeding business, either full or part-time, as distinct from merely keeping the dogs or cats as domestic pets with any breeding being incidental to their role as domestic pets.
(4) No distinction is drawn between breeds of dogs.
(5) There is no requir~ment at law to compel a proprietor of a supermarket or oth~r retailer of pet food to remove the

sales tax on production of an exemption certificate. Whether or not a certificate is accepted is a matter between the retailer and the customer. This situation is not new; it has existed for many years and applies also in respect of all other taxable goods that are purchased at the retail level for use in exempt circumstances. It may be that in practice a person entitled to exemption will find it more convenient to deal with a pet food supplier than with a supermarket.
Sales Tax
Mr Howard-On 9 September 1981 (Hansard, page 1060) Mr Ian Cameron asked me, without notice:
Will the Treasurer ensure that, to save resources and red tape, the Treasury will allow primary producers and manufacturers to use their existing diesel certificate numbers to get an exemption from sales tax on oils and greases? They are different taxes but in the interests of good management they should be grouped on the same certificate.
The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
On 9 September 1981 Mr [an Cameron (Hansard, page 1060) asked me, without notice, whether primary producers could use their existing diesel certificate numbers to obtain exemption from sales tax on oils and greases.
[ indicated that this was an administrative matter which [ would take up with the Commissioner of Taxation. [ have since received further information from the honourable member that dealers and agents involved in marketi'ng oils and greases have expressed concern about the administrative procedures necessary to gain exemption.
The Commissioner has advised that, while a diesel certificate number may assist in establishing the bona fides of a person claiming exemption from sales tax, it would not be practicable from a legal viewpoint to use one certificate for two different taxes. The exemptions are not parallel and ther~ are different responsibilities under the relevant legislation involved. It would not be practicable or desirable to cover the requirements of two different sets of legislation with one certificate.
The Commissioner suggested that any supplier of oils and greases experiencing problems with exemption claims should contact the local taxation office where officers would be available to discuss the matter. The kind of problems likely to arise in this area have arisen previously in other situations and satisfactory solutions found.
[ mention also that the Government is at present reviewing the system of exemption certificates under the sales tax law. The information supplied by the honourable member will be taken into account in this review.
Quarantine: Landings by Foreign Fishermen
(Question No. 1699)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many reports of landings by foreign fishermen on the north-west coast of Australia and adjacent islands have been received since July 1977.
(2) Were any of these reports substantiated; if so, what are the details.
(3) Did any reports refer to animals accompanying the fishermen; if so, were they substantiated.
Mr MacKellar-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2967

(1) Accurate records of the kind needed to answer the honourable member's questions have only been kept since July 1978 with the introduction of the Government's upgraded Civil Coastal Surveillance Program. Since then fifty-four reports have been received of foreign vessels being sighted in positions or situations from which it had to be assumed for quarantine purposes that landings on the north-west coast of Australia or adjacent islands had occurred or were about to occur.
(2) On investigation it was possible to verify that landings on Australian soil had occurred on twenty-five of those occasions. Details are as follows:
25.9.79-An Army Nomad aircraft sighted an Indonesian fishing vessel In the vicinity of Adele Island. The Transport vessel M.V. Cape Pillar responded and found that the food and water cache at the Adele Island lighthouse had been stolen and there was Indonesian writing on the lighthouse walls. The fishing vessel could not be relocated.
3.10.79-Littoral surveillance aircraft sighted two Indonesian fishing vessels anchored off Tapers Inlet with canoes heading from the beach to the vessel. A chartered helicopter response was mounted and the landing confirmed but the fishing vessel was not relocated.
18.10.79-Littoral surveillance aircraft sighted one Indonesian fishing vessel at Cartier Islet with two people on the beach tending fish drying racks. The fishing vessel departed on the aircraft's approach.
21.10.79-Aborigines from One Arm Point Mission reported landing of crews from two Indonesian fishing vessels on West Roe Island. An Animal Quarantine Officer, on investigation, confirmed the landings. The vessels could not be relocated.
27.10.79-Chartered aircraft on surveillance response task reported an Indonesian fishing vessel hidden in mangroves at Sir Frederick Island. The surveillance chartered vessel 'Collendina' responded, escorted the fishing vessel to sea and issued warnings.
29.10.79Littora I surveillance aircra ft sighted an Indonesian fishing vessel at Bedford Island with one person on shore and three canoes in the vicinity. The fishing vessel was boarded by officers from the Customs vessel 'Jacana' and then escorted to sea.
25.11.79-Littoral surveillance aircraft sighted an Indonesian fishing vessel moored in mangroves at East Sunday Island. The surveillance chartered vessel 'D.McD' could not relocate the fishing vessel.
27.11.79-The chartered vessel 'D.McD' located and boarded an Indonesian fishing vessel hidden in mangroves at Tide Rip Island. The fishing vessel departed the area overnight.
28.11.79-Littoral surveillance aircraft reported an Indonesian fishing vessel with three people having landed at High Island. The chartered vessel 'D.McD' located two Indonesian vessels high and dry on the beach. The masters of the vessels were warned and then escorted to sea.
7.12.79-Littoral surveillance aircraft reported an Indonesian fishing vessel hidden in mangroves at Bedford Island. Health and Fisheries officers from the surveillance chartered vessel 'Collendina' boarded the fishing vessel and escorted it to sea following a warning being given.
11.l2.79-Littoral surveillance aircraft reported an Indonesian fishing vessel hidden in mangroves at Mermaid Island. Officers from HMAS Adroit boarded the vessel and ordered it to sea.
16.12.79-Littoral surveillance aircraft reported an Indonesian fishing vessel hidden in mangroves at Pascoe

Island. Officers from HMAS Ardent confirmed the landing, boarded the vessel and confiscated a quantity of fish and trochus. The following day the vessel was escorted to sea and a warning issued.
17.4.80-Three reports were received and confirmed by littoral surveillance aircraft of Indonesian fishermen having made landings on various islands. Two vessels were seen at Island Reef, 25 miles north west of Cafferelli Island, one vessel on High Island, and another two hidden in mangroves at Sunday Island. In response to these reports the Customs vessel 'Jacana', with two Quarantine Officers and a State Police Officer on board, boarded four Indonesian vessels in King Sound between 17 and 19 April, whilst WA. Fisheries Inspectors on board HMAS Aware boarded a total of eleven vessels in the vicinity of Scott, Ashmore and Brue Reefs. All vessels were given warnings and departed the area.
20.4.80-Littoral surveillance aircraft reported two Indonesian fishing vessels at the west island of the Lacepedes group with canoes on the beach. Further investigation failed to relocate the vessels.
8.5.80-Littoral surveillance aircraft reported one Indonesian fishing vessel at Adele Island with a landing having occurred. Fisheries officers from the surveillance chartered vessel 'Collendina' confirmed the landing, boarded the Indonesian vessel and issued warnings. The fishing vessel departed the area.
13.5.80-Littoral surveillance aircraft sighted one Indonesian fishing vessel hidden in mangroves at Curlew Bay. The vessel could not be relocated on further investigation.
2.6.80-Littoral surveillance aircraft sighted one Indonesian fishing vessel anchored at North Maret Island with people foraging on the reef. Subsequent investigation failed to relocate the vessel.
9.6.80-Littoral surveillance aircraft reported one Indonesian fishing vessel beached at Adele Island. Officers from the chartered vessel 'Axion' boarded two Indonesian vessels in the area. The masters denied landing at Adele Island and were directed to leave the area.
14.6.80-Littoral surveillance aircraft reported one Indonesian fishing vessel camouflaged in mangroves at East Roe Island. This vessel was subsequenlly boarded by officers from HMAS Ardent and escorted to sea.
15.6.80-Littoral surveillance aircraft reported one Indonesian fishing vessel hidden in mangroves at Sunday Island. Officers from the chartered vessel 'Axion' investigated, towed the vessel clear of the island and HMAS Ardent escorted it to sea.
16.6.80-Littoral surveillance aircraft reported two Taiwanese fishing vessels aground on Churchill Reef. Fisheries officers on board HMAS Ardent investigated and found two licensed Taiwanese fishing vessels, one of which had accidently run aground. It was refloated at the next high tide.
22.7.80-Littoral surveillance aircraft reported one Indonesian fishing vessel hidden in mangroves at Gregory Island with the crew gathering trochus shells on reef. Officers on board HMAS Ardent investigated the report, apprehended the vessel and towed it to Koolan Island. Legal proceedings were instituted and the master was subsequently fined for illegal landing and the vessel was confiscated.
23.7.80-Littoral surveillance aircraft reported one Indonesian fishing vessel beached on Bedford Island. This vessel was apprehended by officers on board HMAS Ardent and towed to Koolan Island. Legal proceedings were instituted with similar results as in preceding incident.

2968 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(3) No. However, reports from Defence officers include references to birds being "found on foreign fishing vessels boarded by them on the high seas off Western Australia.
MANDATA System: Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 2210)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(I) Has the MANDATA System been introduced in his Department and Government instrumentalities under his control; if so, what was the (a) cost of (i) the equipment, (ii) installation, (iii) site preparation, (iv) acquiring or renting sites and (v) other additional factors associated with the introduction of the system and (b) total cost of introducing the system.
(2) Were any reductions in the staff of personnel/establishment units achieved as a result of introducing this system; if so, what (a) reductions in staff and (b) cost savings were achieved in each year since its introduction.
(3) What staff (a) saving or (b) increase is expected with the termination of the MANDATA System.
(4) What is the anticipated (a) extra cost or (b) saving resulting from the termination of the MANDATA System.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The MANDATA System was introduced into the Department of Trade and Resources. (Ceased 1981).
(a) (i)-(v), and (b) See answer provided by the Prime Minister to Question No. 2209 (Hansard, 29 October 1981, page 2796).
In addition, the Department incurred the following costs in introducing the system: $60 for installation of a power point, $217 for travel expences; total $277.

(2) No.
(3) (a) Nil.
(b) Nil.
(4) (a) Nil. The withdrawal will be achieved within existing resources.
(b) Nil.
Immigration: Settler Worker Arrivals
(Question No. 2474)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:
How many settler worker arrivals in (a) Australia as a whole and (b) each State and Territory in each quarter since 1976 have been (i) skilled and (ii) semi-skilled in the building and construction trades.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question, set out in the table below, is derived from the Australian Bureau of Statistics Occupation Tables and is as follows:
Prior to July 1979, details required to compile these statistics were obtained from settlers' self-description of their occupations. This information was recorded in incoming Passenger Cards. Since then the necessary details have been obtained from the worker categories into which intending migrants are determined to fall, completed by overseas posts. This information is included in a tear-out tab which is placed in passports, at the same time as visa issue. On arrival in Australia these tabs are removed from passports by primary officers and attached to incoming Passenger Cards.
This latter method provides more accurate information than the earlier used self-description method. The tendency under the self-description method was for people to inflate their level of skill which would seem to be borne out by the higher proportion of semi-skilled revealed since the end of 1979.

;:::t,::..
'~"
;<:b:

C

IC)

;::

PERMANENT ARRIVAL OF (i) SKILLED AND (ii) SEMI-SKILLED WORKERS IN THE BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION TRADES

;<:b;. C-

NSW

Vic.

Qld

SA

WA

Tas.

NT

ACT

Not stated

Australia

;:,:
'"

Semi

Semi

Semi

Semi

Semi

Semi

Semi

Semi

Semi

Semi

Skilled skilled Skilled skilled Skilled skilled Skilled skilled Skilled skilled Skilled skilled Skilled skilled Skilled skilled Skilled skilled Skilled skilled

19761st Quarter

116

6

82

a 31

I

41

I

66

2

5

3

3

349

II

2nd Quarter

159

9 106

I

37

2

24

I

94

3

5

2

7

437

13

3rdQuarter

157

5 131

3

40

45

2 118

2

3

7

2

10

513

12

4th Quarter

195

4 184

5

52

59

I 148

2

7

4

4

10

663

13

1977-

1st Quarter

178

6 142

10

48

79

2 130

3

4

10

5

9

605

21

2nd Quarter

200

9 166

5

61

2

85

I

98

3

3

II

3

8

635

22

3rdQuarter

115

8 170

3

91

I

78

I 113

5

2

8

I

9

587

19

4th Quarter 1978-

115

8 220

5 104

4

79

I 110

4

7

7

3

13

658 27 .....

1st Quarter

115

6 178

7

77

I

36

100

2

7

3

14

532

18

-.I

2nd Quarter 3rdQuarter
4th Quarter 1979-
1st Quarter
2nd Quarter

101

8 142

2

54

2

25

115

8 106

4

44

3

14

115

7

74

3

39

I

15

62

7

41

2

5

136

2

6

6

2

9 18 13

408 343 304

16 17 13

Z
<0C1>

96

9

76

3

35

6

10

I

22

3

3

3

128

14

51

16

52

4

9

6

26

I

3

2

7 13

253 3 285

24 47

3
...0-
C1>

3rdQuarter

74

14

30

23

63

10

8

2

23

3

3

7

3 208

58

4th Quarter 1980-

75

30

34

26

54

7

10

II

25

9

3

6

3 207

88

\J:)

00

1st Quarter

105

42

43

33

61

9

13

2

26

14

I

I

2

9

2 261 103

2nd Quarter 3rdQuarter 4th Quarter
1981-

124

58

73

36

61

8

22

10

37

14

I

I

3

161

61

50

49

76

23

12

7

37

24

4

I

2

200

90

57

63

93

14

28

10

67

27

5

2

I

5 4 4

I

15

I

13

4

20

4 341 133 5 359 172 4 475 217

:;0 tIl '"C

:;0

lsi Quarter

263

93

97

77 130

17

27

15

88

25

2

2'

9

6

2

II

625 243

tIl

tZl

Note: Skilled Building Construction trades include: Bricklayers; carpenlers; joiners; fibro plasterers; painters and decorators; plasterers; plumbers and gasfilters; roof tilers, wall and floor lilers; stone masons; flat glass tradesmen; diggers, other.

.Zt..I.l,

Semi-skilled Building and Construction. Builder labourers; other building and construclion workers.

.>.<......:.,

tIl

tZl

IV \J:) 0\J:)

2970 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Advertising and Promotion: Department of Cominunications
(Question No. 2654)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
\. What sum was spent by the Minister's Department on advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services during the period (a) January 1980 to 18 October 1980 and (b) October 1980 to August 198 \.
2. What was the cost of each campaign undertaken.
3. Under which item of expenditure were funds allocated for each campaign.
4. Which advertising agencies or consultants were used for each campaign.
5. What was the total sum paid to each agency or consultant for each campaign.
6. How was each agency or consultant selected.
7. By what percentage has the departmental cost of advertising increased or decreased each year from 1975 to 1980 and during the period I January 1981 to 17 August 198 \.
8. What is the estimated cost of advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services for 1981-82.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I to 6 Nil. (Note: Expenditure has been incurred in respect of on-going administrative functions e.g. advertising of vacant positions, public notices, etc. This is reflected in the answer to question 7.)
7. Total expenditure for all types of advertising by the Department and the percentage charges between the fiscal years concluding in the years nominated in the Question are:

Year

Amount Percentage

spent

increase

$

1975-76

Nil

1976-77

1,704

1977-78

7,935

365

1978-79

9,704

22

1979-80

23,894

146

1980-81

55,356

132

I July 1981-17 August 1981

912

The Australian Government Advertising Service has advised that indexes of percentage increases in unit costs of
Commonwealth departmental advertising since 1975 are:

Index of unit cost of Commonwealth
Departmental advertising

1975 (base)

100

1976

110

1977

120

1978

128

1979

140

1980

153

1981 (I January-17 August)

165

8. The estimated cost of advertising for 1981-82 is $20,000. This is for administrative purposes and does not include any

component for advertising and promotion of Government programs.
Copyright: Audiovisual Recordings
(Question No. 2724)
Mr H.umphreys asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that the 1980 amendment to s. 183 of the Copyright Act removed from all educational institutions the protection afforded by the wording 'for the services of the Commonwealth or State' in relation to audiovisual recording.
(2) Will possible breaches of the amended Act by Members, Senators and users of the Parliamentary Library be overlooked.
(3) Will the Attorney-General elaborate and clarify the new legal responsibility of public educational institutions under s. 183 of the Act as amended.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Section 183 of the Copyright Act 1968 provided certain protection from infringement of copyright in respect of acts 'done for the services of the Commonwealth or State'. Section 24 of the Copyright Amendment Act 1980 added a new provision to s. 183 which qualifies this protection in relation to educational institutions 'of, or under the control of, the Commonwealth, a State or the Northern Territory.' The extent of that qualification is a matter of legal opinion. I would add that on 12 July 1981 the Attorney-General announced that his Department would carry out a review of the provisions of the Copyright Act concerning copying by audiovisual means.
(2) Infringement of copyright is, under the Copyright Act, mainly a matter for civil proceedings, and the decision to commence any such proceedings is thus a matter for the owner of a copyright which is alleged to have been infringed.
(3) See answer to (I) above.
Australian Official Residences Overseas
(Question No. 2759)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 25 August 1981:
What is the rent paid for each official residence of Australian consuls, consulates-general, ambassadors and high commissioners in all countries in which Australia is represented.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
ANNUAL RENT OF OFFICIAL RESIDENCES OF HEADS OF MISSIONS OR POSTS LEASED AS AT
31 AUGUST 1981

Post
Abu Dhabi Algiers Amman Ankara Apia Athens Baghdad Bahrain Belgrade Beirut

Annual rent
$A 41,592 73,010 19,592 30,665 10,044 26,670 29,481 31,294 10,147 24,013

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2971

Post

Annual rent

Berlin Berne Bombay Brasilia Caracas Chicago Dacca Damascus Geneva Hanoi
Honolulu Islamabad Jeddah Kuwait Lima . Los Angeles Lusaka Madrid Milan Moscow
Nauru Nicosia Nuku'alofa Peking
Rio de Janeiro Stockholm Tehran Vientiane Vila Warsaw

$A 44,812 55,156 14,520 25,121 60,000
23,664 11,304 39,300 78,673 Rent included in Chancery rent. Chancery rent-$27,028
13,800 6,264
128,182 55,970 44,248
131,385 20,554 27,182
5,600 R.ent included in Chancery rent. Chancery rent-$91,745
3,780 7,979 6,000 Rent included in Chancery rent. Chancery rent-$61,992 13,200 21,589 38,864 21,732 11,400 36,274

In other countries in which Australia is represented, the residences occupied by heads of missions or posts are owned by the Commonwealth.
The Overseas Property Office of my Department is responsible for the administration of the overseas estate and in doing so it undertakes a continuous review of relevant overseas property markets to ensure that reasonable rentals only are paid for premises considered necessary for the appropriate position. The rentals paid for the above accommodation reRect the market conditions operating in the respective cities at the time the leases were concluded.
Tenosynovitis: Department of Veterans' Affairs
(Question No, 3032)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(I) Have any cases of tenosynovitis been reported to date, in the Department or Statutory Authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction.
(2) If so, will the Minister state (a) how many cases have been reported, (b) in what types of work the affected persons were engaged, (c) of the cases reported how many were in respect of (i) female and (ii) male employees and (d) what age

brackets appear to be most affected, in the Department and each Statutory Authority.
(3) Will the Minister provide similar information in respect of carpal tunnel syndrome.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) (a) 13 cases of tenosynovitis.
(b) 4 in the keyboard group; 3 clerical; 5 in the domestic/hospital assistant group; I surgical bootmaker.
(c) (i) 12 female; (ii) I male.
(d) ages range from 21 years to 59 years.
(3) (a) 6 cases of carpal tunnel.
(b) 3 in the keyboard group; 2 clerical and I domestic.
(c) (i) 6 female; (ii) nil male.
(d) ages range from 20 years to 58 years with four of these in their fifties.
Parliamentary Liaison Officers under the Minister for Communications
(Question No. 3036)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
How many Parliamentary Liaison Officer positions have existed in the Minister's Department and each Statutory Authority under the Minister's jurisdiction in each State, the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory for each year from 1970 to 1981.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
There has been only one Parliamentary Liaison Officer position in the Department of Communications and its predecessor the Postal and Telecommunications Department since 1975.
There are no Parliamentary Liaison positions in the Australian Telecommunications Commission, the Australian Postal Commission, the Overseas Telecommunications Commission (Australia), the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal and the Special Broadcasting Service, although a number of officers may be involved full or part time on Parliamentary liaison work.
Defence Purchases: UNIVAC Switching System
(Question No. 3088)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 10 September 1981:
(I) What action has he taken to ensure that tenders which are based on proposals not properly investigated or incapable of implementation in the form of specified in tender are not accepted in that form.
(2) Is the tender submitted by CISCO for DISCON, in the form recommended by the Department of defence, capable of implementation as submitted.
(3) Is there a danger that the government is seen to be favouring a particular tenderer by accepting a tender which is incapable of being fulfilled because of technical deficiencies or the inclusion of items which are not available to the tenderer.

2972 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) There are standing instructions within both my Department and the Department of Defence which provide for the comprehensive and objective evaluation of all relevant aspects of tenders including compliance with technical requirements.
(2) and (3) The provisional section of CISCO was based on a high level of confidence that its tender was capable of implementation following the evaluation conducted in accordance with the instructions referred to in (I) above.
Fuel Freight Subsidy Scheme
(Question No. 3167)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 17 September 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the considerable alarm, concern and confusion caused by telephone calls from a spokesman for the Petroleum Products Pricing Authority to several fishing 'enterprises and business concerns in the Northern Territory and Queensland, in which it was stated that consideration was being given to changing the Fuel Freight Subsidy Scheme by removing existing freight differentials for safe anchorage locations in northern Australia and restricting these differentials to 6 mainland points only.
(2) Is there any sustance in this report; if so, by what authority was this action taken.
(3) Can he assure the House that before the action was taken, his colleague the Minister for Primary Industry was consulted on the matter; if so, what was the reaction of the Minister for Primary Industry.
(4) Was the fishing industry consulted on this matter.
(5) Has he considered the very serious effect the reported action would have on the operations of the northern prawn trawling industry.
Mr Moore-The answer to' the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (5) The Petroleum Products Pricing Authority (PPPA) has a statutory responsibility to determine whether the prices of certain petroleum products, or services associated with their supply, are justified. In this context the PPPA has been examining fu~1 freight differentials for areas such as safe anchorages in the Gulf of Carpentaria where, over time, anomalies in the differentials have arisen.
The PPPA contacted oil companies and those fishing operators which, as agents of oil companies, have had freight differentials established for them and indicated that it was considering restriction of freight differentials to ports in the Gulf region. The PPPA invited those contacted to put views to it concerning the freight differentials.
As the examination by the PPPA has implications of the rates of subsidy payable on fuel delivered to safe anchorages, the Minister for Primary Industry and other relevant Ministers have been informed of the development. In addition I have met with representatives of the Gulf fishing industry and discussed the operation of the fuel freight subsidy scheme with them.
Currently with the PPPA examination of freight differentials, a number of aspects of the scheme are being reviewed by the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs. As part of that review, consideration is being given to the effects of the scheme on industries in remote areas.

Service Pensions: Fringe Benefits
(Question No. 3174)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 17 September 1981:
Is the Repatriation Act to be amended to include provisions aimed at preventing artificial reductions in income which would thereby qualify veterans for pension fringe benefits.
Mr Thomson-The Minisler for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Not at this stage.
Special Youth Employment Training Program
(Question No. 3229)
Mr McLean asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 23 September 1981:
(I) What percentage of youths participating in the Special Youth Employment Training program (private sector) were retained in employment by the subsidised employer following the expiration of the subsidy period for each year from 1978-79 to 1980-81.
(2) What percentage of youths participating in the SYETP program (private sector) have succeeded in obtaining full time employment following the expiration of the subsidy period either by the subsidised employer or by other employers for each of the same years.
Mr ~. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Information on the basis requested by the honourable member is not available. In late November 1979 my Department undertook a survey of a sample of employers and young people involved in Special Youth Employment Training (SYETP) program placements in the private sector in April 1979. The results of this survey indicated that:
(a) 2.5 per cent of trainees were dismissed by employers at the end of the scheduled completion of the subsidy period. 33.9 per cent of trainees did not complete the fu II subsidy period.
(b) 50.7 per cent of trainees were still employed by the SYETP employer some four to five months after the scheduled completion of the subsidy period and a further 17.8 per cent were in full-time employment elsewhere.
Divorce Statistics
(Question No. 3245)
Mr Jull asked the Minister representing. the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 24 September 1981:
(I) How many divorces were granted in the Family Court of Australia during (a) 1979-80 and (b) 1980-81.
(2) Are statistics kept of the age and duration of marriage of the petitioners; if so, what is the breakdown by age, duration of marriage, and States in which divorces were granted in (a) 1979-80 and (b) 1980-81.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(1) The number of decrees absolute for dissolution of marriage made under the Family Law Act 1975 is as follows:

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2973

Year
By StateNew South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Tasmania Australian Capital Territory Western Australia Northern Territory
Total

1979
12,615 9,471 5,817 3,797 1,167 1,346 3,397
263
37,873

1980
13,449 9,207 6,219 4,203 1,285 1,524 3,073
298
39,258

June 1981
6,816 4,767 3,658 1,872
588 693 1,664
20,058 .

(4) How many of these former members and senators are over 70 years of age.
(5) How many former Governors-General and Federal judges are in receipt of superannuation benefits and how many of them are over 70 years of age.
(6) What sum was paid out in superannuation for these recipients in 1980-81.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has supplied the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Information supplied by the Department of the Senate, the Department of the House of Representatives and the Department of Administrative Services shows that in total:

Statistics shown relate to the calendar year. The figures for 1981 do not include applications for dissolution filed in the Supreme Court of the Northern Territory. The figures for 1979 and 1980 are supplied by the Australian Bureau of Statistics and those for 1981 by the Family Court.
(2) (a) The age of parties at date decree was made absolute, percentage distribution:

Husband

Wife

Age

1979 1980 1979 1980

Under 25 25-29 30-34 35-39 40-44 45-49 50-54 55-59 Over 60

5.9 5.7 14.8 14.4 20.7 21.0 23.4 23.6
21.3 22.1 19.7 20.5 15.3 15.6 13.5 14.1 11.7 11.6 10.0 10.0
9.1 8.6 7.3 6.9 7.2 6.7 5.3 4.5 4.4 4.2 3.2 3.0
4.3 4.1 2.6 2.4

(b) The duration of marriage, percentage distribution:

(a) $6,573,334 was paid in salaries and allowances in the nature of salary, and
(b) $2,368,464 was paid in electorate allowances.
to senators and members of the House of Representatives in 1980-81.
(2) 219 former senators and members, or their dependants, were in receipt of parliamentary superannuation pensions at 28 October 1981.
(3) $3,661,812 was paid out in parliamentary superannuation pensions for these recipients in 1980-81.
(4) Evidence of age is not required from all former parliamentarians but the Department of Finance understands that of those former senators and members who were in receipt of parliamentary superannuation pensions at 28 October 1981, 73 were over 70 years of age.
(5) (a) The Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet has advised that 3 former Governors-General are in receipt of a Oovernor-General's pension and that 2 are over 70 years of age.
(b) The Attorney-General's Department has advised that 15 former Federal Judges are in receipt of a Judge's pension and that 9 are over 70 years of age.

Duration (years)

1979

1980

Under 5 5-9 10-14 15-19 20-24 25-29 Over 30

20.1

20.7

28.4

28.4

18.3

19.3

12.3

11.8

9.3

8.9

5.8

5.6

5.8

5.3

These percentages are supplied by the Australian Bureau of Statistics. Percentages for 1981 are unavailable.

(6) Information supplied by the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet and the Attorney-General's Department shows that $620,512 was paid out in Governor General's and Judge's pensions in 1980-81.
Regularisation of Status Program
(Question No. 3257)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:
(I) How many applications did the Government receive under the Regularisation of Status Program.

Salaries and Allowances of Members of Parliament
(Question No. 3252)
Mr Shack asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 24September 1981:
(I) What was the total sum of (a) salaries and allowances in the nature of salary and (b) electorate allowances paid to Commonwealth members of parliament and senators in 1980-81.
(2) How many former members and senators or their dependants are in receipt of superannuation benefits.
(3) What sum was paid out in superannuation for these recipients in 1980-81.

(2) How many applications had been processed as at 12 October 1981.
(3) Of those processed, how many (a) rejections, (b) ineligibilitiesand (c) eligibilities have been found.
(4) Will he outline the position of those applicants who were deemed as rejected or ineligible.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 11 051 applications representing 14 044 persons.
(2) At week ending 16 October 1981,9734 applications had been processed.
(3) Of those processed there were (a) 8 rejections, (b) 217 ineligible, (c) 9316 eligible (193 applications lapsed through apparent loss of interest by applicants).

2974 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(4) Applicants who have been refused or found ineligible are expected to leave the country otherwise they will become liable for deportation.
Instant Coffee
(Question No. 3289)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:
(I) What percentage of Australian instant coffee is imported and from which countries is it imported.
(2) What Commonwealth Government regulations apply to importation of coffee.
(3) Do Commonwealth Government regulations in any way apply to the quality of imported instant coffee.
(4) Has any Australian import company trading with a near east country been prosecuted recently for substituting acorns and other grains in imported instant coffee; if so, under what State or Commonwealth Acts was action taken.
(5) What was the result of prosecution.
(6) What guarantees can he provide concerning the quality of imported instant coffee.
Mr Moore~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Australian Bureau of Statistics advises that separate statistics are not available to enable the percentage to be calculated.
(2) The Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations provide for a control over the importation of coffee in accordance with Australia's obligations as a member country of the International Coffee Organisation.
In addition those Regulations and the Commerce (Imports) Regulations provide for standardised sizes and labelling requirements for pre-packed coffee.
(3) Commonwealth import regulations do not apply to the quality of imported instant coffee. However, the National Health and Medical Research Council has approved a standard for coffee.
The standard covers the composition and quality of coffee in its many forms and specifies, inter alia, that coffee shall be derived from the coffee bean and shall not contain any foreign substance. Approved National Health and Medical Research Council Standards are recommended to the States and Territories for adoption into the food control legislation of the relevant authorities. When incorporated in the food laws of the States and Territories the standards are applicable to imported and local foods.
(4) and (5) I am not aware of any recent prosecution in connection with the quality of imported instant coffee. If a prosecution did take place it would have taken place under the relevant State or Territory food laws.
(6) A guarantee cannot be provided by me about the quality of imported instant coffee. The State and Territory food laws mentioned above are available however for quality controls.
National Gun Control Legislation
(Question No. 3314)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General the following question, upon notice, on 14 October 1981:
(I) Has the Attorney-General's attention been drawn to the article headed 'The Firearms Debate-Human

Life

or Human Rights?' in the October 1981 Bul-

letill of the Insurance Council of Australia.

(2) Has the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General examined any proposal for uniform national gun control legislation in the last 5 years: if so, what are the details; if not, are there any current proposals for that committee to do so.

(3) If the answer to both parts of part (2) is no, will the
Attorney-General now give an undertaking to place this issue before the next meeting of the Standing Committee; if not, why not.

Mr N. A. Brown~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Yes.

(2) In 1977 as part of a wider consideration of armed robbery consideration was given to the question of gun control.
The Standing Committee passed no resolution on the question
but left it to each jurisdiction to take whatever action was felt necessary.

(3) In view of the predominant State interest in this matter any initiative for the Standing Committee to reconsider the matter should come from a State Attorney-General.

Repatriation Pensions: Personnel Exposed to War Gases
(Question No. 3350)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 15 October 1981:
Have any Australian ex-service personnel who were exposed to war gases tests in Australia during World War II (a) applied for and (b) refused repatriation pensions; if so, what are the details.
Mr Thomson~The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Statistical information collected by my Department in relation to claims for acceptance of incapacity is not collected on the basis of the individual disabilities claimed or of the circumstances of the service on which the claim is based. It is not possible to provide accurate details of the number of ex-service personnel, exposed to war gas tests during World War II, who have applied for, and been refused, Repatriation benefits.
However, the Department of Veterans' Affairs has been able to identify fifty-one claims for Repatriation benefits which have been lodged on the basis of involvement in gas experiments on service. Of these claims, twelve have been successful.
These figures are not comprehensive and there may be other claims which have not been identified.
Should any ex-serviceman consider he is suffering some incapacity as a result of involvement in gas experiments, he should lodge a claim with the Department of Veterans' Affairs in the State in which he resides and arrangements will be made for it to be investigated.

Attorney-General's Department: Record of Travel Warrants
(Question No, 3353)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 20 October 1981:

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2975

(I) What is the reason for the 5+ month delay in replying to my question No. 1138 (Hansard, 22 September 1981, page 1638) concerning the number of travel warrants issued for air travel for officers of the Allorney-General's Department.
(2) Is it a fact that the Allorney-General's reply was that the information requested was not readily available and would not be sought or provided.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(I) According to Departmental records the answer to the question No. 1138 was sent for inclusion in Hansard on 9 June 1981 but apparently was not received by the Table Office. Another copy was submilled on 21 September 1981. and appeared in House of Representatives Hansard on 22 September 1981.
(2) See House of Representatives Hansard of 22 September 1981.
Sharp PC1211 Pocket Computer
(Question No. 3405)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 22 October 1981:
(I) Has his allention been drawn to the existence of correspondence between the (a) purchaser of a Sharp PCI211 Pocket Computer/Electronic Calculator and the Trade Practices Commission and (b) Sharp Corporation and the Trade Practices Commission regarding the defective operation of this equipment.
(2) H so, can he say whether this correspondence stated that the Sharp PCI211 pocket computer had recently been modified to rectify intermittent faults in the spontaneous reset and lockup modes.
(3) Hso, is he satisfied that (a) reasonable efforts have been made to inform retailers and owners that the unit referred to in part (I) may be faulty, (b) the unit is not still being sold without the purchaser being informed beforehand that the unit may be faulty and (c) the TRS80 pocket computer manufactured by Tandy Electronics Pty Ltd has not similar faults to those described in part (2).
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) I am informed that there has been ongoing correspondence since March 1981 between a purchaser and the Trade Practices Commission concerning problems experienced with Sharp PC 1211 Electronic Calculators.
(b) Following receipt of the complaint, the Commission wrote to Sharp Corporation requesting their comments on the matters raised.
(2) In a leller to the Commission dated 27 August 1981, Sharp Corporation said that a permanent modification had been designed by the manufacturer in Japan in December 1980. The Company stated all stocks manufactured after December 1980 contain the modification and all current stocks of earlier production have been modified by its Service Department.
(3) (a) Sharp has advised the Commission that it notified all service agents of the potential problem and a bulletin to service agents of 27 April 1981 gave instruction on the incorporation of modification. However, as advice to service agents may not have filtered through to retailers, the Commission is taking up this point with Sharp Corporation. Sharp also advised that as only 5 units of 1709 units sold has been returned with similar problems, the incidence of failure was not

sufficient to warrant a recall or advertisement of the problem in the media.
(b) See (2) and (3) (a) above. Any units which are returned for repair for any reason will also have the modification filled free of charge if it has not already been done.
(c) I am advised the Commission's allention has been drawn to an article in an American journal which discussed faults in the Tandy TRS80 which seemed to be similar to those which had been experienced with the Sharp PC 1211. The Commission has recently learnt that there may be lillie significant difference between the two units. The Commission therefore intends to approach Tandy on the mailer.
Review of Conillwm'i'~alth FUllctions: Decision on Prosthesis Work
(Question No. 3424)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 27 October 1981:
(I) Has a $34 hourly rate been set as the payment to commercial limb makers; if so, by whom, and how was the sum arrived at.
(2) How many former members of the Repatriation Artificial Limb and Appliance Centre section of the Department of Veterans' Affairs have begun work in commercial limb centres since the Review of Commonwealth Functions decision to pass prosthesis work to the private sector.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question.
(I) No.
(2) Nine (9).
Commercial Limb Centre
(Question No. 3425)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, 27 October 1981 :
(I) Is it a fact that 2 former employees of the Department of Veterans' Affairs Repatriation Artificial Limb and Appliance Centre in Canberra are now operating a commercial limb centre.
(2) If so, is the equipment being used formerly the property of the Commonwealth Government.
(3) If the equipment is former Commonwealth property, was it bought or is it being leased.
(4) If it was purchased, (a) what (i) price was paid and (ii) was its estimated value, (b) did the transaction go through normal Department of Finance and Department of Administrative Services procedures for disposal of Government equipment and (c) were normal tendering procedures used for the sale of the equipment.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes.
(2) and (3) The premises and major equipment are the property of the Capital Territory Health Commission under leasing arrangements to the proprietors.
Hand tools, formerly the property of the Commonwealth (Department of Veterans' Affairs) were sold to the proprietors.

2976 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(4) (a) (i) $690.
(ii) The estimated value of used hand tools must be taken as the best realisable value offered at public tender.
(b) and (c) Public tendering procedures were used.
Cost to Department of Veterans' Affairs of Providing Artificial Limbs
(Question No. 3426)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 27 October 1981:
(I) What are the estimated relative costs to the Department of Veterans' Affairs in (a) Canberra and (b) each State of providing artificial limbs through the Department and through commercial limb makers, in a full year.
(2) When did the Government make the decision to give more work to private companies, rather than to Repatriation Artificial Limb and Appliance Centres.
(3) Did the Government base its decision on any information that there was spare capacity in the private commerciallimb-making sector.
(4) How many new companies making artificial limbs have been set up since the Review of Commonwealth Functions announcement.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) (a) and (b) The estimated costs of artificial limb manufacture and repairs to the Department of Veterans' Affairs for 1981-82 by RALACs and commercial limb makers are-

State

Commercial RALAC limb makers

New South Wales Victoria
Queensland
South Australia Western Australia
Tasmania
Australian Capital Territory

$ 725,000 800,000
415,000
332,000 248,000
140,000

$
1,350,000 240,000 120,000 80,000 85,000 nil 150,000

Total

2,660,000 2,025,000

* Included in New South Wales figure and estimated at
$130,000 in a full year. (2) The decision was made in the course of the Review of
Commonwealth Functions and was announced by the Prime Minister on 30 April 1981.
(3) The decision is consistent with the Government's policy to transfer functions to the private sector where practicable.
(4) My Department is aware of 6 private companies or organisations which have been set up since the decision was announced.
Passenger Departures from Australia
(Question No. 3434)
Mr Jull asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 28 October 1981:
According to the departure card system, how many passengers departing Australia in 1980 stated that their principal country of visit or port of embarkation was (a) Damascus, Jordan, (b) Bahrain, (c) Cairo, Egypt, (d) Johannesburg,

South Africa, (e) Seoul, South Korea, (f) Kuwait, (g) Tel Aviv, Israel, (h) Nicosia, Cyprus, (i) Belgrade, Yugoslavia, (j) Paris, France (k) Amsterdam, Holland, (I) Copenhagen, Denmark, (m) Stockholm, Sweden and (n) Noumea, New Caledonia.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Passengers departing Australia are not required to provide information about either their principal country of visit or their intended port of disembarkation. They are however required to indica!e on their passenger cards the country of their intended residence or stay. The table below sets out departures for 1980 by country of intended residence or stay.
DEPARTURES 1980

Country of intended residence or stay

Residents

departing

Total

temporarily departures

(a) (i) Jordan (ii) Syria
(b) Bahrain
(c) Arab Rep. of Egypt (d) South Africa, Rep. of (e) Korea (including North and
South) (f) Kuwait (g) Israel (h) Cyprus (i) Yugoslavia (j) France (k) Netherlands (I) Denmark (m) Sweden (n) New Caledonia

413 459 361 2,383 7,903
1,313 160
5,211 2,504 14,464 8,886 13,566 1,873 1,587 18,909

533 562 786 3,143 17,164
2,896 345
7,200 2,890 19,947 17,317 32,322 4,630 5,883 28,652

Total Departures

1,254,316 2,168,555

Note: details are provided for both Jordan and Syria as the question sought information for Damascus and Jordan.
Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics.
Importation of Pollen
Mr MacKellar-On 8 September 1981 (Hansard, page 987) Mr Kent asked me a question, without notice, concerning the quarantine risk of the importation of pollen.
The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
My Department has undertaken an extensive study on the effects of chalkbrood fungus and the possibility of viable pseudosclerotia being included in consignments of pollen. My Department's investigations do indicate that a tenuous link exists that could create a risk of entry of the disease with importations of bee-collected pollen. For example, discarded containers holding the remnants of any infected pollen may prove attractive to bees and provide a possible means of introducing the disease into bees in the wild in Australia.
I have approved the drafting of legislation to han the importation of bee-collected pollen. Given the nature of the disease link and the need, where practical, to ensure that industry and others be given time to adjust, I do not consider that it would be appropriate to introduce interim measures to prevent the entry of bee-collected pollen before the proposed legislation hecomes effective.

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2977

Hospital Insurance: Contribution Rates
Mr MacKellar-On 10 September 1981 (Hansard, page 1155) Mr Robert Brown asked me, as Minister for Health, a question without notice concerning contribution rates of hospital insurance funds.
The following is the answer to the honourable member's question:
Where a registered health insurance organisation changes its rates of contribution, it is required under the National Health Act (section 78) to notify the Permanent Head of the Department of Health in writing of the change within seven days after the change is made. The change is inoperative and has no legal effect unless and until the Minister's approval of the change has been given. Any change to an organisation's rules which has financial implications, such as a change in contribution rates, is referred to the Registration Committee for examination and report to the Minister. The Committee comprises the Commonwealth Actuary, or a person appointed by the Commonwealth Actuary to act in his stead, and two officers of the Department of Health appointed by the Permanent Head.
However. the prime responsibility for ensuring that contribution rates are viable lies with the organisations themselves. The onus is on an organisation, when notifying a change in rates, to provide sufficient supporting data that will enable the Registration Committee to undertake a proper assessment of the change and then make an appropriate recommendation to the Minister. Factors taken into account by the Committee include the following:
(i) The financial experience of both the hospital and medical benefits funds, by tables of benefit. for the latest year ended 30 June. This acquaints the Committee with the surplus or deficit situation and the level of reserves of each fund, thereby providing a basis for consideration of the effects of the proposed change.
(ii) The estimated financial experience of each fund, by tables, for the period between 30 June and the date of effect of the new rates. The financial experience is arrived at after taking into consideration any recent movements in membership, the average level of benefits and per capita claims utilisation as well as general cost movements which might affect the level of management expenses and the likely amount of nonoperating income accruing to the fund having regard to the funds' investments at 30 June. Detailed statistics relating to membership benefits and claims utilisation are maintained by the Department of Health from quarterly returns furnished by the health insurance organisations themselves.
(iii) A projected financial experience for each fund, by tables, for a period of twelve months from the date of effect of the new contribution rates. This takes into' account similar factors as in (ii) above. However, where the proposed change is the result of a major revision of the health insurance arrangements, particular attention is given to the likely impact on fund experience of new benefits or increases in levels of existing benefits. In this regard, an assessment is made of the effect on claims utilisation of a possible future redistribution of membership between tables. Similarly, the Committee considers to what extent new members might be attracted and the effect this might have on future experience.
(iv) The estimated result for twelve months having regard to the factors set out in (iii) above and level of reserves, expressed in months of contribution income, at

the end of the projected period. The Committee recognises that organisations might incorporate components in their proposed contribution rates to build-up reserves to satisfactory levels. The Committee also needs to be satisfied that, as far as it can determine, adequate provision has been made for outstanding claims of contributors.
(v) In the case of a hospital benefits fund, the extent of the distribution of moneys from the Hospital Benefits Reinsurance Trust Fund.
(vi) Whether the contribution rates proposed by the organisation generally adhere to the community rating principle. In this context the same contribution rates should be charged for all members of the one table, with the single rate set at half the family rate.
(vii) Any other factors that the Committee considers relevant in the case of a particular fund.
Some of the larger organisations employ the services of an actuary to determine changes in contribution rates and the Committee is sometimes furnished with a copy of the actuary's report for its information.
If, after examining the effect of a change, the Committee considers that the change imposes any unreasonable or inequitable condition affecting the rights of contributors or adversely affects the financial stability of a fund, the Committee is required to state its opinion and the reasons for its opinions in its report to the Minister.
The financial experience of the respective health insurance organisations often varies considerably. Therefore, the Registration Committee necessarily adopts a flexible approach when examining proposals to change contribution rates, having regard to the particular set of circumstances pertaining to each fund.
Mineral Export Controls
(Question No. 1993)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 29 April 1981 :
(I) Are (a) salt, (b) nickel, (c) copper ore (i) concentrate and (ii) matte and (d) refined copper, still subject to export controls.
(2) Did he make a statement on 15 December 1978 in which he foreshadowed that these controls would be removed; if so, and if the controls have not been removed, what is the reason.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The commodities listed in Part I of the question were included in a list of commodities on which I indicated in my statement on 15 December 1978 that my Department would be consulting with industry and the States on their possible removal from export control.
Following those consultations nickel was included in the list of minerals for which I authorised blanket approvals on 12 June 1979. Copper ores, concentrates, matte and refined copper were added to the list in a joint statement by the Ministers for Industry and Commerce, Business and Consumer Affairs and myself on 22 July 1980. As a consequence, it is no longer necessary for exporters of these commodities to seek export approvals for individual shipments or contracts and exporters are able to seek approvals covering their annual tonnages. This procedures enables the Government to monitor the export of these minerals with a minimum of involvement..
In relation to salt, there is still a requirement for approval of individual shipments or contracts. However, this situation is at present under review.

2978 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Assessment, Employment, Training and Placement Services for the Disabled
(Question No. 2373)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 2 June 1981 :
(1) Is it a fact that $1 m was appropriated for 1980-81 for the establishment of assessment, employment, training and placement services for the disabled.
(2) If so, (a) has this sum been fully dispersed and (b) how many projects are in progress.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Of the funds provided to the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs in 1980-81, $Im was allocated for work preparation projects.
(2) (a) No. Of the $Im allocated $404,000 was spent. A number of the projects commenced later in the International Year of Disabled Persons than was originally anticipated, and t~eir costs were carried over into the 1981-82 financial year.
(b) 9 projects at the end oUune.
Advertising and Promotion: Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 2652)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(1) What sum was spent by the Minister's Department on advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services during the period (a) 1 January 1980 to 18 October 1980 and (b) 19 October 1980 to 17 August 1981.
(2) What was the cost of each campaign undertaken.
(3) Under which item of expenditure were funds allocated for each campaign.
(4) Which advertising agencies or consultants were used for each campaign.
(5) What was the total sum paid to each agency or consultant for each campaign.
(6) How was each agency or consultant selected.
(7) By what percentage has the Departmental cost of advertising increased or decreased each year from 1975 to 1980 and during the period I January 1981 to 17 August 1981.
(8) What is the estimated cost of advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services for 1981-82.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) $301,752, (b) $106,419.
(2) (a) Export Now-Total Cost: $358, 710.
A 3 year campaign was launched in the 1978-79 financial year to develop a comprehensive export consciousness and publicity program to increase awareness amongst industries on the advantages of exporting.
The campaign was titled, 'Export Now'.
(b) ASEAN Trade Fair-Total Cost: $49,461.
This program was initiated to assist ASEAN promotion of exports to Australia and to encourage Australian investment in ASEAN countries. A focal point of the program was the mounting of the Trade Fair held in Melbourne in the second half of 1980.

(3)-

Campaign

Item

(a) Export Now . . . . . . . . . (b) ASEAN Trade Fair . . . . . . . (Australian Development Assistance Bureau)

640.2.04 318.4.02

(4) The following Commonwealth master placing/charging
agencies were used for media placement, for checking and monitoring media performance and for all accounting matters for the campaigns

Neville Jeffress Advertising Pty LId Fortune (Aust) Pty LId Berry Currie Advertising

The technical services of the following agencies and consultancies were used to plan and/or produce advertisements for the campaigns by the Department's Regional Offices:

Country Press LId
Media Press Sales Pty LId
S.A. Country Newspapers LId
Australian Posters
Public Relations Services Corp. Communications PtyLtd
AletAL G.Bird Detail Printing G. Flanagan Pty Ltd Grubb Art R. J. Harris MarkbyGroup MilIswyn Photocomp Showads Omega Tripart Marketing Pty
Ltd Evans Evans Prahran Typing Services

Central Coast Broadcasting
Eric White Associates Pty Ltd
Le Grand-McCannErickson
AG"S Doc. Reprod. Unit (Dris. )
Active Offset
Alpha Set Conrad Standish Dova Type Shop Pty Ltd J. Fry J. Hindle Lance Stirling Meredith Trade Minotrade Quickdraw The Art Producers Typographical Services
Pty Ltd GMDisplays Prestige Printers

(5)-

Neville Jeffress Advertising Pty Ltd Fortune (Aust.) Pty Ltd
Berry Currie Advertising
Country Press Ltd Central Coast Broadcasting Media Press Sales Pty Ltd Eric White Associates Pty Ltd
S.A. Country Newspapers Ltd Le Grand-McCann-Erickson Australian Posters AGPS Doc. Reprod. Unit (Bris.)
Public Relations Services Corp. Communications Pty Ltd
Active Offset AletAI Alpha Set G.Bird Conrad Standish Detail Printing

Export now
$ 228,613
31,029 20,200
2,256 300 618
4,211 525
28,181 3,453 1,060
10,555 168 120 17 290 410
2,460

Asean trade
fair
$ 39,688 6,325

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2979

Export now

Asean
trade fair

Dova Type Shop Pty Ltd G. Flanagan Pty Ltd J. Fry Grubb Art J. Hindle R. J. Harris Lance Stirling Markby Group Meredith Trade Millswyn Minotrade Photocomp Quickdraw Showads Omega The Art Producers Tripart Marketing Pty Ltd Typographical Services Pty Ltd Evans Evans G & M Displays Prahran Typing Services Prestige Printers

$ 64 309 947 6,788 900 2,966 500 162 300 288 40 1,043 100 2,680
180 930
25 172 1,500
4 4,346

$
324 113 386 2,625

358,710 49,461

(6) By the Minister for Administrative Services in the case of the master placing/charging agencies and by the Australian Government Advertising Service in consultation with the Department in relation to selection of agencies to provide technical services to plan, create and produce advertisements.
(7) (a) Total expenditure for all types of advertising by the Department and the percentage changes between the fiscal years concluding in the years nominated in the Question are:

$ Per cent

1975 (Base) 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980

18,300 19,400 11,050 10,500 302,000 264,200

+6 -34 -43 + 1,556' + 1,344*t

* Reflects expenditure on the Export Now Campaign and t
the ASEAN Trade Fair.
(b) The Australian Government Advertising Service has advised that indexes of percentage increases in unit costs of Commonwealth departmental advertising since 1975 are:

INDEX OF UNIT COST OF COMMONWEALTH DEPARTMENTAL ADVERTISING

1975 (Base)

100

1976

110

1977

120

1978

128

1979

140

1980

153

1981

165

( 8) $46,700.

Brisbane Airport: Use of Adjacent Land
(Question No. 2795)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to reports which appeared in the Brisbane Courier Mail prior to the 1980 Federal election, in which the former member for Lilley referred to advice provided by independent consultants to his Department on the matter of recreational uses to which land adjacent to the Brisbane Airport might be put.
(2) If so, did these reports refer to specific possible recreational uses, such as boating, horse riding, orienteering, bike riding and shooting.
(3) Can he say whether the former member said in the reports that these activities (a) had been recommended by the advisers and (b) would not impede the efficient running of the airport or add to the hazards of flying.
(4) Is the advice referred to contained in a report commissioned by the Government; if so, (a) who were the independent consultants, (b) when were they commissioned, (c) when and to whom was their report submitted, (d) is the report regarded as confidential, and, if so, what is the reason and (e) was the report made available officially or unofficially to anyone outside his Department and, if so, to whom, and on what basis was it made available.
(5) Can he say how the former member received the information he released to the media and used in election pamphlets.
(6) Did he receive a request from my office for a copy of the consultants' report to be made available to me.
(7) Is it a fact that that request was denied on the basis that the document was confidential.
(8) What recreational facilities does the report recommend as suitable for land adjacent to the airport.
(9) What is his Department's appraisal of the feasibility of each recommendation.
(10) If he will not release the recommendations of the report, what is the reason.
(II) What recreational facilities does the Government regard as suitable for development on land adjacent to the airport.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) My attention has been drawn to an article which appeared in the Brisbane Courier Mail of 15 September 1980, which reported the former member for Lilley, as saying inter alia: that recreation experts had recommended to the then Minister for Housing and Construction, the Hon. R. J. Groom, that the area of the seven kilometre estuary and flood way associated with the airport could be used for more than 40 different leisure activities.
I am also aware of a similar but more detailed article on the front page of the North Eastern edition of the Express suburban newspaper of 17 September 1980.
(2) The newspaper reports did refer to specific possible recreational uses such as boating, horse riding, orienteering, bike riding and scouting. It is assumed that the reference to shooting in the question is intended to be scouting.
(3) I am not in a position to indicate what any previous member may have said or not said to the media. Both the above press articles included the comment, although it was not reported as being quoted by the former member, that the consultants say the recreational opportunities suggested

2980 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

would in no way impede the efficient running of the airport or add to the hazards associated with Hying.
(4) (a) Yes, the above quotation is contained in a report prepared jointly by the Department of Housing and Construction and consultants. The Department of Housing and Construction commissioned a firm of consultants called Recreational Resource Management Pty Ltd to undertake a study of possible recreational uses of the Iloodway to assist the Department in its advisings to the Department of Transport Australia. This study formed the basis of the report.
(b) The firm was commissioned on 30 May 1980.
(c) Followingsubmission of the consultants' study report to the Department of Housing and Construction it was then jointly modified with the consultants and finalised in Septem ber 1980.
(d) It is an internal Departmental report which was, and still is, subject to examination and review by Department of Transport Australia. It was prepared to assist Department of Transport Australia in their on-going considerations on possible land usage. As such, it did not and does not necessarily represent the final outcome as many other issues have still to be taken into account.
(e) The report was of course given to Department of Transport Australia by the Department of Housing and Construction. I am not in a position to comment on whether or not anyone other than Departmental officers gave the report or parts of the report to anyone else.
(5) I am not responsible for any action of any previous member of this Parliament.
(6) Yes.
(7) At my request, my Senior Private Secretary rang your office to advise that I was not prepared to release the report because I consider it premature to generate any public demand for space or facilities which might be incompatible with long term strategy for use, operation and maintenance of the Iloodway area and surrounds before all aspects and implications have been fully examined.
At the present time, the Iloodway usage aspects of the report are being taken into account in formulating the conditions under which possible use might be made of the floodway land for consideration by the various levels of Government. This is being done by the Joint Government Coordinating Committee (JGCC) on Brisbane Airport Redevelopment which has established a F100dway Usage Advisory Group to advise it. I have not agreed to release the report to anyone outside the respective Departments.
(8) The report does not make recommendations as to the suitability of any particular recreation facilities but rather canvasses a range of options and comments on the advantages and disadvantages of each particular option. Within the options, the sorts of activities which presented themselves are, inter alia:
barbecuing, boating, cycling, eating, fishing, horse-riding, trail bike riding, photography, picnicking, reading, relaxing, sigh t seeing, canoeing, caravan park, dog training, fossicking, hiking, orienteering, rowing, sailing, swimming.
(9) The Department of Housing and Construction has made no assessment of the feasibility of the various options proposed pending effective stabilisation of the floodway banks, review of the flood way performance, and the outcome of the considerations of the JGCC's Floodway Usage AdvisoryGroup.
(10) See the answer to Part (7) above.
(II) I would expect that the Government would generally regard recreational facilities or activities as being suitable for the land adjacent to the airport if they are compatible with floodway performance; 'assist in maintaining the flood way,

and do not jeopardise flood way stability or increase the problems of bird hazards and hence risk to aircraft operations from the new airport. However, the whole question of eventual floodway usage is the subject of on-going co~siderations by the Joint Government Co-ordinating Committee and in particular the Department of Transport Australia.
Community Youth Support Scheme
(Question No. 2811)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 20 August 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that the Community Arts Board of the Australia Council announced on 18 August 1981 that a grant of $4, I00 had been approved to go towards artist's fees and costs for an artist to work with youth in the Windsor area, in Brisbane.
(2) Did he, on the same day, announce that the Community Youth Support Scheme would be abolished.
(3) If so, will the decision to abolish CYSS mean that the Scheme located in the Windsor area of Brisbane will close.
(4) Does the coincidence of these announcements in any way rellect a Government preference for art instruction to youth over job instruction as is practised by CYSS staff.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) and (4) The Government has decided that the Community Youth Support Scheme will not be terminated.
Screenings of Multi-cultural Television at Parliament House
(Question No. 3075)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 10 September 1981:
(I) How many (a) members, (b) senators, (c) parliamentary staff members and (d) outside visitors attended the special screenings of multi-cultural television (0/28) at Parliament House in June 1981.
(2) What was the cost of providing this service.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am advised that the special screenings of multicultural television through Channel 0/28, at Parliament House in June 1981 were attended by five members of the House of Representatives, five Senators, several parliamentary staff members and fifteen outside visitors (representatives of the Australian Capital Territory's ethnic communities).
(2) The total cost of providing the service was $1,957.45 which included the costs of the Telecom bearer, equipment hire and travel expenses for one Special Broadcasting Service officer to host the special screenings.
National Estate Grants
(Question No. 3078)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 10 September 1981:
(I) Was the sum of National Estate grants by the Commonwealth to finance programs of assistance for the restoration,

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2981

preservation and improvement of buildings and areas of special significance in the last 3 years less than that allocated by the Whitlam Labor Government in 1974-75.
(2) How many programs seeking assistance under the National Estate program, on a State by State basis, have (a) received and (b) not received Commonwealth funding in the last 3 years.
(3) What would have been the cost of funding all programs considered worthy but which did not receive a grant in the last 3 years.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. However it should be noted that in addition to the National Estate Program, the Government commenced in 1979-80 a special seven year program on a $2 for $1 basis with Tasmania to restore and develop the Port Arthur region. It is currently estimated that Commonwealth assistance of the order of $6m will be required over the seven year period. To date $1.2m has been expended on this important component of the National Estate, which if added to other components would bring the amount above the 1974-75 sum.
(2) (a)-

State or Territory

1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania

25

20

39

37

25

44

24

39

35

52

23

21

27

20

31

39

46

34

Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory

204

173

204

12

12

11

6

7

6

Totals

222

192

221

(2) (b) Under the Government's Federalism policy the detailed administration of the National Estate Program, is as far as it is possible, carried out by State Governments. In this process each State Government calls for and compiles grant applications for consideration within its State. In developing a draft National Estate Program for submission to the Commonwealth, each State Government submits a program commensurate with the level of funds available for its share in the Federal Budget.
Consequently it is not possible for the Commonwealth to identify those programs which the State would have submitted if additional funds had been available.
(3) See (2) (b).

Allowance for Travelling to Education Courses
(Question No. 3080)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 10 September 1981:
(I) Do unemployed young persons receive a travel allowance of $6 per week for travelling to education courses.
(2) Will this travel allowance be available to persons travelling to community-based centres which may replace Community Youth Support Scheme centres.
(3) As $6 is well below the level of fares some persons need to pay to attend courses will he take action to raise the maximumto$12.

Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Eligible young people attending approved full-time Transition courses in TAFE may receive the Transition Allowance which includes a component of $6 per week to cover incidental expenditure incurred in attending the course.
(2) The Government has decided that the Community Youth Support Scheme will not be terminated.
(3) Should it emerge that the rate of allowance is inadequate for its purpose the Government would give consideration to adjusting the rate.
Experimental Ethnic Television Programs
(Question No. 3121)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
(I) Has an assessment been made of public reaction to experimental ethnic television programs which have been shown in Sydney and Melbourne; if so (a) what was the methodological basis of this assessment and (b) what were the findings.
(2) When will multi-cultural television presently operating in these centres, be extended to other capital and provincial cities throughout Australia.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am advised that during the first year of operations the SBS commissioned three television surveys in Melbourne aimed at assessing audience reaction to various aspects of the Channel 0/28 service. These surveys referred to the multicultural television service, which commenced transmiSsion on 24 October 1980, not to the limited series of experimental ethnic television programs presented in late 1979 and early 1980. 11 should be noted that the surveys were confined to Melbourne because of the reception difficulties experienced with Channel 0/28 in Sydney.
Two audience surveys were undertaken by McNair Anderson Associates Pty Ltd. The first, undertaken between 21 December 1980 and JO January 1981, measured the viewing patterns of the total audience (i.e. both Australian and non-Australian born). The second, conducted during the period 16 January to 7 February 1981, surveyed nine ethnic communities:i.e. Italians, Greeks, Yugoslavs, Arabians, Germans, Maltese, Spanish, Poles and Vietnamese.
The third survey, undertaken by In view Market Research between 23 March and 30 April 1981, involved an 'in-depth' survey of four ethnic communities: Italians, Greeks, Poles and Vietnamese.
Aspects upon which viewer reactions were sought included, in all three surveys: quality of reception (Channel 0 and 28); the channel on which the station was viewed; the quality of Channel 0/28 programs in comparison with commercial and ABC channels; Channel 0/28 program presentation style in comparison with commercial and ABC channels; individual programs presented by Channel 0128; Channel 0/28 subtitles.
It is noteworthy that there was a reasonable consistency in the findings obtained in all three surveys. The resulls themselves were encouraging because they pointed to a successful introduction of the new service among the non-Australian born audience; over half of Australian born residents had watched Channel 0/28; the great majority of Channel 0/28 viewers regarded its programming and style ~of presentation as better or equal to that of commercial and ABC channels; there was a high level of acceptance of Channel 0/28's subtitling among the station's viewers; viewers in all language groups watched other language programs as well as their own;

2982 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

and, there was a favourable reaction to Channel 0/28's news, films and sports programs.
(2) The 1981-82 Budget did not allocate any funds for the extension of the multicultural television service beyond Sydney and Melbourne.
The Government is conscious that there is considerable demand for the multicultural television service in other regions. However, before any decision is taken to extend the service to other areas, considerable economic, social and technical planning and research will need to be undertaken. As part of this process the Government will also have to balance the competing claims of a variety of areas for the service.
Australian Light-stations
(Question No. 3134)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
(1) What services are used by the Navigational Aids service of Transport Australia in transporting men and materials to Australian light-stations.
(2) What has been the cost of providing these various services in each of the last 10 years.
(3) What has been the cost of maintaining each of the ships owned by the lighthouse service in each of the last \0 years.
(4) What has been the cost of providing helicopter services to Australian light-stations over each of the last 10 years.

(5) What has been the number of (a) persons involved in supervising the fleet of ships operated by Transport Australia, and (b) crew members for the same period.
(6) Are there any plans to increase the number of persons in his Department's Transport Operations Branch; if so, what are the details.
(7) Has his Department undertaken any studies to determine the relative efficiency of helicopter vis-a-vis Cape-class ship services to light-stations; if so, what were the results of the studies and did any of the studies take account of the higher proportional overheads to be absorbed by the Department's ships as helicopter services are increased.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Men and equipment are transported to Commonwealth light-stations by ship, helicopter, aircraft, launch, motor vehicle or a combination of these depending on the accessibility of the site.
(2) The cost of providing the services referred to in (1) above is not shown separately in departmental accounts.
These services are an integral part of the comprehensive navigational support task carried out by the personnel of the Coastal Transport Branch of the Department of Transport.
This task includes the performance by ships' crews of special technical work aboard ships and ashore and takes in the operation of boats and amphibians as well as the construction and maintenance of navigational aids, stevedoring and other support tasks necessary for operations in isolated areas.

(3) The cost of maintaining each of the Department's navigational aids vessels was:

Financial year

Cape Moreton

Cape Pillar

Cape Don

Lumen

Candella

1980-81 1979-80 1977-79
1977-78 1976-77
1975-76 1974-75 1973-74
1972-73 1971-72

$ 262,598 329,176 316,660
373,472 213,237
170,706 129,902
90,196 82,635
73,072

$
336,206 256,863 167,266 209,438 193;542 194,894
74,378 112,907 77,587

$
466,491 183,968 298,404
286,751 271,735
221,064 70,239 85,278
76,946 77,225

$
137,299 78,738
74,066 80,653 49,299
21,320

$
8,569 15,967
5,112 12,233 6,578
4,382

- This vessel is no longer employed on navaids duties.

(4) Expenditure on helicopters used in servicing navaids was-

1980-81 1979-80 1978-79 1977-78 1976-77 1975-76 1974-75 1973-74 1972-73 1971-72

$ 329,933 319,472 264,757 225,334 153,819 120,756 104,916

(5) (a) 15 in Central Office and 3 in Regions.

(b) The crew complement for each Cape Class Vessel is 32 minimum and 38 maximum (depending on the type of work being carried out). The crew complement for Motor Vessel LUMEN is 13 and for Launch CANDELLA, 2. Actual total

staff numbers vary but in general the requirement for opti-
mum vessel utilisation is I+crews per vessel.
(6) No. In fact rationalisation of the Coastal Transport branch (formerly Transport Operation Branch) soon to be implemented will result in a reduction in total staff numbers.
(7) The relative efficiency of helicopter vis-a-vis Cape Class Vessel servicing of light-stations is continually being reviewed and the 5 Year Plan for upgrading navaids allows for a level of automation of equipment to the extent that the cheaper helicopter option is increasingly viable. Over recent years the increased swing towards helicopters has resulted in one Cape Class Vessel becoming surplus to navaids needs and this has been removed from the service; this and any other surplus time resulting from the use of other modes of transport is utilised elsewhere on a full cost-recovery basis, avoiding higher proportional overheads.

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2983

Exclusions from Pre-paid Envelopes
(Question No. 3146)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
(I) Why has the National floral emblem been excluded from the new issue of pre-paid envelopes which includes all States plus the Northern Territory.
(2) Why is the Australian Capital Territory not recognised as a separate entity by the Postal Commission in this series.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The definitive pre-stamped envelope series featuring floral emblems depicts only officially proclaimed Australian floral emblems. As the 'traditional' national floral emblem (The Golden Wattle-'Acacia Pycnantha') has not been officially proclaimed, it was not included.
(2) The Australian Capital Territory has no official floral emblem.
Plant Variety Rights Legislation
(Question No. 3163)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 17 September 1981:
(I) In view of the invitation for public comment on the Plant Variety Rights legislation contained in his press release dated 3 August 1981, and taking into consideration the fact that further parliamentary debate has been deferred until February 1982 to allow for this public debate, will he provide, without delay up-to-date information, which has been denied to interested public groups, to enable informed public debate on (a) the substance of the discussions at the meeting of the Agricultural Council in August 1981 in Darwin concerning the Plant Variety Rights legislation and (b) proposed changes in the Bill introduced in May 1981 which (i) are under discussion within this Department, (ii) are planned for discussion or (iii) have been initiated since the presentation of the Bill.
(2) Will informed public debate be impossible without the provision of this information.
(3) Have details of the Agriculture Council Meeting referred to been passed to industry.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Informed public debate on the Plant Variety Rights (PVR) issue in Australia depends more upon an understanding of the principles involved in the Scheme than the details of the legislation.
Information about the proposed Scheme has been distributed widely. My own Department and several State departments responsible for agriculture have prepared information papers for general distribution. 1 have issued a number of Press Releases on PVR and answered many hundreds of postal enquiries from interested persons and organisations. The legislation, designed to give effect to proposals for the Scheme, has been available as a public document since it was introduced into Parliament on 7 May 1981.
I have made it clear from the outset that the form the PVR Scheme will finally take will be determined in large part by the wishes of the Australian Agricultural council but as I indicated in my Press Release issued on 3 August 1981, Council has yet to make its final decision on a number of major issues including merit testing and the question of excluding certain species.

(2) Information necessary for informed public debate is available at present. I am issuing an updated information paper which deals with those matters of public concern most frequently raised with me.
(3) No. Agricultural Council discussions are confidential. However, my Press Release concerning the meeting has been available since 3 August 1981 and the Resolutions from the meeting are being tabled in Parliament.
Mr Hughes, Resident of Hong Kong: Application for Age Pension
(Question No. 3196)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 22 September 1981:
(I) Has an application for age pension been received from Mr Richard Hughes, resident of Hong Kong.
(2) Is Mr Hughes over 70 years of age.
(3) Has his application been approved; if not, why not.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) (2) and (3) having regard to the confidentiality provisions of the Social Services Act I am unable to provide the information.
Community Youth Support Scheme
(Question No. 3247)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice;-on 24 September 1981:'
(I) Do procedures exist for the distribution of Community Youth Support Scheme assets.
(2) Have administrators in CYSS centres been advised in writing by his Department of procedures to be followd in disposing of CYSS assets, files etc.
(3) Does the legal onus of responsibility for ensuring that the disposition of CYSS assets is properly carried out rest with the Member of Parliament who represents the area in which the CYSS centre is located or with an individual CYSS administrative committee.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (3) The Government has decided that the Community Youth Support Scheme will not be terminated. The current CYSS Guidelines and Administrative Arrangements set out procedures to be followed in the event of an individual project closing.
Australian National Railways
(Question No. 3341)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 15 October 1981:
(1) What were the principal components of operting losses by Australian National Railways during each year from 1975-76 to 1980-81 and what are the expected components for 1981-82.
(2) What change in AustraliawNational Railways workforce by category of employment and location occurred in each year from 1975-76 to 1980-81 and what is expected in 1981-82.

2984 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable

(1) Principal components of expenditure contributing to

member's question is as follows:

ANRC operating losses:

Expense

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

Est. only 1981-82

Salary and wages Locomotive fuel Material and other costs Depreciation Interest, insurance, long service leave
Superannuation Adjustments to provisions

$m

$m

$m

$m

$m

109

110

119

131

135

6

8

14

21

23

44

46

49

54

56

13

14

14

14

16

12

14

14

13

16

II

13

I3

12

13

15

Expenditure

210

205

223

245

259

Uniform accounting for Australian National Railways commenced with financial year 1977-78. Prior to that only individual and unconsolidated accounts of 3 former railway systems now comprising Australian National Railways were available: Detail as shown above cannot be provided 1975-76-1976-77.
(2) Total staff figures prior to amalgamation:

Financial year.
1975-76 1976-77

Australian

Tasmanian

S.A.

National Government

Railways

Railways

Railways

8,149 8,023

4,015 3,782

1,982 1,839

REGION AND BRANCH FIGURES SINCE AMALGAMATION 1.3.78

Central RegionAdministration Head office Operations Mechanical Civil Finance and supply
Total
Northern RegionOperations Administration Mechanical Civil Finance and supply Australian Capital Territory
Total
Tasmanian RegionOperations Administration Mechanical Civil Supply

1977-78
70 95 2,512 1,891 1,240 428
6,236
1,327
1,088 990 287 36
3,728
766 32
463 388
37

1978-79
49 115 1,874 1,550 988 419
4,995
1,807
1,260 1,051
270 34
4,422
663 34
472 325
32

1979-80
48 128 1,773 1,516 914 381
4,760
1,767 72
1,226 1,012
227 35
4,339
615 32
435 306 29

1980-81
57 145 1,726 1,462 942 373
4,705
1,699 118
1,176 780 241 33
4,047
599 34 294 398 27

Estimated 1981-82
54 183 1,626 1,417 1,011 343
4,634
1,636 III
1,141 692 227 33
3,840
571 33
376 278 25

Total Total Australian National Railways
Made available to STA

1,686 11,650
1,391 13,041

1,526 10,943
1,289 12,232

1,417 10,516
1,240 11,756

1,352 10,104

1,283 9,757

1,069 11,173

Unknown

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2985

Department of Industrial Relations: Record of Travel Warrants
(Question No. 3352)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 20 October 1981:
(I) Further to his reply to my question No. 1134 (Hansard, 9 September 1981, page 1124) concerning the number of travel warrants issued for air travel for officers of his Department, why did it take 5 months for him to reply that the information which I sought was not available and would not be made available.
(2) Has it been drawn to his attention that other Ministers' Departments do record this information.
(3) Can he say what are the reasons for the different approaches of Ministers and their departments to this matter of public accountability.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The delay was caused by the pressure of other work requirements in that area of my Department responsible for the preparation of the reply. Administrative staffing arrangements have been reviewed to ensure that questions on notice are answered promptly.
I did not say that the information was not available, I said that it was not readily available.
(2) I am not aware of the records held by other Ministers' Departments.
(3) I am not aware of the reasons for the different approaches of Ministers and their Departments but again emphasise that the information is not readily available. It would involve the manual examination of over 9,000 movement requisitions and reference to a large volume of associated airline accounts (and their numerous attachments). I am not prepared to authorise the use of the substantial resources that this would require.
Importation of Baby Seal Products
(Question No. 3357)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 20 October 1981:
Further to the reply to question No. 2791 by the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Hansard, 13 October 198 I, page 1935), will the Government, in respect of its position on the importation of baby seal products, take into account whether or not the baby seals from which the products are derived were slaughtered in an inhumane manner, and in the event that this is so, will he undertake to have prohibited the importation of products derived from baby seals.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Government is aware that there is controversy over the methods used to kill harp seals in Canada. The Canadian Government authorities claim that clubbing, using an instrument called a hakapik, is the most humane of a number of alternative killing methods tried under field conditions.
Thai Navy Anti-piracy Unit
(Question No. 3366)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 20 October 1981:

(I) Has the Australian Government been asked by either the United Nations Organisation or the Thai Government to make a financial contribution toward the revival of the Antipiracy Unit to be administered by the Thai Navy.
(2) Has the Government made any decision as to whether Australia should give support to this cause, following renewed attacks on Vietnamese refugees and even Australians sailing in the Gulf of Thailand or the South China Seas and following the contribution of $2,600,000 by the United States of America.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) There has been no direct bilateral approach from the Thai Government to the Australian Government to make a financial contribution towards the Thai Government's antipiracy activity. The Thai Government has however submitted to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees proposals for additional funds and equipment which it considers necessary in order to resume anti-piracy patrolling in and around Thai territorial waters. These and similar proposals for the resumption of anti-piracy patrolling are presently being informally discussed between international agencies ill1d interested governments, including Australia.
(2) The Australian Government has consistently condemned the cruel and barbaric practice of piracy and will of course give sympathetic consideration to the provision of appropriate assistance, once the present round of consultations is completed.
Brisbane Airport: Air Traffic Controllers
(Question No. 3371)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 20 October 1981:
(I) How many hours of overtime were worked during the period I January to 19 October 1981 by each air traffic controller based at Brisbane Control Tower.
(2) What is the national average number of hours of overtime worked per air traffic controller.
(3) On how many occasions during 1981 has a checkcontroller had to stand in for an air traffic controller because of unexpected absences of staff at the Brisbane Control Centre.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Each controller averaged 41 hours 22 minutes overtime.
(2) Approximately 70 hours per annum.
(3) This information is not recorded as the check controller is already on duty when a stand in for a duty controller is required.
Investigator Strait Fishery
(Question No. 3376)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 20 October 1981:
(1) Is it a fact that the Fisheries Division of his Department, as well as the South Australian Fisheries Department, recommended in late 1980 that the Investigator Strait fishery be closed to prawn trawling for 2 years.
(2) Did he refuse to close the strait to trawling unless the South Australian Fisheries Department consented to absorb the vessels operating in Investigator Strait, under Commonwealth exploratory fishing permits, into South Australian prawn fisheries.

2986 REPRESENTATIVES 17 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(3) Did he or his Department grant 12 month exploratory permits for Investigator Strait in 1977 against strong protests from the South Australian Government.
(4) Has the adjoining St Vincent Gulf fishery collapsed because of this action and do the permits remain.
(5) If he did not require the arrangement referred to in part (2), what proposal did he put to the South Australian Department of Fisheries or the South Australian Minister on the question.
(6) If he did require the arrangement referred to in part (2), will it lead to over-fishing and eventually the destruction of other South Australian fisheries.
(7) Did he or his Department co-operate with the South Australian Fisheries Department in a management policy for the joint Commonwealth/State prawn fishery on the West Coast of South Australia, off Venus Bay.
(8) Is it a fact that the fishery was reduced within the 3 year period 1976to 1979 from an average catch of 239tonnes to 16 tonnes as a result of the failure of the Commonwealth to co-operate.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. I am unable to say what the South Australian Department recommended to their Minister. However, my Department, following extensive consultations with industry was clearly of the view that a decision on closure of Investigator Strait should not be made until final comments were received from industry and other interested community groups.
(2) No.
(3) No. On 10 November 1977 the then Minister for Primary Industry approved an interim arrangement whereby the Commonwealth boat licences in respect of 8 authorised operators would be endorsed subject to certain conditions to permit operations for a 3 month period.
It is true that at the time of the Minister's decision the Commonwealth and South Australian Governments had not reached final agreement on the administration and management of the fishery. Consultations continued until 29 June 1978 when Governments agreed to new management measures which were effectively the same as those implemented by the Commonwealth on 10 November 1977.
(4) On information available to my department, it would not appear that the St Vincents Gulf prawn fishery could be said to have collapsed. However, as this fishery is solely a State-based fishery and therefore managed by the State department I make no further comment.
It would appear that only 6 of the 8 operators authorised to operate in the Investigator Strait fishery are in fact so engaged. Inquiries are being made to determine the rights of the remaining 2 fishermen.
(5) On 10 March 1981 I indicated to Mr Rodda that I would be prepared to consider a 2 year closure of Investigator Strait on the condition that fishing would resume when stocks recovered but stressed that no final decision should be taken until all interested parties had been given opportunity for comment. A joint announcement to this effect was made by Mr Rodda and myself on 27 March 1981.
(6) Not applicable.
(7) Yes. In June 1978 the Commonwealth and South Australian Governments announced agreement on management measures for the prawn fishery on the west coast of Eyre Peninsula.
(8) Annual catches from the fishery for the period 1976 to 1979 inclusive were 51.0 tonnes, 22.8 tonnes, 16.4 tonnes and 32.5 tonnes respectively. Following the implementation of a

joint Commonwealth/State management regime catches have recovered to pre-1976 levels.
Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport
(Question No. 3377)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 20 October 1981:
What is the specific order of priority foilowed by his Departmental officers in clearing aircraft for landing at Sydney Kingsford-Smith Airport during periods of air traffic congestion.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Aeronautical Information Publication issued by my Department currently contains the following instructions on the subject of 'Regulation of Flight-Assessment of Priorities'.
7.I-ATC will regulate operations to minimise the possibility of conflict and provided that safety is in no way jeopardised, will apply priorities in the following order:
(a) an aircraft in an emergency, including being subjected to unlawful interference, will be given priority in all circumstances;
(b) an aircraft which has suffered radio communications failure will be granted priority for landing;
(c) an aircraft which has declared a mercy flight;
(d) an aircraft participating in a Search and Rescue (SAR), Medical (MED), Hospital Aircraft (HOSP), or Fire and Flood Relief (FFR) flight shall be granted priority as necessary;
(e) an aircraft engaged in the personal transport of Heads of State or of Government or other selected dignitaries, on official visits to Australia, or the personal transport of the Governor-General or the Prime Minister;
(f) a landing aircraft will have priority over a departing aircraft if the latter cannot take-off with prescribed separation standards;
(g) an aircraft landing or taking off will be given priority over taxiing aircraft;
(h) an aircraft which is first able to use the landing area or desired airspace, in the normal course of its operation, will be given priority except;
(i) when significant economic benefit would result for a number of other aircraft by deferring this priority;
(ii) that flights desiring to operate in other than the normal pattern for operational reasons, will be given the same priority as other flights unless it involves a short-notice change to a clearance already issued to another aircraft. In this case, permission to operate will be deferred.
7.I.I-Training flights will be given the same priority as other flights except that:
(a) flights operating in the traffic pattern in general use will be given priority over flights desiring to operate in conflicting patterns for training purposes;
(b) when a training instrument approach is approved, priority will be given to that aircraft from the time it commences its final approach until the approach is completed.
7.1.2-Notwithstanding para. 7.1 (h), during periods when all requirements for operation in a capital city primary control

Answers to Questions

17 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2987

zone, or the overlying control area, cannot be accommodated, priority will be given in the following order:
(a) regular public transport, military and charter aircraft;
(b) aircraft engaged in aerial work;
(c) private aircraft proceeding to the primary airport;
(d) other private aircraft.
Except that at Sydney the following order of priorities will apply:
(a) regular public transport aircraft, charter aircraft of DC9 and heavier type (if associated with RPT operations), IFR charter aircraft proceeding to Bankstown and military aircraft (other than training flights);
(b) charter aircraft (other than in (a) above);
(c) aircraft engaged in aerial work and military training aircraft;
(d) private aircraft types unable to use Bankstown or Camden;
(e) other private flights.
Additionally, instructions have been issued to ATe to provide aircraft engaged in personal transport of State Governors and Premiers and the Administrator and Chief Minister of the Northern Territory with the same priority as the other categories of flight mentioned in paragraph 7.1.2 (a), as applied generally and at Sydney.
Export of Live Sheep
(Question No. 3399)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 22 October 1981:
(I) Did 9,000 sheep die on the ship Persia during a recent trip from Australia to Egypt; if not, how many did die.
(2) Were the deaths due to a failure of the ventilation system on the ship after 2 days' travel from Fremantle, WA.; if not, what were the reasons.
(3) What is the (a) normal and (b) range of the percentage deaths in the sea transport of live sheep.
(4) What steps can he take and does he intend taking to prevent a high level of deaths in future shipments.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The number of sheep that died on the Persia during a trip from Australia to Egypt in September 1981 is reported to be 8,764.
(2) The Persia completed loading of 49,500 sheep on I September 1981. On 4 September the ventilation system was out of action for 35 minutes and 266 sheep died. On 8 September the ventilation system was out of action for 5l hours and 1,003 sheep died. Both periods of non ventilation were caused by a breakdown in the electrical switching system.
Following these two ventilation failures the main engines had to be run at reduced capacity due to a crack developing in a cylinder head liner. This resulted in a reduction in production of drinking water. The ship altered course and called at Aden to take on additional water. There were 6,028 deaths attributable to this water shortage.
The other 1,495 deaths were due to other miscellaneous causes.
(3) (a) The average mortality rate on ships carrying sheep from Australia is 2 per cent approximately and is being progressively reduced due to improved methods.

(b) The range of mortality rates is from less than I per cent

to about 4 per cent. When a major interruption to conditions

is experienced, such as that on the Persia, the rate can be

higher. The majority of ships have death rates below 3 per

cent.

.

(4) The Australian Bureau of Animal Health has developed a set of Standards for the Preparation and Carriage of
Sheep by Sea. I have informed the industry that these Standards are to be met.

My colleague the Minister for Transport is shortly to introduce revised Marine Orders to control vessels engaged in the carriage of live animals.

Steps have been taken to increase research inputs into this
industry. State and Commonwealth officers are planning these inputs at the present time. Funds have been made available to
enable veterinarians and other scientists to accompany shipments to carry out observations and measurements and to
conduct research.

Experimental Building Station
(Question No. 3612)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) Is the scientific testing of building materials for fire safety rating and structural soundness at the Experimental Building Station an essential service to the building industry and to the general public as consL!mers.
(2) Is it a fact that the services of the station are unique in Australia.
(3) Must the service provided by the station, by its nature, be seen to be independent and unconnected with any commercial interest.
(4) How can the integrity of work performed by the station be guaranteed if it is sold to private interest.
(5) Can he provide any guarantee, that if the station is sold, the full range of testing and related services will continue to be provided for councils and members of the public who depend on these services.
(6) Will the Government urgently review its decision to sell the station in view of the clear need for the retention of the services of the station under government control.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) Yes.
(4) The Government's decision was to dispose of the Station on certain conditions. The successor organisation is required to demonstrate that it could maintain impartiality and technical excellence. This condition was included in the public advertisement for expressions of interest which closed on 9 October.
(5) The public advertisement for expressions of interest also stipulated that the Government's aim is for the Experimental Building Station to be taken over as a going concern, and the Government is prepared to continue its role in building systems accreditation and the development of building regulations. Provision has been made in this year's budget.
(6) See the answer to (5) above.


