House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 124, 1981 Wednesday, 19 August 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--THIRD PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-THIRD PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the
Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House "Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry "Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas AnthQny
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.c.
Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee - The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.c.
The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senatonhe Honourable Anthon~ John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, K.e.M.G., QC. Chairman a/Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deput)' Chairmen a/Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Dona.ld Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader a/the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader a/the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden DeplIl)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader oJthe Liberal Party oJ Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. Deput), Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAllstralia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G. Leodera/the Nalional Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony DepulJ' uaderofthe NatiollalCountry Par/yofAustra(ia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Lobor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor PartJ'-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony, Rt Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewell. Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.e. Brown, Robert James Bungey, Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Hon. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest
Child,Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Han. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley
Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, e.H. Free, Ross Vincent Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey Q'Halioran Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John
Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.e. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles
Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allen Clyde Howard, Han. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunnet Hurford, Christopher John Hyde, John Martin Innes, Utquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher,Qld
Richmond, N.S.W. Chiftey, N.S.W. Macatthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. Bonython, SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith, N.S. W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qld Parramatla, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic.
Hunter, N.S. W. Canning, WA. Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden, Qld
Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
Henty, Vic. Robertson, N.S. W.
Wentwotth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne,N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld McMillan, Vic.
Lilley, Qld Fremantle, WA. Herbert, Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. ,
Holt,Vic. Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Faner, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S.w. Fraser, A.e.T. Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas. Braddon, Tas. Boothby, SA Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qld. Riverina, N.S. W.
Petrie,Qld Denison, Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Griffith,Qld Gwydir, N.S.W.
Adelaide, SA Moore,WA. Melbourne, Vic.

NCP
NCP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP LP
ALP LP LP LP LP LP
NCP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP ALP ALP LP
LP NCP ALP
ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP
ALP LP ALP
Ll' LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP
LP LP ALP ALP NCP LP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP NCP
ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles Killen, Hon. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
K.e.M.G. MacKellar, Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., e.H.
McVeigh, Hon. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Han. William Lawrence Mounlford,John Graham Newman, Han. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Han. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Han. Andrew Sharp Parler, James Robert Robinson, Han. Ian Louis Rocher, Allen Charles Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scoll, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden, Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., Q.e. Spender, John Michael, Q.e. Street. Han. Anthony Austin TJlmbling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.e.
Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Han. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George West, Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.e.
Willis,Ralph Wilson, Han. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker,S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle, N.s.W. Bowman,Qld Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S. W. Canberra, A.e.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Watringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S. W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S. W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld La Trobe, Vic. Ryan,Qld Shorlland, N.S.W. St George, N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid, N.S.w. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S. W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. Sturt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP' LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Counlry Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins (to 8 September), Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Scott (from 8 September), Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY -Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Oonald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATloNs-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERs-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges,Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKs-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman (from 25 August), Senator Kilgariffand Senator Martyr (from 25 August), and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston (from 9 September), Senator Georges, Senator Hamer (from 8 September), and Senator Robertson (to 9 September), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman (from 20 August), Mr Dean (t020 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen (from 23 September), Senator Elstob, Senator Hill (from 23 September), Senator Kilgariff (to 23 September), Senator McIntosh, Senator Martin (to 23 September), Senator Martyr (from 23 September), Senator Sibraa, Senator Teague (from 23 September), and Senator Young (to 23 September) and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOusE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Mi~ister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin (from 25 August), Senator Missen, Senator Sibra. and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE A: Parliament-Mr Speaker, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Hurford, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Barry Jones, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister assisting the Prime Minister), Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Holding, Mr Hurford, Mrs Kelly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Foreign Affairs-Mr Street (Minister for Foreign Affairs), Mr Beazley, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Fry, Mr Jacobi, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Defence-Mr Killen (Minister for Defence), Mr Burr, Mr Campbell, Mr Connolly, Mr Kerin, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Morrison, Mr Peacock, Mr Scholes, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE B: Department of Social SecuritY-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport and Minister representing the Minister for Social Security), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Harris, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mildren, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.

Department of Health-Mr MacKellar (Minister for Health), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Cunningham, Mr Harris, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Veterans' Affairs-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology and Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mrs Darling, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Mr Macphee (Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs), Mr Adennann, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs), Mr Adermann, Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Milton, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE C: Department of the Capital Territory-Mr Hodgman (Minister for the Capital Territory), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Dr Cass, Mr Coleman, Mr Fry, Mr Harris, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lusher and Mr Scholes.
Department of Home Affairs and Environment-Mr Wilson (Minister for Home Affairs and Environment), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Howe, Mr Lusher, Mr Uren and MrWest.
Department of Science and Technology-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mrs Darling, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Mildren.
Department of Communications-Mr Sinclair (Minister for Communications), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Wallis.
Department of Administrative Services-Mr Newman (Minister for Administrative Services), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Humphreys, Mr Lusher, Mr Milton and Mr Scholes.
Attorney-Genera!'s Department-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister representing the Attorney General), Mr Birney, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Coleman, Mr Dean, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Holding and Mr Lusher.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE D: Department of the Treasury-Mr Howard (Treasurer). Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Mr Willis.
Department of Finance-Mr Howard (Treasurer and Minister representing the Minister for Finance), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Hurford, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Mr Shack and Mr Tambling.
Department of Transport-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Jull, Mr Morris, Mr Scott, Mr Shack, Mr Tamblingand Mr Wallis.
Department of Primary Industry-Mr Nixon (Minister for Primary Industry), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Kerin, Mr Mildren, Mr Tambling and Mr Wallis.
ESTIMA TES COMMITTEE E: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs-Mr N. A. Brown (Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Mildren and Mr Peacock.
Department of Industrial Relations-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations), Mr Burr, Mr Charles, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Dr Theophanous.
Department of Education-Mr Fife (Minister for Education), Mr Beazley, Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Dawkins, Mr Fisher, Mr Free, Mr Barry Jones, Mr McLean and Mr Peacock.
Department of Housing and Construction-Mr McVeigh (Minister for Housing and Construction), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Howe, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Mr Uren.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE F: Department oflndustry and Commerce-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs acting for the Minister for Industry and Commerce), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hicks, Mrs Kelly, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Trade and Resources-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of National Development and Energy-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources representing the Minister for National Development and Energy), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Howe, Mr Keating, Mr Milton, Mr O'Keefe, Mr Porter and Mr Uren.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. O. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (TableJ-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (ProceduraIJ-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk Assistant-A. R. Browning Clerk Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-I. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-I. C. Cochran Procedure Office-J. K. Porter
Table Office (ProgrammingJ-B. C. Wright (Acting) Table Office (Bills and PapersJ-J. W. Pender (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaJJ(HouseofRepresimtativesJ-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaJJ(SenateJ-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. de S. C. MacLean (Acting)
JOINT HOUSE
Secrelary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 123 of 1981)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Apple and Pear Export Charge Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 147 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Export Ch~rge Act 1976.
Apple and Pear Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1460f 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Levy Act 1976.
Appropriation Act (No.1) 1981-82 (Act No. 1640f 1981)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 165 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year endingon 30June 1981.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 145 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 124 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 126 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 125 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 130 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (lnsurance Bus;ness) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Life Insurance Business) Act 1981 (Act No. 128 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of certain life insurance business having a connection with the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981 (Act No. 129 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of the registration of certain vehicles in the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian CapitalTerritory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 127 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 150 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 50 of the Austrillian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1977.
Australian National University Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1660f 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Natiollal University Act 1946.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 168 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 177 of 1981)An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905, and for related purposes.
Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 151 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act 1905 in relation to the exportation of food.
Commonwealth Grants Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 173 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973.
Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 153 of 1981)- An Act to amend laws relating to companies and securities and for related purposes.
Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 182 of 1981)An Act to amend the Continental Shelf(Living Natural Resources) Act 1968 to facilitate the collection of levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and of amounts payable under certain agreements, and for certain other purposes.
Crimes (Currency) Aat 1981 (Act No. 1220f 1981)An Act to make provision with respect to offences connected with the counterfeiting of money or certain kinds of securities and other activities injurious to Australian currency, and for related purposes.
Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 152 of 1981)- An Act ~to amend the Cllstoms Act 1901 in relation to the exportation of food.
Customs (Valuations) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 157 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.
Defence Acts Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 178 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relat,ing to defence.

Derence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 144 or 1981)- An Act relating to retirement and death benefits in respect or members or the Derence Force.
Departure Tax Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 131 or 1981)An Act to amend the Departure Tax Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Departure Tax Collection Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 132 or 1981) An Act to amend the Departure Tax Collection Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981 (Act No. 148 or 1981)An Act to provide ror confidentiality in relation to certain epidemiological studies.
Export Grants Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 119 or 1981)- An Act relating to export grants.
Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1800r 1981)- An Act relating to payments under certain fisheries agreements.
Fisheries Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 181 00981)An Act to amend the Fisheries Act 1952 to racilitate the collection or levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and or amounts payable under certain agreements, and ror certain other purposes.
Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 (Act No. 179 or 1981)An Act to impose a levy on the grant or certain licences in respect or roreign fishing boats.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1750r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1981 (Act No. 156 or 1981)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes or companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation runds.
Income Tax (Indi dduals) Act 1981 (Act No. 15500981)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes or companies, or corporate unit trusts and or superannuation runds.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 143 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Internationa! Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act(No. 3) 1981 (Act No. 1540r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Judges' Pensions Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 158 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Judges' Pensions Act 1968.
Meat Export (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 149 or 1981)An Act to provide penalties ror certain offences against the Exports (Meat) Regulations.
National Health Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 163 or 1981)- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953.
Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 174 or 1981)- An Act to amend section 3 or the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966.
Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 161 or 1981)An Act to amend the Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1977, and ror related purposes.
Norrolk Island Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12000981)- An Act to amend the Norfolk Island Act 1979.
Queensland Grant (Special Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 172 or 1981)- An Act to grant financial assistance to Queensland.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 198i (Act No. 121 00981)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16000981)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.1) 1981 (Act No. 1330r 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 13400981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1981 (Act No. 13500981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1981 (Act No. 13600981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1981 (Act No. 137 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1981 (Act No. 138 or 1981)-
An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.

Sales Tax Amendme~t Act (No.7) 1981 (Act No. 1390f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1981 (Act No. 1400f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1981 (Act No. 141 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1420f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Services Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 159 of 1981)An Act to amend the Social Services Act 1947, and for related purposes.
Social Services Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 170 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 105A of the Social Services Act 1947.
States Grants (Capital Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 171 ofl981)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure of a capital nature and to authorize the borrowing of certain moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 1620f 1981)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act(No. 2) 1981 (Act No. 167 of 1981')- An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1760f 1981)An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 169 of 1981)An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Crimes Amendment Bill 1981__ )nitiated in the Senate. First Reading.
-Domicile Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Domicile (Consequential Amendments) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Dried Sultana Production Underwriting Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Read...g.
Freedom of Information Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. IA-9A) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.

Petitions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 381

Wednesday, 19 August 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2.15 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Diabetics: Insulin
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That in view of the recent standardisation of insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect of increasing the cost of both items to the Diabetic in general, and as every insulindependent Diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily according to medication.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that syringes be made available on the N.H.S. and that insulin prescriptions revert to 10 bottles as previously supplied.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles, Mrs Child, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hawke, Mr Holding, Mr Innes, Dr Jenkins, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Kent, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Dr Theophanous and Mr Willis.
Petitions received.
Trans Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans Australia Airlines would inevitably result in:
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) highe~ domestic airfares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child, Mr Dawkins, Mr Free, Mr Milton, Mr Morris and Mr Wallis.
Petitions received.
Health Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits

for the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test for free public hospital care;
That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programmes will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce a system of health care based on ability to pay, and access to health care based on medical need.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley, Mr Free, Mr Howe, Mr Les Johnson and Mr Charles Jones.
Petitions received.
Family Allowances
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament Assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. Because of an anomaly in tax rates a single income family pays nearly $10 a week more tax than a dual income family earning the same total amount.
2. Family allowances established in 1976 have not been increased since then, yet over the same period living costs have increased by nearly 60 per cen t.
Your petitioners most humbly pray thal:
The Parliament should act-
I. To restore the lost value of family allowances and to index them for future price rises.
2. To increase the spouse rebate from $830 to $1,342 per year.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Cross, Mr Falconer and Mr Jult.
Petitions received.
Health Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully requests that the Federal Government ensures that:
(a) It honours its 1975 election promise to maintain Medibank-a free, universal health insurance scheme, and institute methods of improving hospital and health services for the Australian people.
(b) The Community Health Program remains a Federal Government responsibility, with increased funding and expansion of services.
(c) It abandons means-testing and the re-introduction of charges at public hospitals which will severely disadvantage low and middle income groups.
(d) Every effort be made by the Federal Government to meet the health care needs and demands of the Australian community.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled will give earnest consideration to this most vital matter.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

382 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Petitions

by Mrs Child, Mr Howe, Mr Innes, Mr Barry Jones and Mr Milton.
Petitions received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth:
That your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is not fulfilling its responsibility in ensuring an adequate standard of living for all Australians, which is causing untold hardship on relief agencies' limited resources, and require the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
I. That the Commonwealth Government raise the level of all pensions and benefits at least to the poverty line.
2. That the Commonwealth Government reconsider its recent decisions in relation to the health system and cuts to Commonwealth activity.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert further poverty and sufferinl\ in our community by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr N. A. Brown, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Innes and Mr Milton.
Petitions received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament Assembled. This Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. the proposal to introduce fees for higher and second degrees will mean that access to post-graduate and recurrent education will be limited to the rich; Australian research and ability to cope with technological change will suffer; this proposal must be seen as a step in the direction of the introduction of fees for all tertiary students.
2. the proposed introduction of a loans scheme for students will mean graduating with a heavy debt or being denied a tertiary education if loans are refused because a student is seen as a 'poor risk' (particularly affecting women and those doing non-vocational courses); only the rich will be able to get a tertiary education without course restrictions and the burden of indebtedness.
3. in regard to the proposal to restrict eligibility for TEAS and the foreshadowing of reviewing TEAS levels only in the light of the availability of loans, it should be noted that any further downgrading of TEAS, which is already inadequate can only further limit access to education.
4. the proposed restriction of Adult Secondary Assistance to those needing qualifications for employment will severely restrict access to a full high school education and necessary bridging education to tertiary education for those who left school early.
5. the proposal not to fund 30 Colleges of Advanced Education if they are not rationalised is an attack on teacher education.
This attack will create teacher shortages in the mid 1980s, restrict access to education now and endanger the future quality of teaching available to Australian children.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
(i) post-secondary tuition fees not be introduced for any courses or for any category of students;

(ii) that the TEAS scheme be extended so as to more fully

meet the real financial needs of students.

(iii) that a comprehensive loans scheme not be introduced.

(iv) that there be no restriction of Adult Secondary

Assistance.

<

(v) that the proposal not to fund 30 CAEs unless they are

rationalized be rescinded.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mrs Child, Mr Dawkins, Mr Innes and Mr Milton.

Petitions received.

Family Allowances

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the
undersigned respectfully showeth:

No increases have been made to Family Allowances since 1976 and since then consumer prices have increased generally
by over 50%.

The current taxation system penalises single-income famil-

ies who must pay more tax than other families earning the

same total income.

.

Your Petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should:

Ensure that the Government takes immediate action to restore the lost value of Family Allowances and to index
them to cover future price rises.

Help single-income families. by introducing optional income-splitting for taxation purposes.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Connolly, Dr Edwards and Mr Fry.

Petitions received.

Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology and environment of the Island.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the Register of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975 take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has given approval to the sandmining of Moreton Island despite the advice of conservationists and despite the opposition of the majority of electors in the Moreton Region.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will request the Government to refuse export permits covering mineral sands mined on Moreton Island.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Donald Cameron and Mr Cross.
Petitions received.

Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

Petitions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 383

A substantial contribution to Australia's economy by the payment of taxation and to the quality of .life of fellow Australians, is made by parents in the work-force who have preschool children.
Taxation relief for adequate child-care is necessary to enable these parents to avail themselves of child-care facilities in order to take paid employment.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other taxpayers can deduct business expenses from their assessable income.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of Parliament assembled in the House of Representatives and the Senate. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other taxpayers can deduct business expenses from their assessable income.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Milton.
Petition received,
Belconnen Mall, Australian Capital Territory
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the small businessmen of the Belconnen Mall, who by their hard work have built up excellent retail services, should be encouraged and assisted to own their own premises in the Belconnen Mall.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fry and Mrs Kelly.
Petitions received.
J:lealth Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the decrease in Federal Government funding for health, transfer of Commonwealth responsibility to the States, application of the 'user' pay principle to health services and encouragement of private business and profits in the health sphere will inevitably lead to a downgrading of health services and increasing health risks among people who cannot afford health insurance or private payment of doctors and hospitals.
That the cuts in Federal Government spending resulting from the recommendations of the Cabinet Sub-Committee of Review of Government Functions (Razor Gang) will lead to an increase in unemployment and a general deterioration in community services and living standards.
Therefore your petitioners urge that:
(I) The Government continue Commonwealth funding of health services at an improved, and certainly not-a lesser, level than that operating prior to September I, 1981.

(2) That recommendations of the Cabinet Sub-Committee of Review of Government Functions (Razor Gang) be not proceeded with.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon and Mr Uren.
Petitions received.
Proposed Sinai Peacekeeping Force
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. bipartisan concern exists in the Australian community over involvement of Australian military forces in the Middle East where those forces are not under United Nations auspices;
2. concern is also evident about Australia's military capacity to provide those forces without weakening Australia's defence;
3. Sinai is not an area within Australia's sphere of influence; and,
4. Australian agricultural export markets may be adversely affected by Australian military participation in Sinai.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Parliament does not ratify Australian military participation in the proposed Sinai peace~eeping force, unless that force is fully controlled by the United Nations.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley.
Petition received.
Funding of Women's Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should take action as it deems appropriate to ensure the continuing effectiveness of the Womens Services, i.e., Womens Refuges, Womens Health Centres and Womens Rape Crisis Centre. In particular that:
I. National funding under Special Purposes Grant (Section 96 of Constitution) for a new category called Womens Services to be administered federally under one department.
2. That as an interim measure, current funding of administrative arrangements remain in force.
3. Such Special Purposes Grant funding to be on a guaranteed triennial basis which must take into account inflation and indexation rises.
4. Definite Government policy commitment to a substantial injection of funds to consolidate existing services and develop new ones. That such funds be distributed in such a way as to insure equitable national distribution of these resources.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley.
Petition received.
Toxic Shock Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned by the threats to women's health and lives posed by Toxic Shock Syndrome, and urge the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:

384 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Petitions

(I) Tampons, sanitary napkins, vaginal deodorants and similar sanitary products to be re-c1assified under Therapeutic Agents (not under "Cosmetics" as at present), in order to bring them under the scrutiny of the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee. We believe manufacture must be under the strictest hygienic conditions.
(2) After re-classification, we urge an immediate government-funded inquiry into all aspects of manufacture and content of these products. This must lead to: (i) contents of product and instructions for correct usage to be shown on packaging; (ii) removal of synthetic fibres, chemicals or ingredients that are potentially or actually harmful to users.
(3) Allocation of extra funding for ongoing research by the National Health and Medical Research Council into these products, results of this research to be made public to ensure all health workers and potential users are fully informed. This campaign of public education would necessitate multilingual distribution of the information where appropriate.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert possible threats posed to women's health by implementation of the above measures. And your petitioners as in duty bound will epray, etc.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Ex-Servicemens' & Womens' Pension Association is a body formed for the express purpose of obtaining a Service Pension for all Ex-Service Personnel at Sixty years of age for Men and Fifty-five years of age for Women regardless of where they served during the 1939-45 war.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should give urgent consideration to a favourable decision to the granting of the Service Pension to all Ex-Service Personnel who served their Country in time of need and who did not serve overseas through no fault of their own. The Service Pension is presently only granted to Returned Ex-Service Personnel.
And your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
South-west Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at proposed future hydro electric developments in south-west Tasmania. This area is on the Register of the National Estate and therefore is of national concern. We call on the Federal Government not to allocate funds or allow funds to be raised for development of roads or dams in the south-west but rather to provide such funds as would enable the preservation of this area. It is a national issue and therefore Tasmanians should not be made to bear any financial burden resultant from its preservation.
Your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Connolly.
Petition received.

Postal Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade postal and mail services throughout Australia will place in jeopardy the existing services and the security of the mails by:
Downgrading a large number of official post offices Reducing the number of post offices open for business during the lunch period Reducing the number of street posting boxes Delaying telegrams by reducing 'the number of delivery offices Downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified staff Using private contractors for mail cartage.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will downgrade the postal and mail services of the citizens of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham.
Petition received.

Tertiary Education

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The petition of
undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That public investment in tertiary education in the form of Federal Government funding is an investment in Australia's future and enables Australia to meet the demands of techno-
logical innovations;

That grave concern has been generated as a result of the Government's decisions to:

(a) abolish the Education Research and Development

Committee,

(b) terminate special support for educational research,

(c) scale down in-house and contracted research activities

of the Department of Education,

- (d) scale down participation in international education

activities, particularly UNESCO and OECD,

(e) further tighten already restrictive eligibility guidelines

for TEAS,

(f) supplement TEAS assistance by means of a loan

scheme,

- (g) phase in tuition fees for students undertaking degrees

and diplomas subsequent to an initial tertiary

qualification,

(h) reduce grants to universities and colleges to take

account of fee income,

(i) completely abolish 30 colleges of advanced education

and

.

(j) scale down various engineering schools in colleges of

advanced education around Australia.

- Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will rescind these regressive decisions and desist from
obvious attempts to pave the way for a complete reintroduction of tertiary fees.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mrs Darling.

,Petition received.

Petitions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 385

Funding of Community Kindergartens
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth:
That community kindergartens perform indispensable services in the preparation of children For education;
That, without sufficient Federal and State ,government Funding, community kindergartens will be placed beyond the economic reach of many Families, to the disadvantage of their children;
That the Commonwealth Government's contribution to the Funding of community kinderga'rtens has decreased greatly in recent years, causing concern among parents and those concerned with children's education.
Your petitioners thereFore humbly pray:
That the Commonwealth Government's support For Funding of community kindergartens be restored to 1976 Funding levels, i.e., 75% of total approved wages For kindergarten staff.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

Aboriginal Land Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth:

That the projected repeal by the Queensland State Government of the Aborigines Act 1971-1979 and the Torres Strait Islander Act 1971-1979 will almost certainly lead to the
degazettal of all Aboriginal reserves in Queensland, as has already been the case with Aurukun and Mornington Island.

That iF, as is likely, the Aboriginal communities from these

reserves are placed under similar shire council legislation on

fiFty year leases, they will be exposed to serious encroachment

on their land by mining and tourist interests.

.

That it is also quite clear, on past evidence, that these interests will have the Full backing of the Queensland Government and the rights of Aboriginal people to land rights and
selF-management will not be granted by that Government.

That the Commonwealth Government has the power to
legislate and acquire land For Aboriginal people under its constitutional powers since the amendments to the Constitution
in 1967, but it is your petitioners' sincere belief that it Failed to act in 1978 and thus, Failed in its duty beFore the people of Aurukun and Mornington Island.

That the Aboriginal people of Queensland have stated that they want land rights and selF-management.

Your petitioners thereFore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government make use of its co,lstitutional and legislative powers to grant Full land rights and self-management to the Aboriginal people of Queensland.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Dawkins.

Petition received.

Funding of Women's Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members oFthe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble' petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth:

That many thousands of women and children in the Australian community who use the services of Womens ReFuges, Womens Health Centres and Womens Rape Crisis Centres:
(1) Express their concern at the decision of the Federal Government to pass to the States the responsibility of Funding those essential services because of the poor record already demonstrated by some States;
(2) Call on the Federal Government to reverse that decision;
(3) Request that the Government ensure one Department to administer all Funds For the above under the heading of Womens Services;
(4) Propose that Future Funding be on a guaranteed triennial basis taking into account inflation and indexation increases; and
(5) Ask for a positive policy commitment for a substantial injection of funds to consolidate existing services and to develop new initiatives For women and children in the Australian community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members oFthe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(1) The financial situation of students enrolled at Australian post-secondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditures) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their difficulties.
(2) The imposition of post-secondary tuition Fees of comparable levels to those imposed prior to 1974 would force currently enrolled students to discontinue their studies and deter many persons willing and able at present to undertake postsecondary study From doing so.
(3) Those students and potential students From social groups currently under-represented and disadvantaged in the post-secondary education system would be most severely affected by the reintroduction of post-secondary tuition Fees.
Your petitioners thereFore pray that:
(1) Post-secondary tuition fees not be reintroduced for any category of students.
(2) The Minister for Education immediately clarify the Government's attitude to the reintroduction of postsecondary tuition fees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
Privacy and Personal Information
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Paragraphs 107 and 108 of the Privacy and Personal In Formation discussion paper number 14, brought down by the Law ReForm Commission in June 1980, undermine the Family unit and the authority of parents, which is the Christian basis of our society, by proposing that 'between 12 and 16 years, a child should be entitled to object to disclosure of information toa parent.'
It is your petitioners sincere belief that:

386 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Petitions

(a) an adolescent between the ages of 12 and 16 is not at a mature enough stage of life to decide whether or not the disclosure of information to a parent will be in the best interests of the adolescent.
(b) as a record keeper has no responsibility for the child, and as his moral standards may be different to those of a parent, he should not be permitted to come between child and parent.
(c) a parent has a unique position which may enable him/her to perceive a situation that the record keeper does not. The parent must therefore be aware of the problem if remedial action is to be taken, and has the right to guide the child in the direction he/she feels fit.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Members of the House of Representatives will reject the recommendation of the Law Reform Commission and find some other means to protect children from the excessive abuse of some parents.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrDobie.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(I) That merchant seamen have in the past served in theatres of war; they have been decorated for valour following war action; they have been prisoners of war and should therefore be entitled to similar pension rights as regular servicemen.
(2) That by being denied these entitlements, which other war veterans receive, they are thereby being discriminated against.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act (1920) Section 100 (d) (iv) to take account of war-related service by merchant seamen during World War 2.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Everingham.
Petition received.
International Relations
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the Ho~se of Representatives in Parliament assembled. It is the petition of the undersigned electors of Australia that:
Australia increase diplomatic contacts with countries with whom we have differences, not reduce negotiations.
Australia's leaders declare in advance that they will strenuously work for, and be bound by decisions of, a respected mediator agreed on by both sides in any dispute with another nation.
At least as much time, thought, and money be available to find such mediators as Australia now spends to plan military defence and forge military alliances, and to appoint conciliators and arbitrators whenever our international negotiations falter or break down.
Experts of departments, faculties and institutes for pea,ce studies have equal facilities and status with military experts in international negotiations of our country, especially for disarmanent talks or military pacts, and such studies have more government support.
The United Nations organisation develop into a body or bodies more democratically chosen by more enlightened

peoples of all nations, with powers given to it by member nations to improve international law between consenting members, to provide adequate extension of the personnel, functions and facilities of the International Court of Justice to satisfy those countries which agree to abide by such courts' decisions on matters in dispute between those countries, with the powers and right to arr~st, try, sentence and enforce penalties upon individuals in those'countries who breach such laws, and the right to raise revenues from licensing and controlling of international activities of types agreed between the nations concerned.
The mass media of communication of our country exchange comparable amounts of coverage of news and views with comparable media in countries.antagonistic to Australia, and try to put in depth all viewpoints before acceding towartime style censorship, distortion or exhortation.
And your petitioners pray that you will act upon our plea and make public your response.
by Dr Everingham. Petition recei~ed.
Excise on Wine
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. The wine industry is accepted throughout the nation as occupying an important place in tl)e social and economic activities of Australia.
2. The wine industry of Australia has a need to sustain an appropriate level of production and sales to ensure profitability and to sustain and improve the level of employment with the wine producing industry.
3. The wine industry of Australia has a need to sustain an appropriate level of production and sales to sustain and improve the economic viability of persons, partnerships or companies engaged in the occupation of wine grape production and the leyel of employment and standard of living of persons employed in the grape growing industry.
4. An excise tax of 50 cents per gallon applied to wine in 1970 severely retarded sales of wine and converted a 10.7 per cent increase in sales in the previous year to a 0.3 per cent decrease.
5. Any tax applied to wine would seriously retard the industry at a time when the economic viability of all sections of the industry is essential if the necessary reconstruction of vineyards and expansion of plantings of premium quality grape varieties is to continue and further enhance the quality image for which Australia is becoming increasingly recognised.
6. The grape growing and, brandy producing sections of the wine industry are presently suffering the effects of substantial increases in excise on brandy which effectively reduced sales of that commodity by more than 1,600,000 litres (approximately 180,000 dozen bottles) or 20 per cent.
7. It has been assessed by both the Australian wine industry and representatives of the Bureau of Agricyltural Economics that the application of a 15 per cent sales tax on wine would retard sales of wine by 20 per cent, or the equivalent of approximately 50 million Iitres of wine annually which in turn represents approximately 80,000 tonnes of grapes of a market value of approximately $13, I00,000.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives:
1. Recognise the importance and the place the Australian wine industry has in the social and economic life of the

Petitions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 387

communities which constitute the wine producing industry in Australia and in the economic life of those persons employed in goods and service industries associated with the wine industry. 2. Recognise the importance of the wine industry as an attraction for tourists and the ec.onomic advantages gained from this source of income at district, State and Commonwealth level. 3. Accept that the economic viability of the wine and grape growing industries is essential to the maintenance of employment opportunities in the period of reconstruction so necessary to the further development of the industry.
And further, that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives resist and reject any move to apply a sales tax or an excise on wine.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrGiles.
Petition received.
Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(a) Present income tax laws are unfair to single income families.
(b) All marriages should be recognised as partnerships by allowing partners to divide their joint income for tax purposes.
(c) The family, which is the natural and fundamental group unit of society, should be an economic unit in tax laws.
(d) Children are Australia's future and their individual care by a parent at home should not be discouraged by extra tax.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament will:
Reform income tax laws to allow the joint income of husband and wife to be equally divided between them for taxation purposes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Holding.
Petition received.
Georges River Pollution
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That the pollution problems caused by the proliferation qf the Brazilian weed Salvinia molesta in the Georges River, New South Wales:
(a) Poses a serious health risk to the community. (b) Has caused severe damage to the environment. (c) Poses a potential additional threat to the famous
Georges River oyster industry already affected by oil spills in Botany Bay.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Commonwealth will provide immediate financial assistance to the State and local government authorities combating the problem and ensure that all Commonwealth instrumentalities along the Georges River are not contributing to the pollution problem.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.

Petition received.
Plant Variety Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth, do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
I. Note that legislation establishing plant breeders' rights in other countries has had serious adverse effects, namely:
(a) Virtual monopoly control of seed production has passed into the hands of a few large international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation.
(b) The varieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and will not grow without the aid of artificial fertilisers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers.
(c) The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, rendering them vulnerable to disease and other environmental threats.
2. Recognise that maintenance of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to prevent exclusive control over plant genetic materials from falling into private hands.
3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gardeners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden produce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment of plant breeders' rights in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition received.
Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth: That we oppose any expansion of the facilities of Kingsford-Smith Airport which entails the building of a new runway as it would have the following detrimental effects.
(I) The loss of one mile of waterfront including Lady Robinson's Beach and a huge part of Botany Bay.
(2) The loss of up to 1,230 houses and a drop in value of remaining neighbouring properties.
(3) The creation of more noise pollution in the area.
(4) The creation of more traffic congestion on streets leading to and from the airport.
(5) The forced diversion of Cook's River and further damage to the ecology of the area.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government will not consider satisfying the airport needs of Sydney by extending Kingsford-Smith Airport and that any decisions related thereto are not taken before there is an opportunity for adequate consultation with any community particularlyaffected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition received.

388 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Petitions

Anti-Discrimination Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament in Canberra assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That since 1788 discrimination has existed in Australia on particular grounds including, inter alia, grounds of sex, race, ethnic origin, marital status, pregnancy and/or sexual preference;
That since 1788 such discrimination has been accepted and promoted by Australian laws and practices, particularly in the provision of work, in appointment to jobs, in promotion to positions of authority and lucrative incomes, in the provision of goods and services, in the provision of accommodation and generally in relation to political, economic and social institutions of power.
Your petitiQ;;ers therefore humbly pray:
That adequate and appropriate laws be immediately formulated and passed through the Parliament to render unlawful discrimination in all areas over which the Commonwealth holds power, namely, in employment of all persons in the Commonwealth Public Service and employed in Commonwealth Statutory Authorities and other bodies, in the provision of Commonwealth accommodation and goods and services and also in all areas over which legislation for the Australian Capital Territory would be valid.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Kelly.
Petition received.
Human Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
We, the undersigned, being concerned citizens of Australia and of the world noting widespread violations of fundamental human rights in The Republic of Korea urge the Australian Government to exert its influence on the Government of the Republic of Korea to secure:
the immediate and unconditional release of all Prisoners of Conscience
a fair and open trial for all political prisoners commutation of all existing death sentences on humanitarian grounds.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrKerin.
Petition received.
Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. The CLU B industry in Australia is long-established and a valuable part of the community of this nation, providing places where the people may partake of three basic needs of life: a place to eat, a place to drink, a place to sleep.
2. The CLUB industry is accepted thoughout the nation as occupying an important place in the social and economic activities of Australia.
3. The CLUB industry is entirely within the private sector and makes a contribution to the government in taxes of various kinds.

4. The CLUB industry has a need to sustain an appropriate level of turnover and growth, to make profit, and to sustain and improve the level of employment.
5. The CLUB industry of Australia is gravely concerned at published reports that the Government intends to increase excise charges on beer in the forthcoming Budget.
6. Sales of beer constitute the major source of income of most of the industry.
7. The very steep rises in beer excise in 1975 and 1978 severely retarded the growth of the Australian CLUB industry.
8. Any further increases in excise on beer in the 1981 Budget would further retard the industry at a time when growth is essential to maintaining economic viability and the ability to serve the constantly growing needs of the community.
9. Such is its significance as a community requirement, beer occupies a place on the Consumer Price Index, and any alteration to its cost to the community would have an inflationary effect.
10. Any increase in excise would result in and force the CLUB industry to pass on such increases to the consumer by way of higher prices for beer.
II. Higher excise would be only the starting point for an upward spiral in beer prices because of the presence of other factors, such as State Licence Fee taxes, which are directly linked to excise rates.
12. The CLUB industry of Australia already is gravely
a handicapped by heavy excise and other tax imposts, its growth
is at standstill; and, inevitably must decline if beer excise is increased.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives:
(I) Recognise the importance and place of the Australian CLUB industry in the social and economic life of the nation.
(2) Accept that the viability of the CLUB industry is essential to the maintenance of employment opportunities and stability of the industry is essential to enable it to continue to provide for the CLUB needs of the nation in this period of growing population and increasing tourism.
And further, that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives resist and reject any move to increase excise on beer.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrKerin.
Petition received.
Social Security Benefits
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled: The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the allowable amount of income to be earned by people receiving social security benefits has not been adjusted since 1972 and in the case of unemployed not since 1969.
That the $20 allowable for beneficiaries in 1972 was at a time when the benefit was $18.25 per week.
That if the same principle applied and if the amount earned had been indexed the amount now allowable would exceed $63.20 per week.
That Family Allowances have never been indexed.

Petitions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 389

That heartless, insensitive, frugal and anomalous social security benefits, allowances and rules are causing severe financial distress to many citizens and causing the breakup of families.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government will bring all allowances and benefits up to levels which would make them equivalent in real monetary terms to the time when they were set.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrKerin.
Petition received.
Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
'1. The hotel industry in Australia is long-established and a valuable part of the community of this nation, providing places where the people may partake of the three basic needs of life; a place to eat, a place to drink, a place to sleep.
2. The hotel industry is accepted throughout the nation as occupying an important place in the social and economic activities of Australia.
3. The hotel industry is almost entirely within the private sector and makes a large contribution to the government in taxes of various kinds.
4. The hotel industry has a need to sustain an appropriate level of turnover and growth, to make profit, and to sustain and improve the level of employment.
5. The hotel industry of Australia is gravely concerned at published reports that the Government intends to increase excise charges on beer in the forthcoming Budget.
6. Sales of beer constitute the major source of income of most of the industry's 5811 hotels in Australia.
7. The very steep rises in beer excise in 1975 and 1978 severely retarded the growth of the Australian hotel industry.
8. Any further increases in excise on beer in the 1981 Budget would further retard the industry at a time when growth is essential to maintaining economic viability and the ability to serve the constantly growing needs of the community.
9. Such is its significance as a community requirement, beer occupies a place on the Consumer Price Index, and any alteration to its cost to the community would have an inflationary effect.
10. Any increase in excise would result in and force the hotel industry to pass on such increases to the consumer by way of higher prices for beer.
11. Higher excise would be only the starting point for an upward spiral in beer prices because of the presence of other factors, such as State Licence Fee taxes, which are directly linked to excise rates.
12. The hotel industry of Australia already is gravely handicapped by heavy excise and other tax imposts, its growth is at a standstill; and, inevitably must decline if beer excise is increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives:
(I) Recognise the importance and place of the Australian hotel industry in the social and economic life of the nation.
(2) Accept that the viability of the hotel industry is essential to the maintenance of employment opportunities

and stability of the industry is essential to enable it to continue to provide for the hotel needs of the nation in this period of growing population and increasing tourism.
And further, that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives resist and reject any move to increase excise on beer.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrLloyd.
Petition received.
Proxy Voting: Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
Their objections to pensions generally as pertaining to senior citizens:
(I) The election voting procedure be made easier, such as proxy voting.
(2) The Means Test method be changed and only to apply when the pension reaches $150.00 per week.
(3) The base pension be 30 per cent of average weekly earnings.
(4) No discrimination on marriage status. (5) All pensions to be tax free, not added to superannu-
ations and then taxed.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MI' Leo McLeay.
Petition received.
Metric System
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth objection to the Metric system and request the Government to restore the Imperial system.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Millar.
Petition received.
Broadcasting and Television Act
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That because television and radio:
(a) affect our social and moral environment, (b) are family media watched and heard by many children
at all times, and (c) present too much explicit violence and sex,
They therefore need stronger control than other media and the existing standards need stricter enforcement in both national A.B.C., and commercial sectors.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Australian Government will amend the Broadcasting and Television Act, in relation to both national and commercial broadcasters, to legislate:
(a) for adequate and comprehensive programs in the best interests of the general public,
(b) for a "Dual System of Regulation" enforced by the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal by internal regulation and external control,

390 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Petitions

(c) for an independent consumer body to represent the best interests of the general public, and
(d) for immediate and effective penalties to be imposed for breaches of program and advertising standards.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.
Fuel Parity Pricing Policy
To the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled; the undersigned citizens of Australia showeth:
That the costs of diesel fuel and explosives have made opal mining an extremely expensive enterprise. Because of these exorbitant prices prospecting and mining are in decline.
We the people of Coober Pedy request the Government to urgently review its fuel parity policy and reduce fuel prices.
That, in addition, the Government should institute an impact study of its parity pricing policy in reference to the opal mining industry.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Wallis.
Petition received.
Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned members of parents and citizens associations respectfully showeth:
That retention of the Schools Commission and the Curriculum Development Centre in their present forms is essential for the balanced and progressive allocation of educational resources and facilities in the Australian community.
That serious concern has been generated by the decision within the School Commission guidelines, to cut funds to the general recurrent and capital programs by reallocation to transition, the decision not to implement the school improvement program; and the divisiveness created between government and non-government schools due to increases of $43.25m to non-government schools while government schools funds have not increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Government will reverse these decisions-will retain the Schools Commission and Curriculum Development Centre in their original forms; retain the Schools Commission proposals including recurrent and capital funding proposals; basket of services and the schools improvement program.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Braithwaite, Mr Donald Cameron and Dr Everingham.
Petitions received.
Staging of American B52 Bombers
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned in South Australia respectfully showeth:
That the proposed use of Darwin airport as a refuelling and rest and recreation base for American B52 bombers:
Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the USA and another power.

Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of whether B52's:
(a) carried nuclear weapons (b) were engaged in bombing missions against another
State. Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign policies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy. Violates democratic procedures in committing the Australian nation to participation in future wars without due consultation and informed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the militarisation of the Indian Ocean, thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region. Jeopardises the welfare of the Citizens of Darwin, in that noise pollution and the threat of accidental radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents. Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of peace in the Pacific region and violates Australia's committment to the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty.
Your Petitioners therefore pray that the Members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location in Australia, as a base or depot for American B52 bombers. And that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.
Staging of American B52 Bombers
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned in Western Australia respectfully showeth:
That the proposed use of Darwin airport as a refuelling and rest and recreation base for American B52 bombers:
Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the USA and another power.
Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of whether B52's:
(a) carried nuclear weapons (b) were engaged in bombing missions against another
State. Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign policies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy. Violates democratic procedures in committing the Australian nation to participation in future wars without due consultation and informed assessment by Australian citi~ zens and further increases the militarisation of the Indian Ocean, thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region. Jeopardises the welfare of the Citizens of Darwin, in that noise pollution and the threat of accidental radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents. Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of peace in the Pacific region and violates Australia's commitment to the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty.
Your Petitionerstherefore pray that the Members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location in

Petitions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 391

Australia, as a base or depot for American B52 bombers. And that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.
Termination of Lease: Australian Capital Territory
To the Honourable the Speaker and the members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the electors of Fraser respectfully showeth that: L. J. Hooker has terminated the lease of George Karkazis of Blamey Place, Campbell, no reason has been advanced for that termination, this is an unreasonable action, and that George Karkazis has provided good service to the residents of Campbell, George Karkazis has a right to know why the lease is not to be renewed, the community will be damaged by the closure of this family business.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray'that:
[n the interests of the Campbell community, and out of respect for George Karkazis and the quality of service that he has rendered to the' Campbell community, that L. J. Hooker be urged to renew George Karkazis's lease.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fry.
Petition received.
Bute Post Office
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives, in this present Pariament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned residents of the District Council of Bute district respectfully showeth:
That we strongly object to the proposed change in status of the Bute Post Office from an Official Office to a non-official office.
[n our opinion, for the well-being of the district, the office should retain its present classification.
We therefore respectfully petition that the Bute Post Office remain an Official Post Office.
Your petitioners therefore pray that your honourable House will respect the wishes of the residents of the district and retain the classification of the Bute Post Office as an Official Office.
And your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
byMrGiles.
Petition received.
Plant Variety Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. I, Dr Paul Robert Neuman, Leader and Lord of Knights of the Order of the White Cross International, a humanitarian knighthood for the defence and protection of life, jointly with officers and members of the Order and with citizens of the Commonwealth of Australia by this our humble petition respectfully showeth:
That I, jointly with and on behalf of the undersigned petitioners voice our concern and objection about the proposed legislation of the so-called Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981 and that [ claim, according to the nature and principles ofmy organisation, to have a mandate to defend the silent Millions of Life-forms which are unable to defend themselves and are not

represented other'l"ise to protect their fate and future and also the majority of pople, who are not or very little informed about the consequences of this Bill and whose freedom and well-being is at stake, should the Bill become Law in Australia.
Since time immemorial, life has dominated Earth Hnd has formed in the course of evolution a Web of Life, composed of animals and plants which are depending on each other and are adjusted to each other within their Eco-system. Man, as part of nature and being bound to the laws of nature, must suffer the consequences if this nature is brought out of balance. The new life-forms, this Bill will allow to enter Australia, are tailor-made creations of genetic-engineers, aliens and monsters to our eco-system, but fit to open an entirely new marketing opportunity for food and chemicals. Scientific achievement or not, the Gene-manipulators playa wicked Leggo-game for international finance and the chemical industry. I hold, that the natural species in Australia or elsewhere in the world have not even the slightest chance to compete with the invaders from man's laboratories, since the new creations are invested with the power of money, using man's abilities, man's Laws and man's chemicals to clear the way for genemanipulated commercial Mono-cultures, designed and controlled by those who hold the Patent Rights over these plants.
It requires no imagination to realize that all power for dominance over people is contained by those who control the food. Indeed, control over all beings bound to eal. Over farmers and horticulturists as to what to grow, how to grow and with which kind of chemical to treat. Il also means control over licenced breeders of the new varieties, who may be directed to refuse supply to certain growers as the patent owners feel fit. Beneficiary of the entire exercise is the chemical industry which is eagerly buying up already such patents, thus the toxic pollution level in the environment must rapidly rise as a result of such policy. [n the final analysis, [ am convinced, that people in fear of famine due to possible repercussions, will to a great extent surrender their freedom and dignity to the will of those, who are in control of food. Il has been voiced in various circles of Science and Philosophy that the potential of genetic engineering and cloning can be more devastating than the Nuclear-Bomb and [ believe, a unification of gene-manipulation, cloning, computer-technology and international finance together can form a power able to result in a sort of Domesday for the world as we know it. It may be the beginning of a "Brave New World" similar to that, described in Huxley's novel, but whether mankind can survive it's own creations or vanish together with nature, remains a question mark.
When the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives deal with this Bill, they may also consider the religious aspects of the matter. Australians, being so close to nature, have naturally a strong attachment to the Creator. It is not unlikely that spiritual divisions may be enhanced amongst people over this ethical atrocity, indeed, the scientific take-over of creation is in a sense a dethronement of God as a control over all beings. I am awaiting in anticipation the protest of the World-Leaders of Religion to come to the defence of the Divine Creation, since they do so very often on the subjects of procreation and abortion and I pray, the very same Leaders will not 'side with the powerful' as they usually do. After all the foundation of Judeo-Christian Faith is at stake.
I am sure, the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House do share the pride of all Australians over the unique beauty of this continent and the natural composition of it's diverse life forms. Surely no-one of sound mind would wish to see this marvel of the Pacific Region being harmed and finely transformed into gene-manipulated mono-cultures, and yet this very Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981 is the door-opener for such a future. We believe, the driving forces behind this Bill did get away with far too much already in Australia. I refer here to the chemical pollution and the concerted efforts of

392 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Petitions

that industry to increase the sale of toxic chemicals to the agricultural community. Many housewives nowadays fear the method of high pressure salesmen: "Foot in the door and no retreat." Australia is well advised to keep her doors tightly Closed to the salesmen of new life-forms.
We cannot undo the scientific 'success' of cloning and geneengineering, but the people of Australia can refuse to legalize their own dependence upon the mercy of Multi-National Corporations. Such corporations generally do not break the Law openly, but rather lobby for the introduction of new laws, tailored to fit their future intentions. The present Bill, we believe, is a typical example of this kind and will give full cover of the Law to any foreign body or person as outlined in Division 2 Section 12 of the Bill and Division I Section 10 states unmistakably that virtually every plant of commercial interest falls under the Bill.
The promotes of gene-engineering may praise Interferon as a Wonderdrug, capable of eliminating cancer. We hold that from the very same corner of the industry once DDT was praised to be the Wonderchemical, capable of eliminating the insect-pest, but yet the insects have not suffered real losses in the long run, while the environment of the planet is cursed with a dreadful chemical which causes constant harm to nature now and in times to come and we believe, since the increase of cancer incidents appear in correlation with the increase of chemicals, it may be wise to reduce these chemicals rather than adding more to it, including substances derived from gene-manipulated matter.
I conclude,jointly with the undersigned petitioners that:
(I) The Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981 bears destructive consequences for the environment of Australia.
(2) Due to protective chemicals, required for this kind of plants, the toxic level in the environment must increase.
(3) The independence of people and the free trade is endangered.
(4) The Peace of Faith is likely to be disrupted. (5) The beneficiaries of the Bill will primarily be Foreign
Corporation.
Should this Bill become law.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that:
The Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia reject the Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981 entirely and in all parts.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr MacKellar.
Petition received.
Television Services in Remote Areas
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain residents of Tarcoola (electors of the Division of Grey) respectfully showeth our request for the reception of television.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that a Remote Areas Television Earth Station be installed, at the Government's earliest convenience, to enable the citizens of Tarcoola and surrounding areas to receive television via the Intelsat Satellite.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Wallis.
Petition received.

WESTERN AUSTRALIA: AIR FARES
Notice of Motion
Mr CAMPBELL (Kalgoorlie)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That, because of the repudiation by the Minister for Transport of his undertaking to end the unfair bias against Western Australia in relation to domestic air fares, this House requires-
(i) the Minister to immediately reconvene the Holcroft Committee to enquire into the recent extortionate increase in air fares between Western Australia and the eastern States, and
(2) the Committee to rigorously apply the principles enunciated in its report to eliminate the high degree of cross subsidation which currently disadvantages travellers to and from Western Australia.
ABORIGINES
Notice of Motion
Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move-
That this House, noting the report of the World Council of Churches on the condition of Aboriginals in Australia-
(1) supports Amnesty International in commencing preliminary investigations into instances of serious legal discrimination against Aborigines in Australia, and
(2) condemns-
(a) the racist policies of the Governments of Western Australia and Queensland, and
(b) the failure of the Commonwealth Government to use its (i) constitutional powers to override racist State policies particularly on'land rights, and (ii) power to introduce effective anti-racial laws, proper health programs, better housing, improved education and employment opportunities for Aboriginal people.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
TAXATION
Mr HAYDEN-I ask a question of the Prime Minister. Has the Government decided on a -huge increase in sales tax of more than $800m-an increase in fact of 39 per cent? Has the Government also decided to increase personal income tax collections by 22 per cent, which is the equivalent of $11 a week extra per taxpayer? Does .the Prime Minister recall that the Government pledged in this House on 12 March that greater indirect taxation 'should be accompanied by "- noticeable reduction in personal income tax '? Would he regard this as evidence of another solemn undertaking to the electorate being broken by the Fraser Government?
Mr HOWARD-I am very conscious of what the Government said to the House on 12 March of this year when it explained in a statement the reasons why it was not going to move to a broadly

Questions Without Notice

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 393

based indirect tax. The decisions that were announced last night represent no more than a modest broadening of the taxation base in a very limited area. Any suggestion that one can liken what was announced last night to the type of change that was in contemplation earlier this year, which included amongst other things the introduction of a retail turnover tax and also, as an alternative, the introduction of a broadly-based indirect tax including not only the major expansion of the wholesale tax base but also the introduction of a tax on services, is without foundation. I think the true way to measure the increase in indirect taxes in this Budget is to compare the rate of increase in indirect tax in the prospective financial year 1981-82 with what occurred in 1980-81. If the Leader of the Opposition does that, he will find that the differences in increase between the two years are minor indeed.
FRENCH PACIFIC TERRITORIES
Mr FALCONER-My question is directed to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and relates to his attendance last week at the South Pacific Forum meeting in Vanuatu together with the attendance of the Deputy Prime Minister on behalf of Australia. Can the Foreign Minister explain to the House the nature of the course of action which the Forum decided on to assist in bringing about the independence in particular of French territories in the Pacific area? Can he give the House an indication of the nature of the support that Australia will be giving to such efforts, particularly bearing in mind the very positive statements which were made by the Deputy Prime Minister in Vila?
Mr STREET-I thank the honourable member for his question. As the House will know, the Australian Government's policy is that all people should be able, by free act of self determination, to decide for themselves the form of government they want. That policy applies to the French territories in the Pacific to which the honourable gentleman referred. The issue was raised at the recent meeting of the South Pacific Forum and discussed at length. Interestingly, after this discussion the Forum decided by consensus, without any opposition, that a delegation led by the Prime Minister of Fiji should go to France and convey to President Mitterrand the concern of the Forum members that progress should be made towards the independence of the French territories in the Pacific. I think this is a sound, common-sense approach to what is a very difficult and sensitive issue, because it has to be remembered-that in the case of New Caledonia, anyway, the Melanesian population is not in the

majority. Therefore, the handling of the independence issue has to be approached with great care. The timing of the visit of the delegation to President Mitterrand has been left at the discretion of its leader, the Prime Minister of Fiji. The Australian Government, through my colleague the Deputy Prime Minister, gave strong support to this initiative. I hope that it will lead to movement on the part of the new French Government towards what we all regard as a desirable objective-that is, independence for the French territories in the Pacific.
SINAI PEACEKEEPING FORCE
Mr COHEN-I direct my question to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. Is it a fact that the Camp David Accords have brought the first real peace between the two major military powers in the Middle East after a period of 30 years and four wars? To enable a step by step process involved in solving the problems of the Sinai, the West Bank, Gaza and the Palestinian people to proceed, did the Camp David Accords and the IsraeliEgyptian peace treaty propose a United Nations peacekeeping force without super-power involvement being stationed in the Sinai Peninsula to facilitate a final Israeli withdrawal from that region? Has that proposal the support of both the Australian Government and the Opposition? What barriers exist to the raising of a United Nations peacekeeping force? What action is this Government taking to remove those barriers?
Mr STREET-It is true that the Camp David Accords and the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty have had a significant effect in reducing tensions in the Middle East. I understand that those Accords and that peace treaty had the unanimous support of all honourable members of this House, as the honourable gentleman suggested. It is a fact that peace now exists between Egypt and Israel, the two major antagonists in past Middle East conflicts, not that that has resolved all Middle East problems. The failure to solve the Palestinian issue and the present difficulties in Lebanon illustrate that only too clearly. It is true that, in an annex to the peace treaty, reference was made to the composition of a United Nations force, excluding the involvement of any permanent member of the Security Council. It was against the possibility that the United Nations may not be able to fulfil its role that the United States of America undertook, at the time of the signing of the peace treaty, to ensure the establishment and maintenance of an acceptable multinational force. Of course, it is this force that the Egyptian, Israeli and United States governments are presently endeavouring to form.

394 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Questions Without Notice

In my statement to the Parliament in May I expressed regret that for various reasons, including the prospect of a veto by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the President of the Security Council was unable to agree to United Nations involvement in the implementation of the peacekeeping arrangements in the Sinai. Accordingly, for the immediate future anyway, United Nations involvement is not an option.
Honourable members should be aware that, at a meeting with the Secretary-General of the United Nations in New York in July, I raised again the question of a United Nations force to be responsible for peacekeeping arrangements in the Sinai. Dr Waldheim confirmed the earlier advice that I had had from the President of the Security Council and he stated categorically that United Nations involvement was not an option unless and until the Soviet Union indicated that it would not use its veto against United Nations participation. In reply, I expressed to the Secretary-General the hope that the option of United Nations involvement at some future date could be kept open. I understand that the parties to the multinational force agreement also want to keep that option open for the future.
BRISBANE AIRPORT: AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLERS
Mr JULL-I ask the Minister for Transport whether reports are correct that Brisbane Airport is to be closed for three hours a day, beginning in September, because of a shortage of air traffic controllers. Will this also mean that air space over much of Queensland will be uncontrolled during this time? If so, what moves are being made to increase the numbers of air traffic controllers in Queensland and elsewhere to bring their numbers up to strength? Will the Department of Transport resort to importing air traffic controllers from overseas if numbers cannot be found in Australia?
Mr HUNT-The reports that the Brisbane Airport will be closed for short periods as from 10 September are correct. The actual periods of closure are yet to be determined. We are discussing with the airlines the period that is least likely to cause disruption to ~he travelling public. The partial closure of the Brisbane Airport is due to a very severe shortage of air traffic controllers in Australia. We are short of 110 air traffic controllers. We are training air traffic controllers to our maximum capacity. We have in hand plans to transfer some air traffic controllers to Brisbane in the near future, but that will not have any real effect on the situation until some time next year. We are also recruiting air traffic controllers overseas. We have had some success in our recruiting

campaign in the United Kingdom and also in Hong Kong. We are, of course, looking to other areas to see whether it is possible to recruit a few more.
Quite clearly, there is a shortage of air traffic controllers and there has been a shortage for some time. There is a very high wastage rate among them because of the intensity of the work that they perform. It is not easy to recruit people who have the qualifications or the stamina necessary to carry out the task. We are most concerned about the problem and we are taking every measure possible to ensure minimum disruption to services to Queensland. We are taking every measure possible to recruit and to train additional air traffic controllers to overcome this immediate problem. I might add that I have also asked my Department to make sure in whatever arrangements it makes that there will be no closure of the facilities at Brisbane over the Christmas holiday period.
FAI HEALTHCARE INSURANCE
Mr ROBERT BROWN-I refer the Minister for Health to an advertisement which has appeared over recent days concerning FAI Healthcare Insurance and featuring the Honourable Harry Jago who is identified as a former State Minister for Health. The advertisement says in part:
And remember, you may be entitled to additional tax deductions at 32 cents in the $1 on your total medical and hospital costs.
I ask the Minister whether that statement concerning possible tax benefits is correct. I also ask whether the statement attributed to Mr Harry Jago that 'FAI Healthcare Insurance gives you the best possible health cover available' is correct. Does FAI Healthcare Insurance come within the ambit of the National Health Act? If it does not, will the success of this insurance scheme in creaming off the low health-risk people and taking them away from the insurance schemes offered by the registered health funds increase the health costs of those people who are insured with registered health funds?
i\1r MacKELLAR-Firstly, my attention was drawn to the advertisement in a very broad sense. I have not read the fine detail contained in it. I have not seen the words quoted. The rebate of 32c in the dollar for basic health insurance is available only to those people who take out health insurance with a registered health insurance organisation. The FAI is not a registered health insurance organisation. So people taking out insurance with companies such as F AI will not be eligible for the tax rebate, as suggested in the honourable gentleman's question.

Questions Without Notice

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 395

I have no comment to make about Mr Jago's participation. Nor do I have any comment to make about his alleged statement that FAI 'offers the best cover. I do not agree with that, but it demonstrates that the Government has in place a health scheme which offers to individuals within the community a range of choices which enables them to pick the form of health insurance which they believe is most suitable for their circumstances.
As to the last part of the honourable gentleman's question, I think that people who take out insurance with commercial organisations should look very carefully at the fine print in relation to the cover offered. All in all, I am not aware of any evidence that commercial insurers are taking a high proportion of individuals away from the registered health insurance organisations. Therefore, the community rating principle is very largely in place, as the Government intends. Finally, I advocate that all members of the general public look very carefully at the alternatives that are offered in health insurance. I advise them to think very carefully before they decide not to insure with a registered health insurance organisation.
BUILDERS' LABOURERS FEDERATION
Mr SPENDER-The Minister for Industrial Relations will recall that some time ago an announcement was made to the effect that steps were to be taken to deregister the Builders' Labourers Federation. Can the Minister tell the House the present status of that proposed application?
Mr VINER-A great deal of work has gone into the preparation of the case to be lodged with the Federal Court to apply for the deregistration of the Builders' Labourers Federation. That work is very well advanced and I expect to be in a position to advise the House next week when the application has been lodged.
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
Mr BARRY JONES-Has the Prime Minister's attention been drawn to the words of the Governor-General, Sir Zelman Cowen, in the publication 'Technological Change-Impact of Information Technology 1981 '? He stated:
Information processing equipment . , . could well become Australia's largest [import] in the decade of the 1980s unless concrete steps are taken very soon . . . Australia is rapidly becoming totally dependent on imports for the supply of its information technology , . ,This directs attention to the vulnerability of a computerised society. What if sources of supply are threatened in international crises , , . [andl by vulnerability to acts of terrorism?

I ask: Does the Prime Minister agree with the Governor-General's remarks? Is he aware that Australia's capacity to create its own information technology, both hardware and software, was destroyed on the basis of a political decision by the Menzies Government in the 1950s? If so, what has the Government done or does it propose to do to overcome Australia's dangerous overdependence on foreign owned and controlled information technology? Will the Government as a matter of urgency take steps to encourage the development of Australian research and manufacturing capacity in information technology?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I would not want to comment on any remarks that the Governor General might have made, but the Government obviously is concerned for the implications of modern technology in the Australian economy. We established an examination under Professor Rupert Myers for that particular purpose.
Mr Barry Jones-But not on this subject.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-On the broad subject of technological change, yes. We have made a number of decisions as a result of that report. If there is any particular information that I can give the honourable gentleman in relation to the particular aspect of the subject which he--
Mr Barry Jones-You have missed the whole point.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-No, I have not missed the whole point. If there is any particular information I can give the honourable gentleman on the particular aspect that he has raised, I will be in touch with him again later.
Mr Barry Jones-On a point of order, Mr Speaker: The point that I was making--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is not making a point of order. He is repeating his--
Mr Barry Jones-You have not heard me.
Mr SPEAKER-He is repeating his question. The honourable gentleman will resume his seat.
Mr Barry Jones-Will you hear me on the point of order?
Mr SPEAKER-I call the honourable member forCalare.
Mr Barry Jones-Mr Speaker, on the point of order: Am I not entitled to raise a point of order and are you not prepared to do me the courtesy of listening to what that point of order is before you make a decision?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat.

396 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr Barry Jones-Will you hear my point of order?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat.
Mr Barry Jones-Will you hear my point of order?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. If he does not do so, I will have to deal with him. The honourable gentleman said that he raised a point of order. I allowed him to raise it. His opening words were 'The point I was making' in relation to his question. Obviously what he was going to do was to complain that he did not get the answer he wanted. There is no point of order.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, with respect--
Mr SPEAKER-Is this a point of order?
Mr Hayden-Yes, it is.
Mr SPEAKER-I call the Leader of the Opposition.
Mr Hayden-I suggest that for the proper harmony of the House it would be better to listen to at least some of the substance of the point of order before determining your attitude. Otherwise we are going to have disharmony quite unnecessarily in the House. The honourable member has not made his point of order. You may be anticipating completely incorrectly. I ask you whether you would be generous enough to reconsider it in the circumstances. This honourable member is not the sort of person who takes vexatious points of order, I think you will recall.
Mr SPEAKER-As a matter of courtesy to the Leader of the Opposition and at his request, I will allow the honourable member for Lalor to make the point of order.
Mr Barry Jones-Mr Speaker, my point of order was that the question raised with the Prime Minister was the question of the vulnerability--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. There is no point of order.
SYDNEY (KINGSFORD-SMITH) AIRPORT
Mr MacKENZIE-I direct my question to the Minister for Tnmsport. What progress has been made towards the expansion of runway facilities at Mascot Airport after some four years or perhaps five years of inquiry? Has the New South Wales Premier yet made any decision on this matter? Will restrictions on commuter aircraft and perhaps on intrastate aircraft services have to be

brought in soon, unless a decision is made? Is there any truth in the suggestion I have heard only recently that Brisbane may soon take over from Sydney as Australia's international gateway?
Mr HUNT-Yes, we have received a reply from the Premier of New South Wales. Mr Wran has replied to a letter from the Prime Minister, making it quite clear that the New South Wales Government is not prepared to co-operate with the Commonwealth in the development of a close-spaced parallel runway at Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport. In fact what he has done is to turn his back on the people of Sydney and the people of New South Wales. As far as the major airport needs of Sydney--
Mr Charles Jones-So did Willis and so did Lewis.
Mr HUNT-Well, you said that. Does that makehis--
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister will resume his seat. The honourable member for Newcastle will cease interjecting. The Minister will cease taking notice of interjections and will continue with his answer.
Mr HUNT-The truth of the matter is, of course, that Mr Willis agreed to it. Mr Wran agreed five years ago to co-operate with the Commonwealth in setting up a major airport needs study committee involving both Commonwealth and State officials. But in December 1979 the New South Wales Government decided to withdraw its officials, leaving the Commonwealth offichils to make a report. The Commonwealth has agreed to the recommendation for a closespaced parallel runway to meet the immediate needs of those people wishing to use Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport. They happen to represent 60 per cent of the travelling public in this country. It has been Australia's No. 1 international and domestic airport, but it will rapidly decline from that position day by day as a result of this inactivity on the part of the New South Wales Government.
There is not the slightest doubt that there will be restrictions on the traffic using Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport. I have made it clear to my Department that I will not stand by and see regional aviation, general aviation or commuter services singled out for those restrictions. If there are to be restrictions at Kingsford-Smith Airport they will apply to international, domestic, regional, commuter and general aviation alike. Let no one bask in any complacency that the restrictions are going to hurt just one section of the community. They will apply right across the board.

Questions Without Notice

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 397

Mr Wran can carry the blame for that with him throughout the forthcoming election campaign.
PRIVATE CAPITAL INFLOW
Mr WILLIS-I address my question to the Treasurer. Is it the case that the Budget strategy presupposes a level of private capital inflow this year of $7 billion or more, which is an even greater amount than the record and extraordinary $6.5 billion inflow of last year? In view of the fact that the surplus of this private capital inflow over the deficit on the balance of payments current account adds to the money supply and this year, as last year, is expected to account for some 45 per cent of money supply growth, did the Government, in drawing up its Budget strategy, give any consideration to reducing the rate of growth of the money supply by controlling private capital inflow rather than increasing taxes on the Australian people? If that course was considered, why was it not adopted?
Mr HOWARD-It is true that the Budget is based upon an assumption that the rate of private capital inflow will be between $6,000m and $7,000m and will make a contribution to private sector foreign exchange transactions of about the same level as occurred last year. The honourable gentleman's question, like other questions from the Opposition on the subject of private capital inflow, assumes that one can turn the tap of foreign investment in this country on and off without damage to the long term level and pattern of that investment. It is necessary, if the development of this country is to proceed, for us to have foreign capital. There are simply inadequate reserves of domestic savings to support the sort of investment that is going on in Australia at present. When the honourable member for Gellibrand and the Leader of the Opposition talk about controls and blockages on private capital inflow, they are advocating a slower rate of growth, because there is an insufficient volume of domestic savings in this country to support the current levels of investment. If the Opposition argues for less investment in Australia at present, it is arguing for lower living standards, higher unemployment and less growth.
BEEF SHIPMENTS TO THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Mr GILES-Has the Minister for Primary Industry any new information regarding investigations into the substitution of horsemeat in export boneless beef shipments to the United States of America?
Mr NIXON-I confirm that investigations have concluded that horsemeat is contained in the

samples of the 1,200 cartons seized from the Profreeze meat company at Richmond. The Australian Federal Police is investigating the matter to see what further samples are available. Only some of the 1,200 cartons seized so far have been tested. It can be assumed that there is what I would like to call some racket going on in the meat trade. The Government is treating the matter very seriously.
Mrs Darling-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I draw your attention to Question on Notice No. 2760.
Mr SPEAKER-The question on notice asked by the honourable member for Lilley is very broad. I would not wish to allow a broad question of that nature to prevent the seeking of information about a matter of major national importance on a confined basis which relates, as I understand it, to the seizure of certain shipments and the testing of them.
Mrs Darling-I accept that, Mr Speaker, as it is of national importance.
Mr NIXON-The matter is presently before the Bureau of Animal Health and the Federal Police, which are investigating it. The only other point to add is that I hope to bring into the House within the next couple of weeks of this session a Bill to increase markedly the fines that are presently applicable in instances of this nature. At the moment the maximum fine is a mere $1,000.
EXCHANGE RATE
Mr HAYDEN-I ask the Treasurer a question supplementary to the question which has just been asked of him by the honourable member for Gellibrand. The Treasurer will recall in his answer confirming that the Government is anticipating an even larger foreign capital inflow this year than last year; it will be in excess of $6,000m and possibly as high as $7,000m. Does he recognise that the implication is that the Government must also anticipate an appreciation in the Australian dollar. during this fiscal year at least as large as the 10 per cent general appreciation that took place last year and in particular cases rising much higher, as high as 38 per cent against West Germany? Does he recognise that the effect of appreciations, especially such significant appreciations, is to disadvantage the traditional farm and manufacturing export industries and manufacturing import replacement industries? Finally, does he recognise that an appreciation of this level, on top of the appreciations which have already taken place in the preceding 12 months, would effectively wipe out protection for the majority of Australian manufacturing industry?

398 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr HOWARD-I will pick up the last part of the honourable gentleman's question and correct him immediately. The highest levels of protection for a large part of Australian manufacturing industry are in respect of those industries that enjoy quotas. Exchange rate appreciation, far from reducing protection for those industries, in fact increases it to a massive degree. The really high levels of protection in Australia are in respect of the industries that are subject to quotas. I refer, of course, to the textile, clothing and footwear industries, the motor vehicle industry and a number of other industries. Any suggestion in those circumstances that exchange rate appreciation lessens the protection to those industries is diametrically opposite to what precisely happens. It is true that the private capital inflow is likely to be of about the same order as last year; but, of course, the current account deficit is projected to be somewhat larger and, as a consequence, the net monetary effect of that private capital inflow is likely to be about the same. I will not make forward speculations about how the Australian dollar will move. Its value compared with other currencies, including the American dollar and the Deutsche mark, is affected not only by what happens to our currencies and to the Australian economy but also obviously by what happens in domestic conditions in both of those economies. I can only repeat what I have said to the honourable gentleman on many occasions: Anti-inflationary objectives will remain dominant in the determination of our exchange rate policies.
DISTINGUISHED VISITORS
Mr SPEAKER-I inform the House that we have present in the gallery this afternoon members of the Nigerian Parliament's Committee on Federal Capital Development, led by Senator Alhaji Rufair, Chairman of the Committee. On behalf of the House, I extend a very warm welcome to the members of the Committee.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
COMPUTER EQUIPMENT
Mr DONALD CAMERON-I rephrase in everyman's language the question directed by the honourable. member for Lalor to the Prime Minister. Is he aware that, in the 12 months ending 30 June 1981, the value of computer equipment imported by Australia rocketed to $587m? Is he aware that for 11 months in 1980-81, compared with a similar II months in 1979-80, the value of computer equipment imported by Telecom Australia rose from $380m to $502m? Do figures

such as these have an effect on our balance of payments situation? Does the Prime Minister regard the warnings that there will be greater import reliance in this fieldas such as to motivate the Government to pay special attention to increasing Australia's ability to produce computer equipment?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-One of the reasons for the growth in Telecom orders would no doubt be the growth in demand for telecommunications services. The capital program for Telecom has been very large over recent years. It will be very large. Even so, in some areas there are still delays in providing services. I have no doubt that the increase in imports on behalf of Telecom would be in part at least as a result of the very great demand for the services that it provides and the increasing range of services that are open and available to businesses.
Mr Barry Jones-But proportionately we are worse off than anybody else. That is the point.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Lalor will remain silent.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable gentleman also needs to understand that this economy has been growing quite strongly by comparison with other advanced Western countries, many of which are not growing at all. Some are even stagnating or shrinking in terms of their product. As a result of that, it would be natural to find an increase in imports over a wide range of areas. I suggest that, if the honourable member for Fadden believes that there is too much reliance on imports in any particular area, he take the matter up with my colleague the Minister for Industry and Commerce.
AUTOMOTIVE COMPLEMENTATION SCHEME
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I direct my question to the Minister for Industry and Commerce and refer to the automotive complementation scheme which relates to exports. Is the Minister aware that this scheme is coming into some disarray because of the allegations certainly made by the automotive parts manufacturers that there is manipulation of the scheme by transfer pricing in respect of exports and imports? Is he further aware, in the detail of that, that the Borg Warner factory at Wodonga is in danger of closing because the transmissions will not -now be sourced from that particular factory and further that the complex skills of die casting, particularly in New South Wales, are about to be extinguished? Accordingly,

Questions Without Notice

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 399

as the whole of the automotive component industry is in danger of collapsing, I ask: What proposals does the Minister have in mind to guarantee that we retain those skills in Australia?
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH-I thank the honourable gentleman for the question relating to the automotive industry. He will, of course, be aware that Cabinet will shortly have bef~re it the recommendations from the Industries Assistance Commission, together with the work which has ben undertaken in recent times by the various departments which are involved in the Standing Committee on Industries Assistance. I anticipate that the Government will approach its early discussions on the automotive reference some time in September.
So far as export complementation is concerned, the honourable gentleman would certainly understand that I have never hidden the fact that export complementation to the components industry is a matter of gainers and losers. It has been designed to provide Australian industry with the capacity to move technologically with the world industry. I believe it has produced very significant dividends to the industry to this point, but at the same time. I recognise that inherent in what the honourable gentleman is saying is that some companies have been disadvantaged by virtue of the additional overseas sourcing which has been provided both to automotive manufacturers and to some specialist component manufacturers. The question of transfer pricing is a matter for the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs. I will have the matters that the honourable gentleman referred to assessed through my colleague the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs and provide him with what information is available.
TRANSPORT WORKERS UNION: INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE
Mr GOODLUCK-Is the Prime Minister aware of an article which appeared in the Hobart Mercury dated I August 1981 and which in essence refers to the role that the Premier of Tasmania played in the recent Transport Workers Union of Australia strike? My question is a direct one: What role did the Premier play in solving the TWUstrike?
Mr Scholes-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. It is not within the ambit of a Minister of this Government to determine what role the Premier of a State plays,nor is it within the responsibilities of the Prime Minister's portfolio. The question asks for an expression of opinion, which is contrary to the Standing Orders.

Mr SPEAKER-The point of order is not sustained. The Prime Minister was engaged in discussions with people about settling a dispute. As I understand the question, it involved the Premier of Tasmania and discussions with the Prime Minister. Therefore the question is in order.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Let me relate to the House some of the events that occurred over that weekend and during that period. There had been discussions before the weekend involving the Deputy Prime Minister, myself, the Minister for Industrial Relations and, I think, one or two others and the Australian Council of Trade Unions because of a serious situation which was developing in .relation to not only the Transport Workers Union but also certain matters which looked .as though they could involve a total national stoppage on the Australian waterfront. For that reason-I have paid due regard to thisthe President of the Australian Council of Trade Unions approached me and said: 'Will the Government participate in talks in an effort to see what can be done to resolve some of these difficulties?' As a result of that, a statement was issued by the Government and the ACTU. Sir John Moore also was present at those discussions on the Friday, I think it was. It was basically a sensible statement but one which also recognised that the rigidity of the indexation guidelines was making some trade unions feel that they were not able to have their cases heard and argued before the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. A form of words which had the support of the ACTU and the Government and which might have relieved some of that pressure was placed in that statement.
In the event, there was an attempt based on that document to get the Transport Workers Union to go back to arbitration. The ACTU was significantly involved in that. Other Premiers were also involved. States of emergency, we need to remember, had been declared in more than one State, and Premiers were in touch with me concerning the severity of the dispute-whether it was likely to become a full national stoppage or what might be done to relieve the matter. The Minister for Communications also was involved because he had been having discussions oVt!r the same weekend with the Minister for Industrial Relations on disputes in relation to Telecom Australia. Therefore he was involved with me and the Minister for Industrial Relations in the discussions that took place over that weekend and on the Monday. Part of the problem was to get the Transport Workers Union to accept arbitration. There was a belief that it ought to. There was a

400 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Questions Without Notice

prospect at the time that its problem might be resolved through an anomalies conference, even though I think Deputy President Isaac had indicated that the Commission could not make a judgment of the kind that the union had wanted.
In the process of persuading the Transport Workers Union to accept arbitration, Mr Wran was in Melbourne because of a certain Australian Labor Party meeting of which some honourable gentlemen here would be aware. I think he undertook through the New South Wales Trades and Labour Council to see what influence could be exerted on the TWU. Either the Minister for Communications or the Minister for Industrial Relations rang around other States again to try to establish the circumstance where some influence could be brought to bear on the Transport Workers Union to accept arbitration. In the process of that, through my colleague the Minister for Administrative Services, an approach was initially made-to Mr Lowe. After that I discussed the matter with Mr Lowe. He indicated a wish to help because Tasmania was being--
Mr Young-Is this a sunset answer?,
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I think it probably will be. I thank the honourable gentleman for reminding me of the time. Tasmania had been very severely hurt by the Transport Workers Union dispute, in many cases more severely hurt than other States. I have to say that, up to the point at which my colleague the Minister for Administrative Services had approached the Premier, it appeared that the State was'not doing a great deal to assist itself. I should also say that in my conversation I pointed out to Mr Lowe that other Premiers were doing a good deal to protect the interests of their States. He said in that conversation that obviously he wanted to do what he could to protect Tasmania. The action seemed to be in Melbourne and I offered to makp. transport available to him to come to Melbourne, again with the objective of getting the Transport Workers Union before arbitration. I think that is a quiet and accurate description of events.
I would like to make one other point only, and that is that nobody who was involved in these matters and nobody in any of the discussions that the Government has had with the Australian Council of Trade Unions over recent months has sought to make any political capital out of the attempts that people from different spheres have been making to solve difficult problems and problems which concern many Australians. I think senior officers of the ACTU, and the Government certainly, recognise that the level of industrial disputation is not really in anyone's interests. It is

certainly in the interests of all 'Australia to overcome that effort as much as humanly possible and to establish a better industrial environment. I think it is a great pity that that particular article ever appeared in the Hobart Mercury, because it was not in accord with the spirit of what had been taking place over the weekend. Since the Opposition does not want any further questions I ask that further questions be placed on the Notice Paper.
BEEF SHIPMENTS TO THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Mr NIXON-In answer to a question about the horse. meat problem I said that investigations had concluded on 1,200 cartons seized. In fact, the investigations and tests on the seized cartons are continuing but tests have shown positively that horse meat is amongst the cartons.
REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Parliamentary Library
Mr SPEAKER-I understand the honourable member for Lalor wishes to lodge a request for detailed information about one of the parliamentary departments.
Mr BARRY JONES-Yes, I seek information about the Parliamentary Library.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member should hand his question to the Clerk. If it is in order, the question will appear in Hansard and I will reply to it in due course.
AUSTRALIAN WHEAT BOARD
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 54 of the Wheat Marketing Act 1979, I present the Australian Wheat Board annual report 1979-80 together with financial statements.
ADVANCE TO THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)- For the information of honourable members,present statements on the Advance to the Minister for Finance for the period May to July 1981.
DEFENCE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ORGANISATION
Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence)-For the information of honourable members, I present the reports of the Independent External Review of the Defence Science and

Housing Finance

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 401

Technology Organisation and of the Internal Review into Objectives and Procedures of the Defence Science al)d Technology Organisation. I also table the Government's response to these reports. There are 110 recommendations in the reports. The Government has responded to 97 recommendations while 13 are being considered by the Defence Review Committee.
FILM CENSORSHIP BOARD
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Film Censorship Board report on activities for 1980.
HOUSING FINANCE
Dis,cussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The Government's imposition of increasing hardship on first home buyers, existing home buyers and people renting homes, resulting From rising interest rates, declining availability of housing finance and cutbacks in public housing expenditure.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number a/members required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr UREN (Reid) (3.17)-Next to unemployment, housing is the most serious social problem in this country. This Government has deliberately sacrificed both private and public housing for foreign control of unplanned and unco-ordinated resource development in this country. I want to deal with some of the social problems arising out of this Government's economic policy. Last weekend the Sydney Morning Herald reported the plight of a young couple living in Sydney's outer western suburb of Penrith. The family was forced to put its home up for sale because it could no longer afford its mortgage repayments. According to a real estate agent in the area, about lOO homes are for sale in the Penrith area, but rising interest rates and restrictions on the availability of housing finance meant that few people could afford to buy those homes. As a result, while the total repayment debt for existing home buyers went up by around $20,000 in the past 18 months for a home loan of $30,000, the selling prices had moved down on houses and land in this area.
Not very long ago a young couple could buy a modest home on the periphery of the Sydney metropolitan area, delay having children, both go to work, save and scrape and forgo other needs in

order to get their foot on the bottom of the home ownership ladder. They would borrow to the limit of their means and trust that they could get themselves to a position where they could improve their living standards with the security of having their own roof over their heads. Alternatively, they would consider selling their first home and use the capital gain to buy another home better suited to their needs. But this young couple in Penrith had that avenue closed to them. They faced the prospect of little, if any, capital gain and possibly a loss. They faced insecurity and the prospect of increasing hardship resulting from a continual erosion of their household disposable income, So they decided to put the home up for sale. They intended to buy a caravan. For them, buying their first home was a move that put them on the path of downward mobility. Yet these people were lucky enough in the first place to get access to home ownership.
There are many who are even worse off. The Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) admits that he has no idea of the number of homeless people in Australia. He can neither confirm not deny the estimates of the welfare groups that there are about 150,000 homeless people throughout this country-young, unemployed, elderly, deserted people-people who have been dispossessed as a result of the callous policies of this Government. The Minister can neither confirm nor deny that there are about 250,000 people across Australia excluding Aboriginal people who suffer an outrageous neglect of their housing needs, who aJ;e living in mobile, temporary or makeshift accommodation. The Minister cannot tell this Parliament how many people spend their nights in the back seats of cars, in parks or in alleys. He cannot tell tis the extent of overcrowding in sub-standard, overpriced rental accommodation. The Minister does not know these details. The Government does not really care and it cannot possibly develop appropriate housing policies when it cannot understand the housing problems. It is prepared to sacrifice the housing sector to make room for corporate investment and foreign speculation.
In July this year, before the last round of interest rate rises, the Sunday Telegraph reported a survey conducted by the social workers in the western suburbs of Sydney. This report linked the stress of loan repayments with child abuse, drugtaking, mental illness and abortion. The survey revealed a trail of broken marriages and shattered dreams for hundreds of married couples. The men were working full time with as much overtime as they could get. In many cases they even had a second job. The women were going out to work,

402 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Housing Finance

often at night. The survey found that despite both partners working they were incapable of keeping up with rising costs-whether in the form of higher loan repayments for those paying off their homes or the widening deposit gap for those seeking to buy their first home. The survey also found that this pattern of scraping for funds put pressure on the marriage and on the family, particularly the children. I havequoted from two newspaper reports and I commend the sensitivity of the journalists involved. Why do we ,not have government publications detailing such f~cts so that government can make a decision arising from these findings? The Government seems unwilling seriously to examine the impact of its policies on people.
The rate of interest is only one aspect of the effect of rising housing costs on householddisposable income. But that effect is made more acute in a context of employment insecurity; partial wage indexation, casualisation of work, cutbacks ,in social services, rising petrol prices, increased health care costs, rises in charges for public services and increasing indirect taxes. The combined

impact of these Government polic!e~ hits people, particularly little people, hard. ThIS IS part of the policies of this callous Government.
Since February 1980 the home loan interest rate from savings banks has increased from 9.5 per cent to 12.5 per cent. For the average mortgage of $30,000 this has meant an increase in repayments over the last 18 months of $65 a month. Over the same period, average earnings of wage and salary earners have increased by only $30.50 a month. Real household disposable income has been eroded by this Government's redistributive measures. Around 80 per cent of income recipients in Australia get less than average weekly earnings. House and land prices have been increasing in most capital cities, especially in Sydney and Melbourne, beyond the reach of the average income household. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a table setting out the quarterly average of monthly median prices for houses and home units in Sydney and Melbourne for the period June 1965 to December 1980.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows~

QUARTERLY AVERAGE OF MONTHLY MEDIAN PRICES

Sydney prices

Melbourne prices

Houses

Units

Houses

Units

Quarter

Percent-.

age

change

on year

$

ago

Percent-

age

change

on year

$

ago

Percent-

age

change

on year

$

ago

Percent-

age

change

on year

$

ago

June 1965 June 1966 June 1967 June 1968 June 1969 June 1970 June 1971 June 1972 June 1973 June 1974 June 1975 Dec 1975 June 1976 DecI976 June 1977 Dec 1977 June 1978 Dec 1978 June 1979 Dec 1979 June 1980 Dec 1980

11,800

-0.4

10,670

-11.8

9,280

5.1

12,860

9.0

12,010

12.6

9,360

0.9

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

13,380

4.0

12,450

3.7

9,440

0.9

n.a.

n.a.

14,810

10.7

13,030

4.7

10,470

10.9

n.a.

n.a.

16,190

9.3

12,830

-1.5

1,140

8.9

n.a.

n.a.

18,530

14.5

13,120

2.3 ' 11,840

3.9

' n,a.

n.a.

20,570

11.0

13,910

6.0

12,090

2.1

n.a.

n.a.

23,710

15.3

15,980

14.9

14,530

20.2

n.a.

n.a.

26,420

11.4

18,880

18.1

19,140

31.7

n.a.

n.a.

33,000

24.9

25,970

37.6

25,820

34.9

23,000

n.a.

33,750

2.3

25,630

-1.3

27,770

7.6

16,500

-29.2

33,510

12.1

26,300

6.5

31,300

20.8

23,310

78.2

37,300

10.5

27,090

5.7

35,590

13.7

30,890

86.0

37,650

6.0

28,170

7.1

37,600

5.6

31,610

35.6

39,410

5.7

29,440

8.7

38,640

8.6

31,670

3.2

39,380

4.5

30,604

8.3

41,280

9.8

33,000

4.4

45,820

16.3

31,570

7.2

41,270

6.8

34,000

7.4

49,620

26.1

32,820

7.6

40,740

-1.3

29,750

~9.8

54,770

19.5

34,420

9.0

45,020

9.1

31,100

-8.5

62,540

26.0

39,210

19.5

48,920

15.2

38,130

21.4

73,960

35.0

46,830

35.5

47,640

5.8

38,170

22.7

78,740

25.9

60,490

54.3

56,230

19.8

47,920

32.6

Housing Finance

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 403

Mr UREN-I thank the House. In the December quarter 1975 the median house price in Sydney was $33,500. Average earnings were $167 a week. At that time the value of a home was 200
weeks of average earnings. In the December quarter of 1980 the median price of a house was $78,700 and average earnings were $278. The value of the house was then 283 weeks of average earnings. Since that period the median price of a house has moved to around $84,000 and interest rates have gone up still further. In my view

interest rates on housing have not peaked yet and they will rise still further. Several effects of these changes need to be understood. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard several (abIes showing the changes in monthly repayments of different loan sizes at varying interest rates and the deposit gaps for home buyers on average weekly earnings for different house prices and home loan interest rates.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

MONTHLY REPAYMENTS FOR SELECTED HOUSING LOANS

Interest rates

Term/amount

12.0

12.5

13.0

13.5

percent per cent percent percent

25 years20,000 25,000 30,000 35,000 40,000 50,000
30 years20,000
25,000 30,000
35,000 40,000 50,000

210.64 263.31 315.97 368.63 421.29 526.61
205.72 257.15 308.58 360.01 411.45 514.31

218.07 272.59 327.11 381.62 436.14 545.18
213.45 266.81 320.18 373.54 426.90 533.63

225.57 281.96 338.35 394.74 451.13 563.92
221.24 276.55 331.86 387.17 442.48 553.10

233.13 291.41 349.69 407.98 466.26 582.82
229.08 286.35 343.62 400.89 458.16 572.71

Term of loan
25 years 25 years 25 years 25 years 30 years 30 years 30 years 30 years

Note: (I) Typical Savings Bank loan is $25,000 over 25 years. Typical Permanent Building Society loan in $35,000 over 30 years; (2) Ruling interest rates from 14 August 1981 are 12.5 per cent for Savings Banks and expected 13.5% for Building Societies.
INCOME REQUIRED TO SERVICE A HOUSING LOAN OF $30,000

Interest rate
percent 11.5 12.0 12.5 13.0 11.5 12.0 12;5 13.0

Monthly repayment
$ 307.74 318.75 32~.91 341.07 298.92 310.35 321.94 333.54

Weekly income required to service loan(a)
$ 284 293
303 314 275
285 296 307

Proportion of all male
employees with incomes less than that required(b)
perc~nt
73.5 75.4
77.0 80.5 71.0 73.5 76.1 78.7

Notes: (a) assumes that maximum repayment does not exceed 25 per cent of gross weekly income. (b) based on weekly earnings distribution of all male employees, Australian Bureau of Statistics, Weekly Earnings Survey,
August 1980.

404 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Housing Finance

DEPOSIT GAPS FOR HOME BUYERS ON AVERAGE WEEKLY EARNINGS FOR DIFFERENT HOUSE PRICES AND ,HOUSING LOAN INTEREST RATES

$

$

$

House price . Loan required(a) Average weekly earnings(b)
Maximum allowable monthly repayment(c) Borrowing limit(d)-
at 11.5 per cent interest rate
at 12.5 per cent interest rate Depositgap(e)-
at 11.5 per cent interest rate
at 12.5 per cent interest rate

45,000 40,500
277.70 298.50
30,140 27,970
10,360 12,530

55,000 49,500
277.70 298.50
30,140 27,970
19,360 21,530

65,000 58,500
277.70 298.50
30,140 27,970
28,360 30,530

Notes:(a) house price less 10 per cent deposit. (b) Australian Bureau of Statistics, seasonally adjusted, December 1980 (N.B. 70 per cent of all male employees have in-
comes less than average weekly earnings). (c) assumes that maximum repayments does not exceed 25 per cent of gross weekly income and that term of loans is 30
years.

Mr UREN-The tables show that more people are not able to obtain finance to get access to home ownership. Almost four out of five income earners in this country are excluded from access to a $30,000 loan from a savings bank at an interest rate of 12t per cent. A $30,000 loan is not enough for most first home buyers faced with rising house prices, whatever State they live in. I stress that it does not matter where they live. A loan of $30,000 pins down a person. Over 80 per cent of people-four out of five-cannot afford to meet a $30,000 loan. A modest home in Penrith, which is at the bottom end of the market in Sydney, costs around $55,000. People on average single incomes have little chance of buying a home at that price with prevailing interest rates. Dual income families have to save for years to raise the necessary deposit gap. They have to cut back on other necessities. They have to forgo having children. They have to rely on the charity of relatives or they have to take out a crippling second mortgage at an interest rate of 15 per cent to 20 per cent.
These options threaten the stability of families. They impose immense long term hardships. The policies of this Government are not helping these people in need. They are forcing more and more people into the already overstretched private rental market. Private rents are likely to increase substantially as a result of the rental accommodation increase as the landlords put the prices up to meet their own interest ,repayment increases. At the same time, the Government has cut back dramatically on public sector housing. In 1974-75, 3.9 per cent of government expenditure was on public housing. This year it is one per cent of government expenditure. Public housing stock represents only 4.4 per cent of all housing stock in Australia. This Government has also made decisions which will further aggravate housing costs

and undermine the building industry. Inflation in the housing market will follow from the imposition of a 2-lper cent sales tax on building materials and furnishings. A 2-lper cent increase in sales tax could add up to $1,000 to the price of establishing a home. This is in addition to the impact of increasing interest rates.
Deeper economic problems are also associated with the housing policies of this Government. We have seen a dramatic rise in the amount of domestic funds taken up by foreign corporations in this country. Australian borrowing by foreign corporations rose from 1.4 per cent of total domestic savings in 1977-78 to 18.8 per cent in 1978-79. We have a huge increase in the raisings of funds by public authorities to provide infrastructure for resource development. We have seen a large and rapid increase in foreign capital inflow to speculate in land and housing, to speculate on interest rates and to speculate against the exchange rate. This Government is squeezing the rest of the domestic economy to make room for the structural shift of investment in resource development and the takeover of Australian business by foreign corporations. The ordinary people of Australia are paying the real price-immediately through reduced social services and increased interest rates and in the longer term by increased dependence, widening inequality and entrenched unemployment. We are moving to a society oflandlords and tenants. The rate of home ownership under this Government has peaked and is now rapidly on the decline.
What we need is a comprehensive housing policy that attends to the needs of people-the immediate needs of people and the emerging needs associated with population growth, structural change and relocation of people. More and more

Housing Finance

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 405

control is needed over the rate of speculative capital inflow and over the pace and impact of investment in resource development. Effective programs need to be developed to help a wider range of people secure access to home ownership at affordable interest rates. Included in that should be a program to assist first home buyers and a program which will protect those people already living in homes and paying off their mortgages. We also need a planned and substantial upgrading of the public housing sector. We also need a program which will maintain liquidity at all times in the housing sector. Were a government prepared to give housing a major priority we could achieve those objectives. But this Government has decided to scrap the housing industry for the interests of the resource sector.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (3.32)-By their actions we shall know them. I thought the shadow Minister for housing and construction, the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren), was in the wrong ring. I understood that this matter of public importance was about something fundamental to Australian society-home ownership. All the honourable member wanted to talk about was overseas capital coming into this country. Let us start, therefore, from the base, because he is not concerned about home ownership for Australian people; he wants only to mouth meaningless words and platitudes. A leader of the Labor Party once said: 'We do not believe in home ownership. That will make us a nation of capitalists'.
A previous Labor Minister for housingfortunately we have not had too many of themwhen he talked, under insistent and constant questioning by the then Opposition, about housing costs and about the inability of people either to get a job in those disastrous years from 1972 to 1975 or to purchase a house, said: 'We will build them smaller houses'. Does not the honourable member for Reid know that in the closing stages of the Labor Party's far too long reign on the treasury bench it commissioned a report the emphasis of which was: 'We are going to put a tax on home ownership'? That is the policy of the Australian Labor Party. The honourable member for Reid did not want to talk about it because he does not like the truth. I am disappointed. I have a great deal of time for the honourable member for Reid, but today unfortunately, because he is under pressure, he could not defend the situation and he flirted with the truth. I am disappointed and I am concerned that that has happened.

On the other hand, we have had a long commitment to home ownership and to support of the family because we believe the strength of this nation is based on the citadel of home ownership. We have the figures. The honourable member for Reid said that home ownership in Australia had peaked and was now rapidly declining. I do not know where he learned his mathematics, but the simple facts are that the present rate of home ownership in Australia is 71.9 per cent, marginally lower than the 72 per cent revealed by the last census. Yet the honourable member said that the rate was rapidly declining. Does he not know that there is a price to pay for home ownership? Why does he not talk to the migrants in Australia? If he talked to the Italian community and the Greek community he would find that 90 per cent of the Italian community and 84 per cent of the Greek community own their own homes. I utterly reject and throw back in his teeth his statement that home ownership in this country is rapidly declining.
The Australian Government at present, as always under the free enterprise way of life, is pledged to home ownership. I want to talk about some of the things that have happened in recent times to expose this myth, this shadow concern, this sham interest in Australian home ownership. The honourable member cited figures. I want to cite the real figures. At the end of the Labor Party's reign 104,110 Australian families were on the waiting list for welfare housing, which represented a significant increase in three years. The people of Australia had been hung, drawn and quartered with regard to housing. They had realised that they could not have home ownership, that they could not get jobs because of record unemployment in this country during those three years and they had to be placed on the welfare housing list.
At present on account of fundamental policies
of encouraging more people to own their little bit of Australia, the number on the welfare housing list has decreased to 85,391. Home ownership has always involved sacrifice. Mr Deputy Speaker, you know that; it is not easy. People have to have their priorities right. I want to take a little time to enlighten and to encourage so that the shadow Minister can observe. In December 1978 it took 27.2 per cent of average weekly earnings at that time to pay back the interest and redemption on a home loan of $30,000. But under this Government-a government under which real incomes last year increased by 4 per cent, inflation was held down to 8.8 per cent and the working opportunities of Australians in the last two years increased by some 320,000-we find that in

406 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

HOl/sing Finance

December 1980, two years later, it took only 25 per cent of average weekly earnings to repay that loan. The honourable gentleman talked about a $30,000 loan for first home buyers. Does he not know that at least 60 per cent of first home buyers in Australia are dual income earners? Does he not know that 60 per cent of Australian first home buyers seek a loan of considerably less than $30,000? Does he not know those things? I am sorry that I have to take the time of the House to try to explain to him the situation as it exists. He talked about the increase in interest rates. In 18 months I saw this country getting ripped apart, the heart and the muscle torn out of it, because interest rates under the Labor Government increased by 3 per cent in its first 18 months. In almost six years of free enterprise government interest rates have increased by 2 per cent. Yet the honourable member had the temerity and the cheek--
Mr Howe-Now you are a liar.
Mr McVEIGH-Mr Deputy Speaker, I ask for a withdrawal.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Batman will withdraw.
Mr Howe-I withdraw.

about roofs over the heads of the Australian people and families, that in England the interest rate is one per cent higher than it is here; in the United States of America it is 15.5 per cent; and in Canada the interest rate for home ownership is 21.5 per cent. Why does he try to isolate Australia's high interest rates from those in the rest of the world? I am not happy with the high interest rates, but they are a fact of life.
We talk about the person who has a loan. The fact is that in the last two years the average weekly income has gone up by $80 but interest and redemption payments have increased by only $15 .a week. People have not been depositing money with lending institutions for on-lending into housing. The simple reason is that because of the incessant and growing demands of State Governments, a tremendous pressure has been placed on the market places. That is to be regretted, but if a person obtained a loan because he had a better job opportunity and his wages increased, he had the opportunity of paying back the loan. The honourable member talks about extensions to loans. Does not he know that the facts and figures indicate that the average loan in Australia is repaid within seven years, not 25 years or 30 years? That nails once and for all the vicious lies that he is trying to permeate through the Australian population.

Mr McVEIGH-At least the honourable member has a little honesty. But the truth hurts members opposite. We found in that short time that interest rates increased so as to deny the Australian people the opportunity of home ownership. The honourable member talked about increases in the cost of housing in Sydney. I say to the honourable gentleman that there is more to Australia than the city of Sydney. One of the reasons that housing is dear in Sydney is simply the inefficiencies and lack of concern of the Wran Government. The land component of a home in Sydney is sky high, by Australian and world standards. In the first two years of the Wran Government a block of land which initially cost $9,000 had increased to $20,000. One of the reasons we have extraordinary land prices in Sydney is that the New South Wales Government has the highest stamp duties in this country and has not made enough land available to allow people to build houses where they desire them to be built. We talk about high interest rates in Australia. The Treasurer (Mr Howard), in immaculate language, has repeated for all Australia to hear the simple statement that no government and no Minister like increases in interest rates. But I say to the honourable gentleman, who raved and ranted about capital inflow instead of worrying

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! I require the Minister to address the House in parliamentary language.
Mr McVEIGH-I take your advice, Mr Deputy Speaker. We found that many people were not being allowed access to the pool of finance. It is regrettable that most of the people who advance funds to on-lending institutions which provide money for housing are elderly people. Because they did not want to be isolated, it was necessary for them to put their funds into the highest interest earning areas. We hope that the changes that have been made in on-lending for housing will increase the pool of finance that is available so that there will be a balance. Sure, people will have difficulties with paying off their existing mortgages, but we wanted to allow more Australian people the opportunity of participating in home ownership.
I wish to refer to the honourable member's comments about welfare housing. He seemed to take great pride in his statement that public ownership of housing in Australia was only of relatively minor importance. He has been quoted in the Press. I hope he writes as many letters to correct his statements as he wrote in peddling something that was far removed from the truth. For

Housing Finance

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 407

weeks he has been parading around Australia saying that the Fraser-Anthony Government was going to provide only $200m for welfare housing this year. It must have hurt him last night when he found out that we were providing a lot more money than that. He is not concerned. He is not interested. He is only looking for cheap political gain. I used to smile every time the honourable member for Reid said that we were going to provide only $200m for housing because I knew that the day would come when he would cut his own throat. He did not even need assistance from me. The simple fact is that last night the Treasurer said in this Parliament: 'The Commonwealth Government is making available to the States the sum of $262.2m.' I say to the honourable member for Reid that he should not forget to write to the Sydney Morning Herald tomorrow to tell the people that he either did not know the truth or deliberately misrepresented the position last week.
Mr Lloyd-You had better write it for him, Mr Minister.
Mr McVEIGH-I would not write a letter for him; no way. That would be out of character. I like these fellows to hang themselves. We have also made available to the States-we have consistently given them huge sums of money at highly concessional interest rates-a sum of $160m a year. We have given them $262.2m, plus the $160m which is basically free money. Included in that $262.2m is the sum of $116.2m which is a straight out gift. Let us note the generosity of the Government in giving to the States this huge sum of money, not with the restrictions or conditions like those imposed by the fellows opposite when they were in government. Every time the States wanted to spend a dollar they had to put their hands up. They are now allowed to do whatever they want to do. They can put into effect all those glorious interest bearing subsidy schemes and rebates on rental schemes. They do not have to ask me for permission as they had to ask the Labor Minister under that Government's housing agreement. The balance of $146m is available. I think I would be looked upon as not stretching the truth very much when I say that an interest rate of 4.5 per cent is highly concessional. That is the interest rate charged on the money that we have given the States.
How pleasing it must have been for the hondurable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd), the honourable member for Bradfield (Mr Connolly) and the honourable member for Mackellar (Mr Carlton) to have been in this Parliament last night and to hear the Treasurer say that we were to give rental

rebates to people in receipt of social security payments in this country totalling about $120m a year. That shows real interest, real concern and real feeling for the poor and the unfortunate in society. These are the things that we are interested in. The people shall know us by our policies.
The main emphasis in the Budget was to create a climate of confidence, because confidence had been destroyed by irresponsible statements that were made around the country. Today we witnessed a repetition of scaremongering tactics, of trying to undermine people. An instance was cited of a person in Sydney being forced to sell his home. I wish just to recount what happened at the time of the last interest rate increases. Mr Barry Carlton, a representative of the permanent building societies, stated that because of the permanent building societies concern at people's inability or the difficulty that people might have in meeting increased repayments, a circular was sent out tobuilding society clients-several hundred of them-requesting them to come in to discuss any problem that they might have with repayments. Contrary to the view that has been expressed by the honourable member for Reid, only two people saw fit to respond to the circular. That is the problem we face. Home ownership has always been difficult but the position is not improved by scaremongering tactics such as those we have witnessed from the honourable member for Reid who has been reported in the Sydney Morning Herald as citing a particular instance. I wish to direct my remarks also to the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden)--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The Minister's time has expired.
Mr UREN (Reid)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-Does the honourable member wish to make a personal explanation?
Mr UREN-Yes, I will be brief. Myexplanation concerns two points. The first point is that the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) said that I and other members of the Australian Labor Party were against home ownership. I have specifically said time and time again in this House and in other places that I believe that wherever it is possible for people to own their own homes they should do so because that is their real major source of saving in their lifetime. I also said that I and other members on this side of the House will encourage home ownership.
The other aspect is in regard to what I am supposed to have said about the matter of public sector housing and the fact that about $200m was to

408 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Housing Finance

be provided. The Minister said that I said that the States would get only $200m this year. What I said in my letter and what I have been saying publicly was that if the Government made available what the'Labor Government made available in
1974-75 in constant terms under. the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreements to Aboriginals and to the Northern Territory, it would have to provide $850m a year. The Government is to guarantee only $200m. The Minister has pointed out that the Government has increased that sum to $262m but I point out that there is still a shortfall of some $550m. It is about time the Minister put his money where his mouth is,
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKE~ (Mr Millar)-The honourable member has made his point of order. I call the honourable member for Batman.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (3.49)-It is rather sad that the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) could continue to misquote not the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) or any former Leader of the Opposition, but John Dedman, one of the great post-war Ministers, on an interjection which the honourable member would never have read. I am referring to an interjection during the speech of a Liberal Party member who said that the Labor Party was not concerned at all about home ownership. Mr Dedman replied: 'Do you want to turn the nation into little capitalists?' The context of the speech of the time was to point out that the Australian Labor Party's commitment was then, as it is now, to home ownership and also to providing a decent public housing stock for a large section of the Australian population. That was the commitment then and it is the commitment now. I suggest that the Minister look at what Dedman actually said rather than continue peddling this myth about Labor Party policy.
A reference was made by the Minister-it is constantly made by the Government-to the commitment to home ownership and to these tremendous home ownership rates. Some 70 per cent of the Australian population do not own their own home; 70 per cent of the Australian population have never owned their own home. It is true that about 70 per cent of the Australian
population either own or are in the process of buying a home; that is a very different matter. One of the reasons that this matter of public importance is being debated today is that we are concerned about the people who are purchasing their own home. The Minister talks about what may have happened in terms of interest rates between 1974 and 1975 but does not recognise that since 1978 the increase in interest rates under this

Government has been 3 per cent. Over three years. this Government has been in charge of policies which have resulted in rising interest rates. There has been a massive increase in house prices, particularly in the Melbourne and Sydney property markets. The Minister ought to get his facts right. If he wants to talk about home ownership, let us talk about the 28 per cent of Australians who have completely paid for a home and about the people who are purchasing homes and their problems under the context of this Government's policies.
I take 'as the quote of the day the words of the Minister at the beginning of his speech. He said: 'By their action you shall know them'.
It reminded me of what the Governor-General said late last year. He stated:
It is essential that it be understood that economics and people are linked, that economic policy must serve human objectives,
He went on to say:
The only legitimate yardstick for assessing any policy is not conformity to an ideology-
It does not matter whether it be the ideology of home ownership or any other ideology-
but the effectiveness of that policy in enhancing the lives of people.
He went on to cite the case of housing policy as being an example of where this Government had shown its concern-for people. One can only say that that is complete rubbish. If one looks at this particular Government's policy, and one has to look, as the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) did, not simply at housing policy but housing policy within the context of economic policy, one has to recognise that this Government has been a government along with many other conservative governments in the world that has been prepared to sacrifice social policy for short run economic policy. It is a government which has its interests dictated to it by international capital, by processes and interests which bear no relationship to the interests of the Australian people. One has to say that the Fraser Government is unique in the history of Australian governments in that it fails to see any relationship between the aspirations of ordinary Australians and the well-being of the corporate sector; one must be sacrificed for the other. This Government has been prepared to sacrifice ordinary Australians and their housing for the interests of the corporate sector.
As the honourable member for Reid has pointed out, the facts are crystal clear and undeniable. The total Commonwealth outlays on housing have moved from a peak of $702m in 1974-75

Housing Finance

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 409

to a low, in real terms, in this Budget of $196m expressed in 1974-75 values. Outlays on housing at that time represented nearly 4 per cent of total outlays. This year's outlays for housing will represent one per cent. We are talking about the priorities of this Government and housing is not a priority for this Government. It may have priorities which may be worthwhile but it cannot say and this Minister cannot say with any honesty or any understanding that housing is any kin.d of priority for this Government. Indeed, the Minister's appointment is a reflection of the low priority which housing has for this Government.
Within that context one has to look particularly at the Government's role in relation to welfare housing or public housing. Of course, public housing is a serious problem whether the Minister recognises it or not. It is a serious problem because of the failure of the Government's economic policies as a whole., At a time in which we have had record unemployment and in which real incomes have, in fact, been declining and have not been maintaining pace with inflation we have substantially reduced expenditure and public housing. This Government claims that it is looking after the people who are very poor and the people who are in serious economic difficulties. Yet if one looks at its policies as a whole in the area of social expenditure, one sees that at a time when people are emerging with special needs, homelessness is increasing and housing waiting lists are going up the Government is, in fact, reducing spending on public housing. That certainly does not indicate a government of social concern or a government of compassion; it indicates a government with priorities in which housing simply does not fit. We cannot look at the aggregate level of government spending and expect that to tell us all there is to be said about housing policy. We need to talk,about the monetarist stance of this Government which has resulted in increasingly high interest rates. The effect of the rise in interest rates is to make money for ordinary people very much dearer.
Mr Beazley-The Government is against little capitalists, in other words,
Mr HOWE-One might say that it is against little capitalists. The reality is that with interest rates now climbing to 12.5 per cent people will have to pay additional money in terms of monthly repayments and the total amount for housing. Many people will not be able to get into the housing market at all.
The Minister talks about relative changes. Let us look at that aspect historically. The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation recently calculated that where it took only

18 months' pay at the time of World War I for the average family to pay off a home, it now takes four years of pay. The CSIRO-I do not think one would regard it as a body of any particular biaspoints to the fact that in 1970 people have expected with 7 per cent interest rates might to pay $63,000 in total. People are now paying nearly $100,000 for a $25,000 to $30,000 loan. The Minister talks about so many months for a loan of $25,000 or $30,000. People are literally having to pay $100,000 for a $30,000 loan to buy a modest house that is probably not properly serviced, not near shops and does not have all the facilities it ought to have. One could go on. That is what is happening in terms of this Government's policy, and this Government prides itself in its commitment to home ownership and to looking after people who are trying to get into home ownership!
One has to combine that reality with the fact that people are now in a market situation in terms of housing where a $30,000 loan is not anywhere near enough, certainly in Melbourne and Sydney. Average prices for housing in Melbourne are now well over $50,000; for people wanting or needing to have housing in particular locations the price may be well above the average. Those are the Government's policies in terms of the implications for quite ordinary people in the community.'
, Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BRADFIELD (Barton) (3.59)-Mr Deputy Speaker, this Government gets no pleasure from people who are subjected to individual hardship. The honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) put forward his case study of someone out in the Peririth area. We do not like to see things like that happening to people. We realise that from time to time people are subjected to individual hardship. We are concerned about that. What is revealed in today's debate is the Opposition's lack of understanding of the competing influences that determine realistic interest rates, No one can continually and artificially hold down rates at an unrealistic level. We realise that the dream of almost all Australians is to own their own home. This Government places that uppermost amongst those personal desires for all Australians to achieve. We want Australians to share in prosperity. In fact the main object of this Government is to allow prosperity to go through to individuals. If any decision that we make here does not benefit the individual in the long run,

410 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Housing Finance

there is no purpose in making that decision. As the
Minister has said, Australia today enjoys one of the highest percentages of home ownership in the
world. Almost 72 per cent of families in this
country enjoy that as a reality, a reality that many other countries would dearly love to achieve.

not produce anything in the manufacturing, mining or agri'cultural industries. However, it does
provide for and fulfil the personal needs of the individual. It is the reward for which those people
have worked and the reason why they have wanted to earn money. That has been their goal.

Let us look at the more recent trends and alterations to interest rates and why they have developed. In the recent argument on interest rates and in the propositions put forward by the Opposition in this debate, no one has explained why interest rates have risen. No one has pinpointed the reason why the rise in interest rates has occurred. There has existed an imbalance between the number of people wanting to borrow money and those willing to provide that money. The Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) mentioned in his speech the need to entice people to invest in funds that lend money to people who want to buy homes. Only a realistic interest rate tends to bring a better balance between people who want to lend money and those who want to borrow can achieve this result. Only an increase in interest rates will lead to this situation occurring.
Surely it is better to have a higher interest rate which results in more funds being available for lending than a situation in which interest rates are artificially held down to a level that does not attract any funds for lending purposes. It almost takes me back to my early childhood in World War II, when the shortages that prevailed created a black market. If interest rates are artificially held down and if funds are made available to a few people only I can see a situation developing in which someone will do something under the lap in order to get a person a loan.
In this argument, we analyse the community sectors which are competing for these funds, why they are competing and the advantages and disadvantages that flow from which sector gets the funds. I select as No. I the manufacturing, mining and agricultural sector that is competing for funds and must get funds. Let honourable members look at the result of investment in this group. As a result of such funding, employment opportunities are created and a continuing contribution to the Australian economy is made through the goods and services that are produced. The investment is made to ensure future production. Let honourable members look next at the money which goes to the home building industry. They will see that certainly employment is created while a house or dwelling is being constructed, but that there is no further advantage to Australia as a whole from that dwelling. Once the home is completed, it does

Guaranteed prosperity requires investment to be sensibly spread amongst those various categories that I have just mentioned. In the past, home construction has received a generous share of investment. There is now a greater need for funds to go to those industries associated with the resource boom because success of investment in this area will ensure the prosperity and long term continuation of increasing home ownership. We cannot have home ownership if we do not have prosperity. We must have prosperity first and home ownership will follow. I am not advocating starvation of home building funds, but merely identifying the major considerations when decisions on interest rates are made. I refer honourable members to some statistics. I have tables from the Indicative Planning Council's report for 1980-81. As I have said, currently almost 72 per cent of Australians own their own homes. When I look at the statistics from this report I find that, in the financial year just concluded, 131,000 homes were completed in Australia. That represents the second highest figure in the last decade. When I look at another table that a few honourable members have mentioned in this Parliament--
Mr Uren~It should be 150,000.
Mr BRADFIELD-The honourable member for Reid just said that it should be 150,000. What I am about to say may make him change his mind. When I look at a table in the same pUblication on vacant dwellings ratios, I find that throughout Australia consistently about 10 per cent of all dwellings are unoccupied. The projection in the Indicative Planning Council's report, which goes as far as 1996, indicates that vacant dwellings in Australia will increase. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard the tables from the Indicative Planning Council's report.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows~

TABLE AS: VACANT DWELLINGS RATlO(a)

Region
Sydney Rest of New South Wales Melbourne Rest of Victoria

1976(b) 1981 1996

8.10 11.32 8.17 13.26

7.85 11.39 8.18 13.48

8.10 12.04 8.52 14.62

Housing Finance

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 411

Region

1976(b) 1981 1996 Region

1976(b) 1981 1996

Brisbane Rest of Queensland
Adelaide Rest of South Australia
Perth Rest of Western Australia

6.44 12.37 6.30 16.89 6.60 15.79

6.60
12.32 6.13 16.95 6.70 15.78

6.89 12.87 6.22
18.41 6.98 16.64

Hobart
Rest of Tasmania Australian Capital
Territory Northern Territory

7.88 8.30 9.28 13.89 14.09 15.38
6.69 6.47 6.55 12.31 11.01 10.04

TABLE 5.5: COMMENCEMENTS AND COMPLETIONS OF TOTAL NEW DWELLINGS ('000)

NSW

Vic.

Qld

S.A.

WA.

Tas.

ACT

N.T.

Aust.

Commencements1975-76
1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80(f) 1980-81 (f) Completions1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80(f) 1980-81 (f)

32.2

36.5

22.4

14.9

19.6

4.1

4.6

2.9

137.1

37.0

37.9

23.7

14.3

19.4

4.0

3.1

2.4

141.7

33.9

29.4

23.8

9.4

14.9

3.6

2.4

1.2

118.7

38.7

25.5

25.4

7.4

15.1

3.7

2.1

1.2

119.1

45.0

26.8

28.1

7.6

16.2

3.4

1.5

1.4

130.0

42.0

29.5

28.0

8.2

16.5

3.5

1.3

1.4

130.4

36.1

34.3

22.0

14.0

15.0

3.7

5.1

1.9

132.0

35.9

37.8

24.0

15.4

21.3

4.0

3.5

2.8

144.8

33.8

33.5

23.9

11.7

17.4

3.9

3.2

l.5

128.9

34.9

28.0

24.4

8.4

14.7

3.5

2.0

1.3

117.1

41.0

26.0

27.7

7.8

16.1

3.4

1.5

1.4

124.9

44.0

28.5

28.1

7.8

16.5

3.5

1.3

1.4

131.1

Mr BRADFIELD-I thank the House. When honourable members look at these tables they wiII see that there must be a balance in Australia between home ownership and other investment. More importantly, there must he a balance between homes required and vacant homes so that anyone who wants to buy a second home has a sat" isfactory and stable market in which he can sell his first home. The honourable member for Reid spoke about people who wanted to buy a second home. They cannot buy a second home if the market on which they would seek to sell their first home has been destroyed. If we have too many vacant homes or a surplus of homes there is no way that a person can sell a first home and use the money obtained from it as a deposit for a second home. It is like the new car market. If new cars are for sale but the second hand car market has been destroyed, if a person cannot get a satisfactory price for his second hand car, he cannot buy a new car. Home ownership is exactly the same. The whole area needs to be controlled and there is a complete lack of understanding by the Opposition of the reasons why interest rates have risen in recent years and the need to have a market for second hand homes so that new homes can continue to be purchased.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Ian Robinson)-Order! The discussion is concluded.
GENERAL BUSINESS
Suspension ofStanding Orders
Motion (by Mr McVeigh)-by leave-agreed to:

That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent Notice No. 29, General Business, being called on forthwith, and, after conclusion of consideration of that business, Notice No.8, General Business, being called on.
ADHERENTS OF BAHA'I FAITH IN IRAN
Mr CARLTON (Mackellar) (4.11)-1 seek leave to amend the notice appearing in my name on the Notice Paper relating to the treatment of adherents of the Baha'i faith in Iran. 1 am seeking leave to amend it becau~e 1 put it down some time ago and certain matters of fact have changed since then.
Leave granted.
Mr CARLTON-I move:
That this House(I) expresses its grave concern over the persecution of the
adherents of the Baha'i faith in Iran by the regime of the Ayatollah Khomeini, and notes with alarm and abhorrence the continuing executions of Iranian Baha'is purely on the grounds of their religious faith; (2) calls upon the Government of Iran to release from custody those Baha'is who have been urfjustly detained, and to restore the holy places, properties, community centres and companies that have been confiscated; (3) commends the Australian Government for its assistance to Australian Baha'is in expressing their protest to the Iranian Government, and (4) requests the Australian Government to continue to lend its support to moves in international forums designed to restore to the Iranian Baha'is their freedom to live in peace and practice their religion in harmony with their fellow citizens of other faiths.
1 think most members of the House will be aware by now of the nature of the Baha'i faith, but 1

412 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Adherents ofBaha'i Faith in Iran

would like to give some information on it during my speech and also to indicate some of the difficulties presently being experienced by adherents of that faith in Iran. The seconder of the motion, my colleague the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack), will detail some of the atrocities which are being perpetrated at present by the Iranian regime on Baha'is. The faith of the Baha'is arose in Persia-now Iran-in the middle of the nineteenth century~ and its name, Baha'i, comes from the founder, Bahaullah, and simply means a follower of Bahaullah. It is an independent world religion ..
The Baha'i faith first 'came to my attention some years ago when I met the world famous baritone, Mr Norman Bailey, who came to Australia to sing with the Australian Opera in performances of The Mastersingers ofNuremberg. I had lunch with Mr Bailey and I was very much impressed by his adherence to this simple yet universal faith. It was by pure coincidence that a few years later I found that I was representing the electorate of Mackellar, which has within it the house of worship of the Bahai's in Australia. Visitors to the northern beachside suburbs of Sydney will have noticed that remarkable building at Ingleside which can be seen for many kilometres. It is a beautiful shrine and J would advise anybody in the area to visit it and, if possible, to attend services there. More recently, and certainly since the Iranian revolution, the Baha'is who worship at Ingleside have brought to my attention the very severe difficulties being experienced by their brethren in Iran. Certainly, following the Iranian revolution, there was a major persecution to which I shall refer later.
On 10 September last year I made a speech in the adjournment debate drawing the attention of the House to this problem, and on the following day, II September, I gave notice of the motion which is substantially the same as the one I moved today. Last year the former Minister for Foreign Affairs-the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock)-saw members of the Baha'i faith in Australia and as a result had the Iranian charge-d'affaires called in to hear the Australian Government's concern about the persecution of Baha'is. With the formation of the new Parliament, I renewed the motion on notice. On 9 March 1981 Senator Wheeldon asked a question in the Senate of Senator Dame Margaret Guilfoyle, representing the Minister for Foreign Affairs, and Dame Margaret was able to indicate that the Australian representative at the United Nations Commission on Human Rights had specifically raised the problem of religious persecution in Iran and had raised the question of

Baha'is in particular. Dame Margaret also indicated in that answer that the present Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) was continuing the role of the previous Minister in pursuing this matter in international forums and, where possible, with the Iranian Government.
On 25 March of this year the honourable member for Diamond Valley, now the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown), spoke on the Human Rights Commission Bill and detailed the problems being experienced at that time by Iranian Baha'is. On 26 March 1981 Sehator Puplick moved a motion in the Senate to this effect:
That the Senate deplores the continued persecution of religious minorities in Iran, particularly the large community of Baha'is, and urges that this total abuse of the right to religious tolerance be brought to the attention of the Human Rights Commission of the United Nations.
That motion was supported by Senator Gareth Evans on behalf of the Australian Labor Party and it was carried by the Senate. There have been, of course, individual cases of Iranian citizens who have come to Australia, possibly before the revolution, and found that they are subject to religious persecution. I have made representations, as I am sure many other honourable members have, to the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) on behalf of such people, hoping that the Australian Government will be able to take a sympathetic view of their plight. I am happy to say that the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs has advised me that he is giving this matter very sympathetic consideration, and in a forthcoming statement on immigration policy matters he will refer to the status of Iranian citizens suffering persecution.
I thought that in order to indicate to the House just how outrageous it is that this should be happening to adherents I would refer to some of the basic Baha'i teachings. The Baha'i faith, which rose out of Islam but is different from Islam, proclaims the unity of God and His prophets. It recognises the basic oneness of all religions and the oneness of the entire human race. It encourages an independent investigation of truth. It provides the necessary agencies for the establishment and safeguarding of a permanent and universal peace as the supreme goal of mankind. It states that religion must go hand in hand with science and that it constitutes the ultimate basis of a peaceful, ordered and progressive society. It upholds the principle of equal opportunity, rights and privileges for men and women. It advocates universal compUlsory education. It exalts work performed in the spirit of service to the rank of worship. The Baha'i faith is particularly emphatic

Adherents ofBaha'i Faith in fran

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 413

in its teachings about obedience to government, number of works that today constitute the scrip-

non-involvement in politic~, the oneness of reture of the religion he founded, the Baha'i faith.

ligion and the far-reaching implications of the Bahaullah taught the unity of mankind and the

oneness of mankind.

equality of races and nations. He proclaimed the

I certainly have found from my contacts with individual Baha'is and also from attending religious services which are conducted by the Baha'is that they are indeed a very gentle people.

essential harmony of religion and science, equality of the sexes and the need for universal education. He also established the principles on which this currently world-wide religion would be founded.

The set of religious principles that I have The authorities, both religious and secular, kept

underlined must have been startling indeed not Bahaullah in confinement and exile for some 40

only in Iran in the mid-nineteenth century but years. Fundamentalist Muslim clergy, feeling

surely throughout much of the world. It is hard to threatened by ideas that challenged the theologi-

imagine that such foresight and such understandcal formulas they had repeated for hundreds of

ing of the movement of human progress over the years, continued to demand the extermination of

forthcoming centuries would be seen by such a . the Baha'is whom they denounced as heretics and

small band in such a place so long ago.

harmfu'l misleaders. In time, the Baha'is were

Many find it difficult to understand why members of a religious minority dedicated to tolerance, peace and universal brotherhood arouse hatred in those amongst whom they live. The reasons for persecutions, the hatred and the violence lie deep in the socio-psychological structure of Persian society and go back more than a century to 1844 when a young merchant of Shiraz,

turned into the scapegoats of Iranian society. As their numbers increased they became an evermore attractive target for demagogic attacks by those who wanted to distract the public or create turmoil. Since the Baha'is emphasised education and placed high value on work, they achieved a rela-
tively high standard of living which made them attractive targets of pogroms.

later known as the Bab, founded this religion Last, but not least, the peaceable nature of the

whose followers rejected the literal interpretation Baha'i community made it possible to attack

of the Koran and held that soon he whom God Baha'is without fear of violent retaliation. In mo-

shall make manifest would appear on earth to ments of national stress, during famines, revol-

bring a new law and to inaugurate a new era in the utions and invasions of the country, Baha'is could

history of mankind. In nineteenth century Iran, be blamed for the nation's miseries. If one did not

where even the notion of religious liberty did not wish to pay a debt one could accuse the creditor of

exist, the teachings of the Bab were bound to probeing a Baha'i. If an epidemic spread throughout a

duce a violent reaction. Accused of heresy the Bab province one could blame the Baha'is. Baha'i

was imprisoned and finally executed in 1850. This ideals of world unity could be twisted to appear as

did not stop the spread of the Bab's teachings nor a lack of patriotism. Baha'i acceptance of the

did it stop the resistance of his disciples who truth inherent in all great religions of mankind

defended themselves with great valour against could be interpreted as a betrayal of Islam. When

attacks by the united forces of the clergy, the in 1896 Nasiri'd-Din Shah was assassinated by a

mobs and the government. There ensued a campan-Islamist terrorist the Baha'is were automati-

paign of extermination in which some 20,000 cally accused of that deed. In a brief but violent

Babis, as they were then called, were killed. The persecution that followed several Baha'is lost

cruelty of the suppression, the indiscriminate their lives. In 1903 more than 100 Baha'is were

massacre of women and children and the tortures massacred in Yazd. The outbreak of the revol;

inflicted upon masses of innocent people -have ution in 1906 precipitated new attacks on Baha'is.

been eloquently described both by participants As the constitutional movement developed, reac-

and by Western observers. The bloodshed left a tionaries brought groundless accusations against

legacy of suspicion, fear and pain.

the Baha'is, denouncing them as supporters and

Thirteen years after the martydom of the Bab one of his leading disciples who had been exiled by the Persian Government to Baghdad proclaimed himself to be the one whose advent the Bab had

inspirers of the reformist cause. In the chaotic

conditions of World War I and its aftermath

Baha'is once again suffered scattered attacks in

various parts of the country.

.

prophesied. He became known as Bahaullah and During the 1930s things calmed down some-

is seen as the main founder oHhe religion. Most of what but a large scale attack on the Baha'i com-

the Bab's followers accepted Bahaullah's claim munity was launched in the month of Ramadan in

and they became known thereafter as Baha'is. 1955. At one of Tehran's mosques Shaykh

Over the next 40 years Bahaullah produced a vast Muhammad Taqi Falsafi, a fanatical Mullah,

414 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Adherents ofBaha'i Faith in Iran

daily urged his flock to rise up against the false religion. He accused the Baha'is of being enemies of Islam and called for severe measures against them. One can certainly see in this little piece of history as in the earlier ones precursors of what has been happening in recent times. It is almost a repeat of that old history. In 1955 there was an orgy of senseless murder, rape, pillage and destruction. The details were published in a number of leading European and American newspapers and aroused the concern of a large number of Western statesmen and scholars; The outbreaks were mentione9 by President Eisenhower in a press conference reported in the Chicago Daily News on 14 July 1955. The renowned Oxford scholer, Professor Gilbert Murray, wrote an open letter in the Manchester Guardian on 22 August 1955 where he said:
A country such as Irfln, whose Government approved the Declaration of Human Rights, can ill-afford to permit fanatics to attack with violence the peaceful followers of a ~armless and progressive religion.
His remarks were echoed by the British historian, Professor Arnold Toynbee, who wrote to express his concern in the 3 September issue of the Times. He stated:
In publishing your leading article of August 30, 'A Persecuted Sect', I am sure you have done a service to Persia as well as to her Baha'i citizens. The Persian Government has, as you say, an interest in keeping order and protecting its nationals . . . The Baha'is have a particularly strong claim to be tolerated, because non-violence is one of the cardinal principles of their religion.
This is quite significant because in 1955 a worldwide campaign of publicity, expressions of sympathy for the Baha'is of Iran on the part of outstanding individuals throughout the world and two formal appeals to the United Nations eventually resulted in some relief. The Iranian Foreign Minister gave formal reassurances to the Secretary-General of the United Nations that the persecutions would be halted. However, it took several years for passions to abate, for normalcy to return and for the Iranian Baha'j community to begin to rebuild its shattered and desecrated holy places, community centres and educational facilities. Since then Baha'is have continued to live under the threat of further outbreaks and the burden of severe civil restrictions.
Though the Baha'is are the largest religious minority in the country their existence was not officially recognised by the government of the Shah. Unlike other minorities, such as the Christians, the Jews and the Zoroastrians, they enjoyed 'no protection under the imperial constitution. Being in ,their vast majority ethnic Iranians, speaking Persian or Azerbaijani, they are no foreign element but a part of the Iranian nation to

which they have always been loyal. It is the medieval intolerance of fanatical elements that strives to set them apart from their Muslim brothers and fellow citizens. Being non-political, law abiding, and opposed to all violence they constitute no threat to anyone. Yet they have been the most frequently persecuted group in the nation. The current outbreaks of persecution are only one more episode in the long history of cruel and senseless oppression.
There have been six stages in what happened in Iran in recent times. The first stage was the seizure of the complete records of the National Baha'i Centre. This action provided those responsible for the persecution with the means of identifying members of the Baha'i community throughout Iran. The numbers are estimated-I am not quite sure of the total number-at somewhere between 200,000 and 500,000 people, which is a fairly large minority. The second stage, which began immediately, was a campaign of systematic destruction of the economic base of the community. Baha'i assets were arbitrarily seized, pensions were cancelled and bank accounts confiscated, private enterprises were looted or wrecked, farms and orchards were burned and thousands of Baha'is were discharged from public and private employment.
The third stage was the effort to terrorise the community. Urged on by sermons of the Shiah clergy and supported by so-called revolutionary guards, mobs destroyed Baha'i shrines and holy places, desecrated cemetries and raped and beat members of the faith in scores of towns and villages. The media collaborated by giving wide publicity to hate propaganda against the Baha'is. This has been followed by the current attempt to cut the head off the Baha'i community, so to speak. The members of the National Baha'i Assembly and many members of local assemblies in major cities and towns have been arrested and held without legal process. Unsubstantiated charges have been widely published that the prisoners were agents of imperialism, heretics, apostates or Savak collaborators, that is, collaborators with the Shah's secret police. The fifth stage took place this past summer and fall in Europe when the campaign moved into its most ominous stage with the beginning of a series of farcical trials by local komitehs in which a dozen or more prominent Baha'is have been sentenced to death on these same charges. It is apparent in the sixth phase that they wished to demoralise the whole of the Baha'i community. All those sentenced to death were offered their lives if they would take this step.

Adherents ofBaha'i Faith in Iran

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 415

They have not done so. My colleague, the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack), will indicate that many people have lost their lives in this battle, although it was a one-sided battle.
Why are they such a threat to the regime of the Ayatollah Khomeini? I think'the reason is that they are such a liberal sect. Nothingthey put forward could possibly be harmful to anybody except a fanatic. The principles of their religion are for openness of inquiry, equality of the sexes, independent investigation of the truth and the use of science in advancing the human race. These are all liberal principles which I hope all of us in this House share. But these principles, of course, are a dire threat to a regime such as that of the Ayatollah. It is for that reason that these people are losing their lives. I ask the House to consider this motion and pass it unanimously in the hope that these poor beleaguered people ~ilI be assisted in world forums.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hoo. lao Robiosoo)-Is the motion seconded?
Mr Shack-I second the motion and seek leave to speak later.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (4.32)-1 wish to m,ake a few comments on b(lhalf of the Opposition. I welcome the remarks made by the honourable member for Mackellar (Mr Carlton). This matter 'has been the subject of debate in this Parliament. It was not raised by the honourable member for Mackellar, but was raised by his colleague, the honourable member for Diamond Valley (Mr N. A. Brown), in the debate on the Human Rights Commission Bill last March. The honourable member for Diamond Valley then referred to a notice of motion which has been brought on-for debate today. In that context we welcome the Government's refreshing approach to dealing with notices of motion. They are not often dealt with. It appears that we will have a chance to debate some of them. My colleagues in the Opposition also have given notice of motions that they are anxious to have discussed. We look forward to continued co~operation in that respect.
This matter is a very serious one for the reasons that the honourable member for Mackellar mentioned. I am pleased to note that he has given, in support of his motion, a number of facts which clearly indicate that over the centuries~certainly over this century-the Baha'is have been subjected to dreadful treatment by those who have been in charge in Iran. This motion mentions the present regime in Iran, but the facts clearly indicate that for some time there has been persecution of Baha'is in Iran whether it be. under the regime of the Shah or under the regime of some other

controller of Iran. I note that the Senate has discussed this matter. I think Senator Puplick raised it on 25 March. The motion was passed and it was supported by my colleagues in that august chamber. With the pe.rmission of my friends opposite I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a letter written by my Leader to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcom Fraser) on 5 August indicating that the Senate had passed the resolution in the followingterms:
That the Senate deplores the continued persecution of religious minorities in Iran, particularly the large community of Baha'is, and urges that this total abuse of the right to religious tolerance be brought to the attention of the Human Rights Commission of the United Nations.
Leave granted.
, The letter read as follows-
LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION
5 August 198 I
The Rt. Hon. Malcolm FraserC.H., M.P., Prime Minister, Parliament House, Canberra, ACT 2600
My dear Prime Minister, In the Senate on 26 March 1981 the following resolution
was unanimously approved by the Senate:
'That the Senate deplores the continued persecution of religious minorities, in Iran, particularly the large community of Baha'is, and urges that this total abuse of the right to religious tolerance be brought to the attention of the Human Rights Commission of the United Nations'.
I would be grateful for your advice as to whether the Government has yet had the opportunity to bring the issue of the Baha'is to the attention of the Human Rights Commission of the United Nations.
Yours sincerely, BILL HAYDEN, M.P.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I thank honourable members. This letter shows that the Leader of the Opposition was anxious to co-operate in the case of that resolution. We are also anxious to indicate to the honourable member for Mackellar that we have no objection to his motion. In the course of mentioning support for the Senate's resolution, I note also that other people have had cause for concern about discrimination particularly religious discrimination in Iran. Reference has been made to the persecution of the Christians and the Jews, who have had a pretty tough time in Iran. This indicates that we do have some problems in our society. Christians and Jews could hardly be said to have had an easy time in Iran under the Ayatollah, but the group that has suffered the most has certainly been the Baha'is.l suppose one could say also that the Kurds are having a difficult time in Iran. We talk about human rights, religious freedoms and freedoms generally. At present we have difficulties in our own land. We have accepted refugees from Asia, Latin America,

416 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Adherents ofBaha'i Faith in Iran

Cyprus and Lebanon. We now see the problems of Northern Ireland being raised in the cities of Australia such as Sydney. We are seeing the problems of what is deemed to be religious discrimination and religious persecution.
The Australian Labor Party deplores religious intolerance wherever it occurs. There is no doubt that the Baha'is have been persecuted by past regimes and by the present regime in Iran. It is im" portant that the Australian Government speaks out and condemns that persecution. We have an obligation to speak out under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. It is a matter of considerable regret that in spite of many years work by the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, an effective international convention directed at the practice of religious intolerance by governments is still not in force. I understand that the Human Rights Commission has recently completed a draft convention and submitted it to the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations for transmission to the United Nations General Assembly.
I urge the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr .Street) to instruct the Australian delegation to the forthcoming meeting of the General Assembly to give the completion of work on this convention the highest priority and to lobby other governments to give the convention the highest priority. The Human Rights Commission is a very broadly based body with 40 member countries from all regional, religious and socio-economic groups. All the arguments which could or should be reasonably advanced with respect to the substance of a convention on religious intolerance have already emerged and been thoroughly debated. There is no reason for any further delay. It appears that the Baha'i minorityin Iran is suffering from acute repression as its members cannot enjoy normal human rights and practise their religion free from intimidation and oppression. The honourable member for Mackellar and his colleagues have said previously that there have been executions, confiscations and complete discrimination against this community which has nothing but good to offer its fellow citizens. So the Labor Party is concerned about the persecution of minorities, particularly of those such as the Baha'is.
There are many other problems which we cannot canvass in this debate, but I have mentioned some in my opening remarks. This is a country which accepts many migrants. Migrants who have come to Australia have brought home to us the problems they have experienced in their own countries. There is no doubt that the Baha'is in Australia are anxious to have the Australian Government take some action. There are many

others in the same boat and that is rather tragic. It is of some satisfaction that in the development of our democracy in Australia we have made progress in giving everybody the same rights. There are some difficulties and objections which are certainly valid in respect of our Aborigines and others. But it is important that matters such as this have a chance to be aired because people have come to Australia, perhaps not because they want to come here but to escape persecution. We cannot let that pass unnoticed. We wish to see a continuation of a responsible and humane attitude to our citizens and also to our international obligations. We cannot turn people away from Australia because they are in fear of their lives. Certainly it is tragic to think that they could be in fear of their lives because of their religious beliefs.
There are many hundreds of thousands of Baha'is in Iran. The Baha'is are a pacifist religious group emphasising unity and prohibiting involvement by their members in politics. The Baha'is broke away from Islam in the mid-nineteenth century. It is clear that members of that faith have been persecuted in Moslem countries ever since. They have been in Australia for over 60 years. There are Baha'i communities in every State and Territory of Australia. There have been threats against Iranian inembers of the Baha'i faith in Australia. Some members, apparently, fear for their safety and the safety of their families. That has to be deplored. It is intolerable in a democracy such as ours. There is absolutely no evidence to suggest that members of this faith have been other than hard-working citizens whose conduct is beyond reproach.
I note that the previous Minister for Foreign
Affairs, the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock), received representations from members of the Baha'i faith and instructed his
Department to call in the Iranian charged'affaires and protested to him about the persecution of the Baha'is in Iran. I commend him for so doing. I urge the current Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) to consider whether it is not time to take such further action. Apparently, under the present regime the Baha'is have been subjected to arbitrary arrest, job discrimination, and, as has been indicated, the desecration of graves-in other words, to every form of persecution. Many people have been executed; I am told at least seven last September and many more in recent times. So, as I have indicated, the Opposition supports what the honourable member for Mackellar has said.
We have obligations under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. These inclUde the In-
ternational Covenant on Civil and Political

Adherents ofBaha'i Faith in Iran

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 417

Rights and it is significant that the signatories of this latter Covenant include the Iranian Government. Whilst we still do not have in force an international convention against the practices of religious intolerance, there are steps which the Australian Government could take, within the framework of international law, and in accordance with its international responsibilities, to assist the Baha'i. We could, in particular, raise the serious violations to which I have referred in the United Nations Commission on Human Rights, of which we are a member. I advert to the fact that Article 27 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights states:
In those states in which ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities exist, persons belonging to such minorities shall not be denied the right, in community with the other members of their group, to enjoy their own culture, to profess and practise their own religion or to use their own language.
Quite clearly, on the evidence available this provision of international law has been violated by the regime in Iran. Other articles including Article 18 of that Covenant have also clearly been breached. We therefore have a duty as well as a right to raise the matter in the Human Rights Commission and we should do so.
Mr SHACK (Tangney) (4.42)-Less than 24 hours have passed since the Treasurer (Mr Howard) brought down this year's Budget. Next week in this chamber we will be involved in the hurly-burly of debating the Budget, disputing with one another about its particular terms, criticising one another about the level of income redistribution, the size of the cake and how it is to be split up, whether we are taking too much from one sector or whether we are not giving enough to another sector. Against that background, I think it is extremely sobering that we can join together as one chamber-the House of Representatives-in recognising the persecution of a religious minority in a foreign country many thousands of miles from this place and in condemning the persecution that is taking place in that society. Of course, we are talking about the persecution of the adherents of the Baha'i faith in Iran.
As my colleague the honourable member for Mackellar (Mr Carlton) has pointed out, there is a small Baha'i faith community in Australia. I was impressed with them when two representatives came to see me in my Perth electorate office soon after I was elected in 1977. They came to inform me of their religion in a very self-effacing, low-key way, and to leave me some booklets and pamphlets relating to their beliefs. I certainly found it a very humbling experience because they had not

come to propagandise their faith but, in my presence, to genuinely pray for me and my efforts in this Parliament. It was a very humbling experience and it bears out the fact that they are a gentle and very tolerant people. It is an extremely pacifist religion. The Baha'is are concerned with unity and consensus. Indeed, those concerns lead them to prohibit themselves from any involvement in the day to day political process. Yet we know that for some time now in Irabeen facing extreme persecution solely on the basis of that very pacifist religion.
We have learned in this debate that the position of Baha'is in Iran has always been bleak and if we cannot relate to the circumstances surrounding the foundation of that religion in the 19th century and the persecution that followed we can certainly relate to this century. My colleague has drawn attention to the flare-ups in the 19.30s when there was extreme persecution against adherents of the Baha'i faith. In my own lifetime, in 1955, the then Minister for the Interior for the Iranian Government declared that the sect be banned and all their centres be liquidated. As my colleague has pointed out, what followed was an orgy of senseless murder, rape, pillage and persecution of every variety. It was only because of extreme world pressure that the then Iranian Government gave formal reassurances to the United Nations that the persecution would be halted. It really has been a century of persecution with particularly nasty flare-ups. We are now seeing in the anarchical situation in Iran a heightening of that persecution. I have a quote from the Ayatollah S~doughi when he called on the faithful masses to hunt the Baha'is they knew from all administrations and to deliver them to the revolutionary court.
What is extremely worrying about the present context is that it is not persecution prosecuted by
a few outrageous individuals; it is persecution which is orchestrated and organised from the top. My colleague from Mackellar did us a very great service when he outlined in a very clear form the six stages of this conspiracy to destroy the Baha'i faith, namely: To seize all their records; to destroy systematically the economic base of the adherents of the Baha'i faith; to terrorise the Baha'i community; to cut off the head of the Baha'i community; to leave it leaderless and speechless; to move into a campaign of farcical detentions and trials; and, of course, organised murder and death. I am reluctant, against the background of that experience, to portray in detail in this Parliament the particularinstances, but there are people well known in Australia-Mr Parsa, Mr Sobhani and Mr Firuzi, Professor Hakim, Mr Nafti and Mr

418 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Adherents ofBaha'i Faith in Iran

Dehgani-who are no longer with us because they have been subjected to the organised persecution campaign going on in Iran. I have a letter here which was published in the Australian Baha'i Bulletin in July 1979. I shall read a couple of paragraphs from the letter which obviously has come out of Iran and which was written by an adherent of the Baha'i faith:
About 2,000 men, women, children and youth have sought refuge in the mountains and .deserts and live in tents. They have spent many cold and rainy days in the caves of the mountains. Many are injured with broken arms and legs. The small children have lost their ability to talk, having been frightened so much because of the incidents-
The incidents of persecution-
. . . These believers, without having any means of livelihood, pass their days with utmost difficulty-
In this modern world-
and are banished from place to place. This is only a glimpse into one incident. Every day, from
every corner, there is another cry of grief. The number of Baha'is in prisons for one reason or another has increased tp 200. Many have been discharged from their jobs. Many have lost their retirement allowances. The Ministry of Education has officially sent a circular that those Baha'is who do not deny their faith be immediately discharged.
At present thousands of friends in Iran have lost everything, or have lost their jobs and are meeting their expenses by the sale of their belongings. And then there are those who are fleeing from one place to another and in grave danger. This is only the beginning of the journey of love, and its end is not known.
We can be very grateful this afternoon that the hQnourable member for Mackellar has raised the matter in this chamber. He, of course, referred to the fact that he first raised it last year and, as the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Bowen) has mentioned, it was raised by the honourable member for Diamond Valley (Mr N. A. Brown). Former Senator Puplick also made quite an extensive speech on the matter in the Senate last March. The Senate passed a motion deploring the persecution of Bahai's in Iran and urged that the matter be brought to the attention of the Human Rights Commission of the United Nations. I am very pleased that since this matter has been brought to the attention of the Australian Government it has seen fit to express an opinion. The former Minister for Foreign Affairs-the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock)-instructed his Department to call in the Iranian charge d'affaires to voice the Australian Government's protest. This protest has been continued by the present Minister. There has been world-wide condemnation from Amnesty International. The Canadian House of Commons has passed a motion similar to the motion we are considering this afternoon. The United Nations has expressed considerable concern about the

situation, as have many European countries. As I have said, a motion was passed in the Senate.
An important point made by my colleague the honourable member for Mackellar was that the
persecution which was perpetrated in 1955 in Iran ceased because of the weight of world opinion and condemnation. We now have an opportunity to contribute to the world condemnation so that the situation presently being perpetrated in Iran may again cease. I do not know whether, by passing this motion in the House of Representatives, we will sa~e one Iranian life. I do not know whether we will preserve and protect the position of n~ose presently under threat. But at least the passing of the motion in this House will draw the attention of the Iranian authorities to the Australian view that what is happening is objectionable. A free and independen t democratic society like Australia has as one of its cornerstones a belief in the freedom of worship and religion. At least this motion will put forward our view that what is happening in that country is extremely objectionable and should cease forthwith.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (4.53)-As has been pointed out by the honourable member for Mackellar (Mr Carlton), who moved this motion, the Baha'i faith originated in Persia, as it was then known, in the second half of the nineteenth century. The Baha'is trace their faith back to the Babi
faith of the 1840s, which sprang from the Shiite tradition of Islam to which the Ayatollah Khomeini belongs. It is true that Persian history has been marked by horrific persecutions of religious dissenters. I think it is important to make clear that those dissenters have not been confined to the Baha'is. No doubt the Baha'is deserve special treatment, but it also needs to be pointed out that the Jewish community of Iran, which dates back more than 2,000 years, has been virtually eliminated. The Zoroastrians, who are followers of another important religion which began in Iran, have been subject to enormous persecution. The overwhelming bulk of the members of that faith have migrated over the years to India and Pakistan. In India they are known as Parsees. The Zoroastrian religion is a native religion of Iran that has been subject to the most acute persecution. The Baluchis and the Azerbaijanis have also been persecuted. So have the Kurds and to some degree the Druses, the Ishmaelite Shiites. They suffer. They have committed the abomin~ able crime of constituting a minority-not necessarily a dissenting vocal minority but simply a recognisable minority. The majority is disposed to express its prejudice and its lack of understanding and humanity by visiting the most barbarous treatment on these minorities.

Adherents ofBaha'i Faith in Iran

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 419

My only reservation about the motion moved by the honourable member for Mackellar is that it appears to suggest that we express concern for only one minority group. I hope the entire House agrees-I see that the mover and the seconder of the motion indicate their agreement-that we should convey to the Government that the motion ought to be read as though it applies to other persecuted minorities as well as the Baha'is. In 1850 the Bab, Sayyid Ali Muhammad, founder of the Babi faith, as mentioned by the honourable member for Mackellar, was executed in Tabriz and about 20,000 members of the Babi sect were killed in large scale persecutions over the next few years. When in 1863 Bahaullah proclaimed his new faith, the Baha'i, he was expelled from Persia into the Ottoman Empire and then confined to Aire, which was then in Palestine and is now in the modern state of Israel. Bahaullah died in 1892 but by his death the Baha'i faith had spread from Burma through the Middle East to the Sudan. The Baha'i faith was further promoted by the founder's son and grandson and extended to small groups in North Africa, the United States and Australia. Later still the faith was taken up with some success throughout the continent of Africa and in a number of Pacific islands.
As has been mentioned; the teaching of the Baha'is is universalist and syncretist. The Baha'is do not accept the description of syncretist, although the Baha'i faith is the best example of a syncretist faith I can think of. In their services there is no priesthood and no sermons but they read from the writings of other faiths, Shoghi Effendi, one of the leading spokesmen, described the faith in the following words:
. . . proclaims the necessity and inevitability of the unification of mankind . . . enjoins upon its followers the primary duty of an unFettered search after truth, condemns all manner of prejUdice and superstition . . . declares the purpose of religion to be the promotion of amity and concord . . . [and) proclaims its essential harmony with science . . . maintains the principle of equal rights . . . insists on compulsory education, [and) . . . eliminates extremes of poverty and wealth.
The Baha'i community is organised on an elective basis, but not in Calvin's sense. The Baha'i community has made representations to the United Nations about the treatment of its members in Iran. The Baha'i International Community is a non-government organisation in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations in New York. The community reported to the United Nations that their members have:
. . . been harassed, dismissed From their jobs" denied back pay and pensions; they have been terrorised, individuals and families beaten, and in some instances driven to the mosques and Forced to recant their faith; and their homes,

shops, and businesses have been looted, burnt down, or otherwise destroyed. Baha'i homes have continually been invaded by armed groups, and the family members subjected to long and harsh interrogations. The Iranian Baha'i community has had its holy places, centres, and businesses confiscated, even destroyed and its cemeteries have been seized and desecrated.
The national spiritual assembly of the Baha'is reported to the United Nations. It said:
. . . they were denied civil rights, such as permission to register their Baha'i marriages, the privilege to hold Baha'i religious endowments in the name of the Baha'i community, and freedom to publish Baha'i literature or establish Baha'i schools (indeed, during the reign of Muhammad Reza Shah's father--
That is, the late Shah's father-
more than 30 Baha'i schools throughout the country were permanently closed). Many From the rank and file of the Baha'is were denied jobs and sometimes even their rights to pensions because of their refusal to deny their Faith.
So the events of the last few years-the persecution under the Ayatollah Khomeini-ought not to be thought of as peculiar. No doubt it has been heightened and it'has become quantitatively and qualitatively worse. But it is a long tradition that goes back to the Pahlavi monarchy and the Quaja dynasty from the nineteenth century that preceded it. I draw the attention of the House to a particularly distressing case referred to in the Medical Journal of Australia on 16 May 1981. It referred to the murder of Dr Manuchir-Hakim in Iran, which was mentioned by the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack). The article reads:
Professor Hakim returned to Iran'in 1938 where he established the Chair of Anatomy at Teheran University. He was also a well known specialist in the field of gastroenterology and he served For 30 years as a director of the Baha'i Hospital in Teheran. This charitable hospital treated all, irrespective of their religious affiliations or nationality, and cared For the poor Free of charge where necessary.
His other great humanitarian work was as the Founder of the Baha'i Home For the Aged which accepted people oFali religious and racial backgrounds. He was decorated by the French government in 1976 with the Legion D' Honneur.
He does not sound to me like a very dangerous terrorist.
It continues:
In the months beFore his assassination" ProFessor Hakim received constant threats and anonymous telephone calls. During a short visit to Europe in 1980 he was warned by Friends not to return to Iran, but his high sense of duty made him return to serve people in need despite the knowledge of danger to his own liFe. On January 12, 1981, he was murdered by an unknown assassin who entered his office and shot him to death after his last patient had left his clinic.
ProFessor Hakim was in no sense a political dissident and one is even more concerned at the loss to the world oFthis eminent humanitarian and gravely disturbed to learn that his property was confiscated by the Islamic Republic on January 14, two days after he was murdered, despite legal protests, and that his Family is without the protection of Iranian law.
The Federation of Protestant Churches in Switzerland, through its Human Rights Commission has declared its belief

420 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Adherents ofBaha'i Faith in Iran

tliat the new constitution of Iran should include protection for all religious minorities so that Professor Hakim's family and fellow Baha'is may enjoy religious freedom.
Before I conclude I want to return for just a moment to the question of the Zoroastrians. A letter that appeared in the New York Times on 21 January 1979 pointed out:
Over the past millenium, most Zoroastrians have fled to India, where they live in freedom and safety; these have come to be known as Parsis. The Parsis have distinguished themselves in commerce, science and the arts (Zubin Mehta, conductor of the New York Philharmonic, will be well-known to your readers). But some 27,000 Zoroastrians remain in Iran, mainly in Teheran and in the Yazd area.
That is considerably less than the number of Baha'is. The twentieth century has been the most appalling era in terms of religious and tribal persecution. The elimination of six million Jews in Europe in World War II stands out, but there are very many other horrific examples in other continents. The Ayatollah Khomeini presides over one of the most unattractive regimes in the world today with strong elements of obscurantism and cruelty. In the Iranian Bulletins, the news bulletins of the Committee for Defence of Political Prisoners in Iran, published by Index on Censorship in London in 1979 there is an introductory comment by the writer, Edward Mortimer, which says:
. . . the future of human rights in Iran is far from being assured, and it is still possible that the revolution will in the end produce a new dictatorship no less savage than that of Mohammed Reza Pahlavi. It would not be the first revolution in the world to follow such a cycle. What would be wrong would be to attribute any such tendency to the Islamic and or anti-Western character of the revolution and the regime that is emerging from it . .. It is hardly surprising if they suspect the good faith of criticisms of their new rulers emanating from the West in the name of freedom or human rights
. . . Even those of us in the West who did speak out against the Pahlavi dictatorship in the days of its strength have to admit that we were quite unsuccessful in changing the policies of our own governments towards it.
I point out that the Baha'i faith has not emanated from the West. It is not something imposed historically. It is something that has arisen out of the Iranian tradition, out of Iranian history. This persecution is a black mark against the record of the current Iranian Government. Why are we in the Australian Parliament raising the question of the Baha'is, people who are mistreated in a distant country? The reason, of course, is that we recognise our common interest-we are all part of the human race. Before I close I should mention that the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) was very anxious that I should indicate his very strong support:for the motion. He has had many representations on this. issue. The matter was raised-the honourable member for Mackellar should be congratulated for doing so-because of

the common bond, membership of the human race.
Mr Jacobi-They opposed the human rights standing committee in the Parliament. They opposed that when they had the chance. That is to be deplored.
Mr BARRY JONES-That is to be deplored, . but there will be a unanimous resolution here today. I close with the famous words of John Donne, the great metaphysical poet, which express the feeling we all have:
No man is an island, entire of itself; every man is a piece of the continent, a part or the main; if a clod be washed away by the sea, Europe is the less, as well as if a promontory were, as well as if a manor or thy rriends or of thine own were; any man's death diminishes me, because I am involved in mankind; and therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls; it tolls for the
Question resolved in the affirmative.

HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES: PROPOSED PROCEDURES COMMITTEE

MrSCHOLES (Corio) (5.8)-1 move:

(I) That a standing committee be appointed to maintain a
continuing surveillance or the practices and procedures of the House of Representatives with a view to
making recommendations which would enhance the role of the House and its operational efficiency.

(2) That the committee consist of four Government

Members and four Opposition Members to be

appointed by Mr Speaker after consultation with the

~~Whl~

.

(3) That Mr Speaker alsQ appoint it Chairman of the

Committee who shall have a casting vote only.

(4) That any additional terms of appointment of the committee be the subject of a subsequent resolution of the House.

The motion which I have moved arises out of a select committee of this Parliament which met some years ago to examine the procedures of the Parliament and to make recommendations in respect of a committee system for the Parliament.
That committee was the Procedures Committee of the House of Representatives. The purpose of the committee I am seeking to set up is to provide the means by which the House itself can review its own procedures, can make recommendations or can have recommendations on changes in procedures brought before the House to enhance and improve the efficiency of the House and the role that the House plays in the government of the
country. Unfortunately, in recent times the Standing Orders have ceased to be the prerogative of this chamber. That prerogative has been transferred outside this chamber, largely to a committee of Government back bench members and the Executive. That is not the manner in which the Standing Orders were handled when you and I, Mr Deputy Speaker, came to this Parliament..

Representatives: Proposed Procedures Committee 19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 421

At that time they were dealt with on their merit by members of this chamber voting without party whip. So whilst the Standing Orders were not all that we would have liked, and certainly advantaged the Executive to an extent which is probably beyond the wishes of most back benchers, they were approved in free vote by members of this House at the time they were put forward.
In recent times the procedures by which changes to the Standing Orders have taken place have almost always consisted of an Executive resolution and a subsequent reference to the Standing Orders Committee after a long term of practice based on the change. Whilst one does not deny the input of the Executive into the chamber, it is highly desirable that a house of parliament should reserve unto itself the right to consider its own procedures and to bring forward wherever possible recommendations which would amend those procedures in such a way as to make them more effective for the house of parliament to carry out its function.
It can be argued, and I have no doubt that it will be argued, that there is a Standing Orders Committee. The House of Commons also has a standing orders committee and has found that it is not a satisfactory vehicle for examining ongoing matters relating to procedures or new procedures which may be desirable for a parliament to fulfil its role in a society which is ever more demanding on members of parliament and the government of the day. Clearly, in the Westminster system, the parliament has more than one role. First of all, it
has a responsibility to facilitate the government of the country by enacting and dealing with legislation in a manner which does not unduly inhibit good_government. It should seriously inhibit bad government. This chamber has allowed to pass from its control the procedures by which it oper-
ates. I do not deny that resolutions are carried by a majority of members, but on almost all occasions now when Standing Orders matters are dealt with, they are carried by a majority of members after party decision and on party lines, and rarely with any adequate consultation with the Opposition. Usually it is a take-it-or-leave-it proposition.
The Standing Orders Committee, as I have already mentioned, does exist. It recommends the form in which new procedures should be written into the Standing Orders of the House. It is not a committee which has a capacity or could have a capacity for ongoing consideration of changes or for examination of the manner in which this chamber operates as a house of parliament. The Standing Orders Committee is cumbersome. Its personnel alone prevent it from meeting regularly

or from carrying out any investigation other than a cursory one. It has one advantage. Because of its personnel, those things to which it agrees are
usually able to be presented to this Parliament almost as a fait accompli, although some of its recommendations have not been adopted in the past, and unfortunately a number of reports of that Committee have never been listed for consideration in this chamber.
Quite seriously, a procedures committee would give us the flexibility that is necessary to examine our procedures. One would hope that the members of such a committee would be experienced in the operations of parliament and would recognise the various roles that this chamber has to carry out. It would give this chamber the opportunity. for self-examination of its procedures on a continuing basis. Clearly, recommendations would come back to this House and the House would determine whether or not those recommendations were to be proceeded with. If they were to become part of the Standing Orders or the regular
procedures of this House, one would expect that the Standing Orders Committee would ultimately draft and present the necessary Standing Orders.
Procedures committees operate successfully in other parliaments, and are a far more flexible and a better vehicle than the Standing Orders Committee. We have no means now by which we can bring about a review of our procedures on any specific matter. An honourable member may list for debate in this chamber a resolution of the Standing Orders Committee but the chances of it actually being debated are almost nil. Certainly there is no vehicle by which such a matter can be seriously considered by members of this chamber
or alternatives which can be considered to meet any given situation.
We are not seeking in this motion to bring about a decision-making function, but merely to bring about a facility which would enable this House to examine itself and to report upon itself to its members for their determination on how its
procedures should be conducted. We have had many changes in recent years, some good and some bad, but none of which would not have been better had it been the subject of substantive consideration on the best means by which the Parliament could conduct certain items of business, and none of which would not have been better had it not received the unanimous recommendations of this House. For instance, in recent years we have had the introduction of Estimates committees. When I say that they are a farce, I think that I reflect the majority view of the Opposition and the majority view of members who have participated on those committees. They have been set

422 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981 Representatives: Proposed Procedures Committee

up without any substantive consideration of what their role is, other than to take the debate out of this chamber, which seems to be the only role they perform, how they are to be conducted, the nature of their business and what time should be allocated to the conduct of that business.
I think that members of this chamber, meeting as a smaller committee, giving consideration to a need on occasions to conduct outside this chamber business which normally would be conducted in this chamber, in order to permit there being greater time for the major debates which should take place in this chamber but do not, would have come down with a more workable proposition than the one we are faced with. We have legislation committees which I think are of doubtful validity as regards functioning effectively as part of the operations of this chamber. Agreements have been made, and they have been broken.
I believe that in future this Parliament will have to devise a means whereby matters not considered to be of major consequence and therefore able to be debated outside this chamber, can be debated outside this chamber, and whereby the procedures for doing that should if possible-it is possible-be devised by members of this Parliament meeting to determine procedures that will bring about the best possible resolution of the problem that faces this chamber. The business which now goes through this chamber and has gone thrclUgh it for the last six or seven years, is probably 10 times as great as that which went through this chamber 20 years ago, when some of us were not here. Nevertheless, it is undertaken in a time frame which is almost exactly the same. It is probably 50 times as great as that which took place in the immediate post-war years. For instance, the conciliation and arbitration legislation of 1947 was debated in this chamber for four weeks. Other Bills have been before this chamber for longer periods. Now such legislation takes two hours to consider, sometimes even three.
There are no means, an-d there have been no examinations of the procedures whereby substantive and important legislation can be adequately considered by the Parliament without necessarily being considered on the floor of this chamber. The Senate debated the Freedom of Information Bill, which is presently listed on our Notice Paper, for almost a year, and the Bill was before the Senate for longer than that. A similar situation occurred with the marriage Bills which were before this chamber not that long ago-in 1974-75. The debate and consideration in the Senate was 10 times as long as that which took place in this chamber.

In these instances our procedures are not conducive to proper examination of matters which are important to honourable members and to the country. We are supposedly the chamber which is responsible for the financial affairs of the country. We have no procedures for examination of the financial statements or the financial considerations which come before this chamber. This Committee would not, in any way, jeopardise the Government's control of the Parliament or its ability to run the Parliament. It would not jeopardise or reduce the standing of the Standing Orders Committee or its members. It would enable a continuing debate and examination of the methods by which this chamber does its business. It would enable new ideas to be examined in detail and tested and either put forward to the Parliament as suggestions for change or rejected. Majority views of honourable members from both sides of the Parliament would be reflected in that Committee.
We are confronted with a situation where we can maintain a stubborn insistence on a committee which cannot carry out the functions of considering changes which may be necessary, we can adopt procedures whereby examination by this chamber as reflected in a committee can take place or we can take the third alternative which, unfortunately, is the current position where the party empowered determines, on party lines, the procedures and Standing Orders of this chamber. This is an unfortunate departure from what was a very satisfactory arrangement at an earlier time. The Standing Orders, considerations and matters of actual conduct of this chamber which rested with individual members. I fancy that they still do in the Senate-have been transferred largely to an executive and party function. That has occurred, especially in the party sense, because of a vacuum which exists in the ability of this chamber to conduct its business. There is no facility for someone who wants to make an input into consideration of change. We have party back bench committees examining the change where really the Parliament itself should be looking at that change.
This motion arises from a unanimous decision of a parliamentary committee which reported to both Houses in 1976. At that time it was chaired by the former President of the Senate, Sir Magnus Cormack. It had previously been chaired in its initial stages by myself and subsequently by the honourable member for Scullin (Dr Jenkins). All of the honourable members of the committee supported this recommendation. I believe that it was supported by the majority of honourable members of this chamber at that time. At this

Representatives: Proposed Procedures Committee 19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 423

time the House should give consideration to adopting a procedure which is eminently successful elsewhere and which would enable this chamber to look at its own procedures in an objective, rational and sensible way on a continuing basis. The Standing Orders Committee should deal with matters of form and Standing Orders which actually govern the chamber. There are two roles in this matter. A procedures committee would fulfil a very necessary role in the future of this Parliament. The Parliament tends to have stagnated and fallen backwards in its place in the parliamentary government of this country. because of its inability to cope with the increased workload and the changes which have taken place in parliamentary and political operations in this country in recent years.
Dr JENKINS (Scullin) (5.25)-1 have much pleasure in seconding the motion. It is not surprising that I should do so when the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) has pointed out that I was the Chairman of the Joint Committee on the Parliamentary Committee System which considered this matter and made a recommendation. One of the fears is that the proposed committee is seen as replacing the Standing Orders Committee. The Standing Orders CQmmiftee is concerned with the form of words put in the Standing Orders which are to be applied. I suggest that the Standing Orders are not reviewed enough. When they are reviewed they are generally concerned with subjects that are discussed in the House or discussed by honourable members privately around the House and given some impetus.
This Committee is not suggested as a competitor with the Standing Orders Committee. It is put forward as a sensible procedure for suggested init-
iatives to be examined, discussed and their practicability tested and, finally, for the matter to be put before the House for decision and for incorporation in the Standing Orders. One feels at times that many of the practices and procedures do not require changes to the Standing Orders; they just require a change in the attitude of the House in the day-to-day functioning of Parliament. Over the years there has been a changed functioning of Parliament. There is the question of the volume of legislation and the question of the increasing demand by executive government on the time of the Parliament in putting matters forward.
One must ask whether Parliament exists just simply to provide that time for executive government. Should it not, after all, provide time for the elected representatives of the people to discuss a number of matters that are of importance? One

has only to read a number of debates that occur on the Estimates for the Parliament to see that there is a lively interest amongst a number of honourable members on practices and procedures. Suggestions may be made for certain changes which are tested, but there is no discussion or testing of the effectiveness of those changes.
One thinks of the recent setting up of Estimates committees, legislation committees, expenditure committees and so on. Who tests them? When do we get a chance as a parliament to examine how they function? It may be found, from their functioning, that there should be an alteration in their role, that they should be given more powers or fewer powers and that they should use procedures which are more appropriate to the matters that are before them. For example, the legislation committees so far have dealt with the committee stages of Bills. While some of the Bills have been technically difficult, they have not necessarily been controversial. The operation of the legislative committees has been effective in that amendments and suggestions from Opposition members have been accepted and incorporated in the legislation. Is it necessary that all second readings of Bills are dealt with in the House, or is it appropriate that they be dealt with by these committees after being presented to the House? Who can make a recommendation to parliament with regard to it? Surely it is not a matter of party opinion that the parliamentary procedures used in dealing with such legislation are the ones that must be used.
I suggest that with this sort of committee, which is set up to have a look at our practices and procedures, one would probably, after reasoned discussion, get a very practical attitude on the matter and an opinion which would be unanimous. The Joint Committee on the Parliamentary Committee System comprised members from both Houses and all parties. There is not always sweet accord between both Houses of this Parliament, yet the report that was presented on that system was unanimous. It was a report on which senators and members, with wide variations in points of view politically, had been able to agree. They suggested to the Parliament that its recommendations should be implemented. One of those suggestions related to the surveillance of the practices and procedures of parliament. Honourable members will recall that members of that Committee visited other parliaments and heard of their experiences. That reinforced our belief that a practices and procedures committee-or whatever title it was given-would be of benefit to this

424 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981 Representatives: Proposed Procedures Committee

Parliament in adjusting those practices and procedures to allow maximum participation of all members in the matters that Parliament should deal with to prevent it being bogged down on whatever action the Executive Government required it to take so that broader issues could be taken on and debated.
One of the matters you, Mr Deputy Speaker, will know has been raised is the relevance of our Question Time. I will not talk much further on that. We have the argument about whether answers to questions are relevant. That is always a bone of discontent between the Opposition and the Chair, and one for great joy for the Government at any time. But it does downgrade the information that we get from Question Time. In Question Time in other parliaments, such as the British House of Commons, a two or three line question to a specific Minister is printed. After the short and succinct answer is given, there is an opportunity at the discretion of the Speaker for supplementary questions. A discretion that we do not allow the Speaker of this Parliament. With good will and such a procedures committee, we may well find there is overwhelming agreement on the matter. That I believe, would be quite an improvement in the procedures of this House.
Should we set up standing committees? I will name one that I served on, the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation. I am very proud of that committee. I wonder at times whether a committee such as that should continue year after year when subject matters are raised in Parliament by members, and by petitions that never get an airing before a parliamentary committee. That is one of the procedures that I would like to see examined. I am not trying to judge that matter. I am saying that this sort of committee made up by four Government members, four Opposition members and a chairman who obviously, having the casting vote, would probably come from the Government side of the House-so there need be no fear in that respect-could decide just where we should head on this subject.
I believe that there is a desire amongst most members of this Parliament that we should review our practices and procedures from time to time to protect the interest of the ordinary back bench member of the Parliament to see that matters of national importance are able to be discussed in the Parliament and that these discussions allowed by practices and procedures are manifestly fair to all concerned. The practices and procedures committee that looks at these matters may ask about petitions which may come before the House. I know they are read by the Clerk and then referred

to the appropriate persons. But surely there is a place for some of those to be discussed by this Parliament. I invite honourable members who have been here for some time to ask how often this practice has occurred.
I recall, when I first became a member of this Parliament, that there were petitions by the thousand on the killing of kangaroos. That is one example where a series of petitions did produce the House of Representatives select Committee on Wildlife Conservation. I believe that that was a matter in which the Government Whip of the day, Mr Max Fox, had a great interest and he was able to persuade the Government to take it on. But that is not the proper procedure in Parliament. The petition is made to Parliament. Surely we can define a bipartisan approach through a practices and procedures committee that would enable us to look at these matters and say: These are reasonably routine petitions. We expect such petitions, but this one is of particular interest to the Parliament and the Parliament should proceed to do something about it'.
I strongly support the setting up of a practices and procedures standing committee for the House. I believe that the Government need have no fear that it would bring about its downfall. I think all honourable members would realise that it would improve our practices and procedures in the House. There are many other arguments which 1 could advance if it had not been for the fact that 1 had about three minutes notice to second this motion. Certainly there is no backwardness in my support for this motion for a standing committee of practices and procedures of the House.
Mr GILES (Wakefield) (5.37)-1 reply to the arguments of a previous Speaker of this House, the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes), who moved this motion, and to a most distinguished Deputy Speaker of another Parliament who, of course, has had some historical background in relation to the Joint Select Committee on the Parliamentary Committee System.
Dr Jenkins-You are not suggesting that I am an historical relic, are you?
Mr GILES-I am not suggesting that you are an historical dodo at all. I feel that I must take a lot of notice of what these two gentlemen have said today to this House. They have, of course, done what we did when in opposition-that is, put the position forward from where they sit. In some ways I must differ-I do not think very greatly-from what they have said. At the core of this whole debate is the proper balance-I do not think anyone has mentioned it yet-achieved by

Representatives: Proposed Procedures Committee 19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 425

Parliament as a check and control on Executive power. That is really what this debate should be about. Again this magnifies the difference between where I sit currently as a slightly senior Government back bench member and where the two honourable gentlemen sit as highly important members of Her Majesty's Opposition. Under the current Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser)- and I am not being political in any shape or form-the back bench system, the number of
committees and the power given to those committees resolves, in my view, any problems regarding the check and control of Executive power. For the first time. I chair a committee that is quite entitled to refuse-and in fact has refused-leave to a Minister to introduce a certain matter into the party room. So we get the position within this Government, contrary to other governments, where this House-I suppose this is one thing that is genuinely perturbing the two Opposition speakers in this debate-becomes, in some ways, the House of ultimate self-justification. Apart from patching up procedures such as amendments agreed to subsequent to decisions being made, that is really what it is today. Decisions of government are now being taken not one step below this Parliament-in other words, by the Executive or in the party room-but in many cases one step below that again. Therefore, Mr Deputy Speaker, you will excuse me, if I say that the reasoned argument that the honourable gentlemen put forward did not convince me about what should be the core of this debate, that is, whether there is a proper parliamentary check and balance on Executive power.
The matter of Estimates committees was mentioned by the honourable member for Corio. He put forward a view on the Estimates committees which I do not hold. If ever there is a responsibility on this Parliament to function as a check and balance on Executive power it is to mount those Estimates committees properly. That is what they are about. I can think of an instance when a team from one party in this Parliament-I will not mention which one it was-succeeded in having nobody there when an industrial relations Bill was being considered. If one is talking about check and balance and the role of the back bench members of parliament, one should get one's perspective right because that is a complete example of the proper check that there should be within a
limited portfolio responsibility on Executive power. I was disappointed to hear the honourable member for Corio treat the Estimates committees in a cavalier fashion in that instance. He also questioned-maybe this is what is worrying him-whether the structure is right and whether

the power of such a committee, for want of a better phrase, is correct. If it has done nothing else, it has improved the capacity of this House to scrutinise every Minister's portfolio eight to twelve times more than this House and the Committee of the Whole used to. Some honourable members used to make parochial speeches for their local newspapers. I did the same thing; it was a marvellous opportunity for it. That was the degree of scrutiny of the Executive estimate by this House. Do not let us run away from the fact that we have taken big strides. I ask the House to remember that within the Government back bench structures today there is real power and a real check on Executive power emanates from that source. That power was not there before.
I shall now refer to the speech made by the honourable member for Scullin (Dr Jenkins). He said that the role of the Standing Orders Committee now was primarily a matter of deciding on the form of words that should be used. Even that is not true,'as I see the situation. The last meeting of the Standing Orders Committee was on 3 December 1980, a little while ago now. Maybe the honourable member for Scullin, the honourable member for Corio and the member for Wakefield should have been promoting the fact that we needed another meeting. I do not know; that is another matter. As to whether the Committee simply looks at the form of words, let us look at some of the matters still under consideration by the Standing Orders Committee.
Firstly there is the Standing Orders Com-
mittee's report relating to petitions and parliamentary privilege tabled November 1979 but not considered by the House. In regard to petitions, I point out in passing that we have had two very solid days of presentation of petitions. No member of parliament has really listened to them, other than to listen for his own name to be read out, which is a matter of gross offence to the honourable members concerned and of even greater offence to the people who had that petition put down by their local member of parliament. Secondly, the Standing Orders Committee is to look again at the appointment of expenditure committees and their incorporation in Standing Orders-hardly a matter of words. It is also to look at discretions to the Speaker, quorums, divisions, closures, points of order generallyperhaps merely a form of words in that instance. It is to look at Question Time, which is surely a matter of substance, including the length of questions, and the House of Commons practice. That is not just a matter of words. It is to look at notices of motion, their content and the method of giving notice-'bringing down', as I would term it. The

426 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981 Representatives: Proposed Procedures Committee

appointment of a committee on procedure is also mentioned. That, of course, is precisely what we
are debating today.

If, on the agenda of the Standing Orders Com-
i mittee, item 6 states 'Committee on Procedure'
perhaps an idea ought to emanate there. inquired earlier today as to whether the form of motion brought down by the honourable member
for Corio could not be looked on more properly and more usefully as a sub-committee of the
Standing Orders Committee on the Standing Orders basis. I was informed-I have no doubt quite accurately-that currently the Speaker does
not have the power to bring about such a subcommittee in line with the Standing Orders Committee. Maybe that is one thing the Standing
?~ders Committee ought to look at. But as long as It IS on the agenda for the next meeting, I should
have thought that the first step would be to con-
vene the Standing Orders Committee and to move that that be supported. The honourable member
for Corio has not seen that as the proper course,
for reasons I do not fully understand.

Mr Scholes-Can I tell you?

Mr GILES-Yes, I would be delighted.

Mr Scholes-It is listed there because it was on
the Notice Paper in my name in reverse order to the presentation to the House.

Mr GILES-I accept that as a reasonable matter. It does not alter what I said, though, and that is that I think what ought to happen is that the Standing Orders Committee ought to decide in favour of it, and if it does that it is a matter of action by - the Government to bring it down. Maybe that is the way it will go anyway.

Another matter that I ought to refer to is that

under the current structures of the Fraser

Government the very people from the Govern-

ment side who are on the Standing Orders

Committee-I think the member for Corio or his

colleague suggested they were probably the

proper people-are experienced people who

ought to be members of that standing committee

and are, of course, the ones with the least time. I

am not refering to referring to people

tshuechleaasdmeryssoeflftwhehoH, ouunsde~'rI

am this

system, have very little surplus time. I ponder

upon whether we need another standing com-

mittee. I am concerned that there are now so

many committees when one considers the party

committee system as well. This causes a sort of

ment.al.constipa~ion to occur within the system,

and It IS ve!"y dIffi.cult for people who are very

busy on a Wide vanety of committee structures to

get the sort of dynamism and result which I think

the honourable member for Corio has in mind.

Those are my current views. I do not hold the view that the honourable member for Corio is doing anything he should not. I do not hold the view that there is no room at all for a standing committee on procedures; there might well be. But I point to the structural problems in having more and more committees. In contradistinction to the growth in the number of members of State Houses of parliament, both upper houses and lower, over a 20-year period, the number of members of this House has gone down by one and gone up by one in the 17 years I have been a member of parliament. It may well be that to mount committees properly with competent people we need more federal members of parliament. I think that time will come. I hesitate to speak without a great deal of thought on this problem and to give complete carte blanche agreement to the proposition of the honourable member for Corio. To bring it down now might not do justice to the system that the honourable member for Corio wants to adopt. To do it justice it must be mounted by experienced people who have a sense of history and a knowledge of how the _committees function. We are asking the busiest people in Parliament to take part in yet another standing committee to be set up on a long term basis. I repeat: The argument must be about the proper check and balance on the Executive by Parliament itself. That is what it is about. If we are to argue that, as I think we should-it should be discussed-let us be consistentand give support to the other structures, such as the Estimates committees, that this Parliament so badly needs if it is to adopt its proper responsibility in checking the actions of an Executive.
Mr CADMAN (Mitchell) (5.49)-1 think that everybody in the House appreciates the interest of the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) on matters such as this and the valuable role he has played in looking at the structure of Parliament "and making Parliament more effective. I thank him for moving the motion. I think a number of the honourable members who served on the committee which examined these matters-the Joint Committee on the Parliamentary Committee System-in fact involved themselves more closely with the operation of committees of the Parliament both in the Senate and in the House of Representatives. That was an extremely valuable committee which came forward wit~ a number of recommendations many of which have been adopted over a period.
The proposition being put by the honourable member for Corio is, indeed, an extension, as I understand it, of the work that was done by that committee on committees, as it was called. The

Representatives: Proposed Procedures Committee 19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 427

report of the committee on committees, in fact, made recommendations on a number of important areas but I think the most significant ones related to the scrutiny of government activity by the Parliament. That scrutiny process, in fact, devoted itself to mainly financial matters, budgetary decisions, the decisions of government lending up to the Budget and the general administration of government. It also devoted itself at some length of the proposition of legislation committees.
Those two recommendations, whilst not completely in the form recommended by the committee on committees, have been adopted. They were pursued by a number of people. I remember the work of the honourable member for Scullin (Dr Jenkins) in this regard. In particular I remember the way in which the honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde) followed through, in fact, to bring into place some of these ideas. Much of the work was developed privately within the ranks of the Australian Labor Party and also within the ranks of the coalition. We came to a consensus and, in fact, established legislation committees which have not been used in this Parliament as yet. But I hope that they will be used because I found the discussion and the effectiveness of legislation committees, whether they be for complicated legislation or for simple runof-the-mill provisions that can be dealt with quickly--
Dr Jenkins-Very valuable.
Mr CADMAN-Very valuable indeed. In fact, we have been able to allow members to examine and scrutinise legislation with care and proper attention to detail. That has resulted in more effective and better legislaion and in better laws being made for this country. The other element that has been taken up by the House has been the decision that we should establish committees that look at the Estimates in the Budget. The honourable member for Moore was particularly keen to pursue this matter. The House has adopted for the )iast two years the process of Estimates committees. I personally see value in that process. I think those committees will continue or not continue depending on the value that is seen for them by members of this House.
The matter that has been raised by the honourable member for Corio, however, goes beyond that point. The motion that he has moved seeks to establish a committee to maintain a continuing surveillance of the practices and procedures of the House of Representatives with a view to making recommendations which could enhance the role of the House and its operational efficiency. My colleague the honourable member for Wakefield

(Mr Giles), I think, put a compelling case as to why part of those activities should be, in fact, put to the Standing Orders Committee. The establishment of that committee is set out in our Standing Orders. Its role in fact should be to look at the functioning of this House and to enhance the role of the House through amendments to Standing Orders procedures. My view is that these matters should best be dealt with in the way that we have been dealing with them.
Parliamentary reform and the efficiency and the enhancement of the operations of the House of Representatives have occupied the time and the minds of many people, mostly unsuccessfully. One individual seeking to bring about reform or change has a very difficult problem in convincing
his colleagues that his ideas can be successfully adopted. But a number of indlViduals working together have been successful in having the Parliament look at a change to sitting hours. That has occupied the minds of parliamentarians on many occasions. Experiments have been tried; some have failed. In fact, they mostly have failed. But we are about to launch into an experiment for a change of sitting hours. I believe that a committee of the type envisaged by the honourable member for Corio. would suffer the same difficulties that an individual suffers because one would have a group of dedicated enthusiastic individuals who would spend all of their time convincing their colleagues of the wisdom of their recommendations.
There is great reluctance in many ways to change the manner in which we operate here in these chambers. It is difficult to do that. There are vested interests perhaps, with each individual having his own vested interest in the style of life that he has here, in the requirements of the chamber and in the requirements of the Parliament. I suggest that further consideration be given to this proposal so that, in fact, the basic thrust of the matter can be taken up to see whether it be by means of Standing Orders committees, whether it be by agreement between the parties or individuals to pursue certain matters with their colleagues, or whether it would be practical to extend the scope of the Standing Orders Committee of the House of Representatives. I am not sure whether this will meet the needs and the requests of the honourable member for Corio.
I see merit in what the honourable member has proposed. I see obstruction in bringing it to achievement with any real success. I think we all
know that in order to have enthusiastic membership of committees of this Parliament there needs to be some sense of fulfilment. There is not enthusiastic acclamation, I would think, for people to get themselves involved with the proposition of

428 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981 Representatives: Proposed Procedures Committee

the honourable member. But I think there is interest in achieving the objectives he has laid down. I suggest to the honourable member that, privately and in discussion, a number of us may be able to pursue this matter to see whether we can establish a satisfactory method of working. Within the Government for five years we have had a committee which has worked to seek to establish parliamentary reform. There are a few successes on the board. Those successes are worthy successes. They relate to the factors that I have mentioned-the examination of Estimates and. the legislation committees. I would like to see this progress continue because it has been a satisfying part of my time in the Parliament to see changes made.
I would like to conclude on the note that whilst I appreciate the thrust of what has been proposed and the comments made by the honourable member, I think his proposition to establish yet another committee would not meet with the approval of the House at large. But the objectives should be something in the mind of every member. Perhaps other techniques can be adopted to achieve the honourable member's objectives.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (S.S9)-ln reply-I just want to respond to the debate on this matter. I want to thank all honourable members for the consideration they have given to the matter. I ,do not believe, as the honourable member for Wakefield (Mr Giles) has in,dicated, it is a satisfactory situation that because the. back bench members of the Government are satisfied with the methods by which legislation is considered outside this chamber, this chamb!!r or this Parliament should abrogate its responsibilities as .a parliament. Honourable members are, in fact, elected to serve in the Parliament. Whatever other activies they take are'consequential on that, not part of it. My motion follows a recommendation of the Joint Committee on the PariiamentarySommittee System. It deals with a practice which is adopted in other parliaments. It is highly successful. I believe that it would not become a lobbying exercise or an excercise whereby members seek to impose limited views. I think a broader consideration of matters and their practicality would have to be considered by such Ii committee otherwise its reputation would suffer. I am sorry that the Government is not prepared to adopt this procedure.
I say only one thing. The matters read out by the honourable member for Wakefield are listed for consideration by the Standing Orders Committee. The Speaker has taken the opportunity to

list for the Standing Orders Committee a number of matters which are, in fact, on the Notice Paper of this chamber and other matters which have been raised in debate by members in this chamber. The reason the matters are still listed for consideration is because the Standing Orders Committee is a cumbersome committee and its personnel are almost totally unable to deal with any sort of discussion other than in an extremely cursory manner. The matters will stay listed for consideration. If my memory serves me correctly, I think the time taken up by Standing Orders committees in the last three Parliaments would not add up to one working day.
Question resolved in the negative.
Sitting suspended from 6.1 to 8 p.m.
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 18 August, on motion by MrViner:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (8.0)-On 4 August 1822, in a letter toW. T. Barry, James Madison, who had been the fourth President of the United States, wrote these words:
A popular Government, without popular information, or the means of acquiring it, is but a prologue to a farce or a tragedy, or perhaps both. Knowledge will forever govern ignorance and a people who mean to be their own governors must arm themselves with the power knowledge gives.
Those wise words, 160 years old, are really the whole rationale of freedom of information legislation. But the legislation when it came in was a profound disappointment. Certainly, after it was worked over by the Senate it was a great improvement on its original form. It was still not as good, I think, as the American legislation of 1966 as amended in 1974 and certainly not asgood as the draft Bill that was prepared by the Australian Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs.
The long-awaited Freedom of Information Bill should be more accurately described as a 'Public Service Preservation from Disclosure' Bill. It is perhaps better than nothing. There are some guidelines which will enable citizens and organisations to gain access to information in the possession of the Government of the Commonwealth as set out in clause 3 of the Bill by, and I quote:
(a) making available to the public information about the operations of departments and public authorities and, in particular, ensuring that rules and practices affecting members of the public in their dealings with departments and public authorities are readily available to persons affected by those rules and practices; and

Freedom ofInformation Bill

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 429

(b) creating a general right of access to information in documentary form in the possession of Ministers, departments and public authorities, limited ?nly by exceptions a?d. exemptions necessary for the proteclton of essential public mterests and the private and business affairs of persons in respect of whom information is collected and held by departments and public authorities.
The tragedy is that the comparative breadth of the first paragraph of clause 3 is really cut back very considerably by the broad exemptions and exceptions created by paragraph (b). As Patrick Cook suggested in the National Times, perhaps the best way that the Bill could be described is as the 'Ask Me No Questions and I Won't Have to Waste Time Lying' Bill or, for those honourable members who follow the television program Yes, Minister, the 'Yes, Minister' Bill.
Mr Jacobi-An excellent program.
Mr BARRY JONES-It certainly is.
Mr Kerin-Frightening.
Mr BARRY JONES-It is frightening but I think a substantially accurate impression of what happens in Australia. There are a number of points about the Bill that are disturbing and I wanted to take up a number of the references made last night by the honourable member for Chisholm (Mr Harris) in his speech. The first question is that of retrospectivity. Originally there was to be no retrospectivity at all, but now there is a degree of qualified retrospectivity in respect of personal files-the capacity to go back and correct errors or omissions that are significant with respect to one's own personal file. The honourable member for Chisholm dismissed any claim for general retrospectivity. 'Why,' he said, 'people might be hunting back through files for the past five or 10 years'-as indeed they might. And so they should. I make the point that the United States legislation of 1966, as amended in 1974, does provide for retrospectivity and the result is that it has been possible to go back and to examine a number of very contentious matters on the historical record.
Mr Jacobi-So they ought.
Mr BARRY JONES-So they ought, as the honourable member for Hawker says. One could just mention very briefly some of the matters that have been raised of very general public concern. The Rosenberg case, for example, was noLa very popular case in 1953 and it still arouses a lot of sensitivity in American breasts. But it has become quite clear from the papers derived from the Rosenberg file that whatever the guilt or innocence of Julius Rosenberg, one can only say that the case against Ethel Rosenberg was absolutely threadbare-conceded in prosecution files-and that essentially her conviction was sought because

it was thought it would apply additional pressure on her husband to speak. But there was not even a prima facie case against her. Whatever one's view of the Cold War there has been a general concession that United States justice did not operate correctly in her case.
One might argue that the Ethel Rosenberg revelation indicates a weakness in the United States judicial system, but I think, to the contrary, it shows strength when it is prepared to make files available even in a case as sensitive as that one. The United States in fact has not suffered from these revelations. If we consider the case of Alger Hiss, we find very serious weaknesses in the prosecution case. It is quite clear from the. Federal Bureau of Investigation files that very significant information was withheld from the prosecution case. If it had been put to the jury in the way that Australian prosecutors put a broad case to the jury-that is, not just a narrow and segmented case-it is difficult to see that Hiss would have been convicted.
In the case of the assassination of President Kennedy, it is now patent on the basis of documentation brought out by the freedom of information legislation that there were grave deficiencies in the way that the Warren Commission operated, although the final conclusion reached by the Warren Commission may well be correct. What one can say pretty safely is that one could not safely reach that judgment on the basis of the evidence that the committee looked at. There may be other factors that have to be taken into account as well. We know a great deal more about the operation of the United States Government than we do about our own Government, partly because of the -access to the documents related to the Watergate affair. We know a lot more about the relationship of the Mafia and government agencies and, most significantly, because there are no exemptions granted in the United states freedom of information legislation, we know, and the United States citizens know, far more about the operations of the Central Intelligence Agency or the Federal Bureau of Investigation than we do about the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation or the Australian Security Intelligence Service or the Office of National Assessments.
Mr Jacobi-And the Government.
Mr BARRY JONES-And the Government. The point that the former honourable member for Fuller who is trying to interject will no doubt raise--
Mr Coleman-Wentworth.
Mr BARRY JONES-Yes, the honourable member for Wentworth. It just escaped me for the

- -f--

430 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Freedom ofInformation Bill

minute. There has been a constituency in between as well. The honourable member for Wentworth will no doubt be able to take up the point as to why we should be so much more sensitive on these questions than the United States. Is it because the volume of secret information we have is so much more significant than it is in the United States? One has only to state that proposition to recognise its patent absurdity.

There are a whole number of issues, some of them historical, that one would like to know about in Australia. One of these, for example, would be the relationship of the Armed Forces and the civilian government in Australia during World War II-an issue I have raised before-to find out more about that potentially explosive situation where the Army was executing significant numbers of New Guineans, at least a hundred at the last count, without telling the Australian Government and also going to some pains to keep the Australian Government of the day from knowing. Another very contentious question concerns how it was that we got into the Vietnam War. Clearly, the whole question of the documentation-what contact there was with the United States Government and with the Government of the Republic of Vietnam-is of the greatest importance. And so it ought to be of the greatest importance. We have a right to know as citizens.

Mr Kerin-Menzies lied.

Mr BARRY JONES-Well, of course, that is clear. The exemptions in the Australian Bill are far too wide. The onus of proof for the right to exempt-that is to exclude certain classes of documents from access-should be placed squarely on those seeking the exemption. But the certificate of the Minister is to be conclusive. Schedule 2 provides a list of exempt agencies and a further list of agencies which are exempt in respect of certain functions. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard Schedule 2 of the Government's own Bill.

Leave granted.

The document read as follows-

SCHEDULE 2

Section 7

Part I Exempt agencies

Aboriginal Land Councils and Land Trusts Auditor-General Australian Industry Development Corporation Australian National Airlines Commission Australian National Railways Commission Australian Overseas Projects Corporation Australian Secret Intelligence Service Australian Security Intelligence Organization Australian Shipping Commission

Canberra Commercial Development Authority
Commonwealth Banking Corporation; Commonwealth Trading Bank; Commonwealth Savings Bank; Commonwealth Development Bank
Commonwealth Serum Laboratories Commission Export Finance and Insurance Corporation Health Insurance Commission Housing Loans Insurance Corporation National Debt Commission National Labour Consultative Council Office of National Assessments Pipeline Authority Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation Superannuation Fund Investment Trust
Part II
Agencies exempt in respect ofparticular documellIs
Albury-Wodonga Development Corporation, in relation to documents in respect of its competitive commercial activities
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation, in relation to documents in respect of its competitive commercial activities
Australian Broadcasting Commission, in relation to its program material
Australian Canned Fruits Corporation, in relation to documents in respect of its competitive commericaI activities
Australian Dairy Corporation, in relation to documents in respect of its competitive commercial activities
Australian Dried Fruits Corporation, in relation to documents in respect of its competitive commercial activities
Australian Egg Board, in relation to documents in respect of its competitive commercial activities
Australian Honey Board, in relation to documents in respect of its competitive commercial activities
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation, in relation to documents in respect of its competitive commercial activities
Australian Postal Commission, in relation to documents in respect of its competitive commercial activities
Australian Telecommunications Commission, in relation to documents in respect of its competitive commercial activities
Australian Wheat Board, in relation to documents in respect of its competitive commercial activities
Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation, in relation to documents in respect of its competitive commercial activities
Australian Wool Corporation, in relation to documents in respect of its competitive commercial activities
Department of Defence, in relation to documents in respect of activities of the Defence Signals Directorate and the Joint Intelligence Organization
Department of the Treasury, in relation to documents in respect of activities of the Australian Loan Council and in respect of the competitive commercial activities of the Royal Australian Mint
Overseas Telecommunications Commission, in relation to documents in respect of its competitive commercial activities
Reserve Bank of Australia, in relation to documents in respect of its banking operations (including individual open market operations and foreign exchange dealings) and in respect of exchange control matters
Special Broadcasting Service, in relation to its program material
Mr BARRY JONES-I thank the House. In the list of exempt agencies about which no information can be provided are the Commonwealth

Freedom ofInformation Bill

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 431

Serum Laboratories Commission, the Health Insurance Commission, the Office of National Assessments, the Pipeline Authority and, as I said earlier, ASIS and ASIO. We have to ask why it is possible for the United States to grant access under freedom of information legislation to docu- ~ents of the FBI and the CIA when it is impossIble for us to have the same right. Why is the whole issue of security so much more sensitive in Australia than it is in the United States?
A~encies are also to be exempt in respect of particular documents. For example, we will not be able to ask for information about the Australian Broadcasting Commission in relation to its program material. Can anyone advance any rational reason why that should be the case? Further, we will not be able to ask the Special Broadcasting Service about its program material. I refer to a case that has been brought to my attention. The ABC, for its own peculiar reasons has declined to buy the British Broadcasting Co;poration's recent three-part television dramatisation of Dostoevski's Crime and Punishment. I would like to know the reason. No doubt, if as a member of parliament I ask the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) I will get an answer sometime in the dim, distant future. If a citizen asked for this information under the freedom of information legislation, he would be told: 'We cannot give you that information. The ABC is exempt'. Why? In the United States citizens would get such information. It is quite absurd. The same situation a~plie~ to th~ Australian Dried Fruits CorporatIOn In relatIOn to documents in respect of its competitive commercial activities. Why should it be so secret? Why should citizens not know? In th~ United S~ates freedom of information legislatIOn, agencies are prima facie included. In Australia the legislation is drawn so that the more sensitive agencies are prima facie excluded.
The question of costs was raised last night by the honourable member for Chisholm, who is not with us at~'the moment. He argued that if we tried to draw t e legislation too widely we might find that the c sts would be prohibitive. I draw attention to some material that the Parliamentary Library has been able to obtain about the actual cost of running the United States freedom of infor- ~ation ~ystem. !he originaliegislation was passed In 1966 In the time of President Johnson. In 1974 during the Watergate period it was very much expanded. The most recent figure for the total cost of running the freedom of information operation in the United States was cited by Allen Weinstein, a historian who would be well known to the honourable member for Wentworth (Mr

Coleman). He wrote in the New York Times Magazine:

. In 1978, according to the Department of Defense, its agen-
cIes processed over 56,466 requests at a cost of $6 million, and fees collected from FOIA requesters covered only a small
portion of the expense.

The honourable member for Wentworth will not
be surprised to learn that Professor Weinstein is an opponent of the freedom of information legislation. He continued:

This 'shortfall' affects all Government departments and agencies. In 1977, for example-

Here is the total figure-

F10A users' fees amounted to $1.36m, less than 4 percent of the estimated $35m it cost the Federal Government to comply with the Act.

The United States has a population 14 times that

of Australia. The United States Freedom of Infor-

mation Act is much wider than ours. Some of the

areas which have had the largest number of re-

quests have been the Department of Defence, the

CIA and the FBI. In 1977 the total cost was

$US35m. It seems to me that that figure would be

the equivalent in Australia of about $2.5m on a

pro rata basis, taking population only into

account. Considering that our legislation is so

much narrower in its scope, that it does not cover

sensitive areas and that it is so much easier to get

an exemption than it is in the United States one

might assume siderably less

that than

t$h2e.5cmostisnw1o9u77ld,minonfeayct~ableu'ecso.n-I

,,:,ould estimate that even on the most generous es-

timate freedom of information would cost about

$3m or perhaps a little more here. Another factor

that has to be taken into account is that Aus-

tralians are far less aggressive than Americans and

far less likely to want to find out the truth. They

do not show any passionate curiosity. That is obvi-

ous when we look at honourable members on the

othe!" side of the House. They have no very

passIOnate concern or great zeal to find out the

trut~. The total outlays in this year's Budget, in-

clu~lng permanent and special appropriations,

~re Just over $40,000m. Even if the cost of operat-

mg under the freedom of information legislation

wweorueldasbheigchoanssi$d4ermab-lIydloensost-itthiwnkouitldworuelpdrebse~'nitt

only 0.001 per cent of the total Budget allocation.

We have to ask ourselves whether that is too

much for finding out what is going on in govern-

ment and to have the right to be fully informed.

Clearly, this Government does not like that idea

and has done the absolute bare minimum in this

legislation.

There are some major deficiencies in the legislation, some of which we will raise by way of
amendments. We are also told that after 12

432 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Freedom ofInformation Bill

months or so there will be a review of the legislation. Two points need to be made in addition to our amendments. They are two fundamental issues of principle which will have to be looked at in the future and which make the United States Act worthwhile. Firstly, we have to be able to impose penalties directed at specific offices and officers. The real problem that often occurs when a person comes up against the bureaucratic maze is that he is not given a flat refusal. The officers do not say: 'No, you cann'ot have the file'. They say: 'Look, we had the file a few days ago but somebody else is using it. Come back next week'. When the person comes back the next week they say: 'We are terribly sorry. It had to go somewhere else. Perhaps if you come back next week you will get it'. A person is often not refused absolutely; he is just fooled around with.
The United States legislation provides that it is possible to go to a court and request it to impose a monetary penalty on an officer or a section of the access office which is procrastinating in a way that is unreasonable. Of course, an applicant has the onus of proof to prove that the officer is unreasonable in his procrastination, but it is an effective deterrent. The other factor is the provision of indices. The provision of a fine grained index is extremely important. Let me read what the legislation says. I do not regard this as adequate. Clause 8 states:
(I) The responsible Minister of an agency shall-
(a) ca use to be pu bIished, as soon as practicable , , . a statement setting out particulars of the organization . . . particulars of any arrangements that exist for bodies or persons outside the Commonwealth administration to participate . . . a statement of the categories of documents that are maintained in the possession of the agency . . .
It seems to me that the sheer setting out of a bland statement of heads of categories does not tell us enough. If a layman or an organisation which is not particularly skilled is trying to look for particular information, it is very easy to be snowed. There may be very valuable information in a document but the document may be of such imposing length and complexity that one does not know where to look. It is a matter of absolute necessity that there be an adequate fine grained index. Of course, with the computerised facilities available to the Government it should be possible for that to be provided very easily.
I do not doubt that the whole democratic system is under very serious challenge. We have an enormously powerful Public Service in Australia and the Parliament, relatively speaking, is losing its place in the sun under this Government. I think

freedom of information is a very powerful instrument that can strengthen the hand of the Australian voter, and if we have a more informed electorate we should have a better Parliament. I vividly recall, as you do, Mr Deputy Speaker, the Berthelsen case when we sat on the Privileges Committee of this House. It became patently clear that many senior public servants despised
their Ministers. They downgrade and disregard the Parliament, members of which they outrank arid outearn, and they feel that the electorate should be left in the dark. The attitude expressed so vividly in the British Broadcasting Corporation's television series Yes, Minister in which a
hapless Minister has rings run round him by his wily permanent head is as accurate for the Australian scene as it is a faithful representation of what happens in Great Britain. I conclude as I began by re-reading those words of Madison which are the whole justification, the whole
rationale:

A popular Government, without popular information, or

the means of acquiring it, is but a prologue to a farce or a

tragedy or perhaps both. Knowledge will forever govern

ignorance--

'

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (8.20)-1 welcome the opportunity to speak on the Freedom of Information Bill. The Bill is an important initiative of the Government of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). I wish strongly to applaud the fact that after a long period of gestation since the proposal for freedom of information was first advanced by spokesmen for the Australian Labor Party when it was in Opposition prior to its last being in government, the first Freedom of Information Bill introduced to any Parliament in Australia was a Bill introduced by the Government of Prime Minister Malcolm Fraser. It ought to be applauded because it was a very fine initiative and a very worthwhile reform of which Australians have every right to be proud. I admit that there might well be scope for argument about the clauses of the Bill. One might want to discuss the extent to which the Act, when it is in operation, ought to apply to particular departments and particular statutory authorities, and the manner in which we ought to apply the legislation to those authorities. But the fact is that this is a unique and admirable initiative of the Government of today.

The legislation was first proposed by the Labor Party when it was in Opposition. When it came to power in 1972 it did not come into the Parliament with a Bill of its own ready to proceed. It referred the matter first to an interdepartmental committee. We saw its first report in 1974. After the

Freedom ofInformation Bill

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 433

change of government in 1975 there was a further report from the interdepartmental committee and later we saw legislation in a draft form introduced into the Senate. It was the subject of consideration by a standing committee of the Senate. The Bill was the subject of reconsideration by the Government and the present Bill, in another form, was introduced into the Senate, was amended and has now reached this chamber. It comes here after contributions from the Opposition as well as from the Government.
I made those comments because I regard this Bill as a very worthwhile reform which one might hope would be discussed in this place in a bipartisan spirit. I was, therefore, exceedingly disappointed to hear the speech of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) when he spoke on behalf of the Opposition on this matter. He was most grudging in whatever praise he had to offer in relation to the Bill and had some most uncomplimentary remarks to make about the Fraser Government. I must say that I could not let the moment pass without having a look at the Labor Party's record, which I propose to do. I think its record gives its members every reason to hang their heads in shame. I would not have done this except for the sorts of comments made by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition. I quote from the House of Representatives Hansard of 18 August, page 44. He said:
However. the Allorney-General was overridden by a very dominant Cabinet with a most dominant Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) who appears to be obsessed with secrecy. We will deal with some of these mailers as we go through some of the amendments later in the week.
We have seen the Government somewhat obsessed with secrecy.
I would suggest that members of the Labor Party hang their heads in shame when they listen to their Government's record on these matters, notwithstanding their rhetoric before 1972. On page 45 Mr Bowen was reported to have said:
There is also no doubt that many Ministers. including the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) are very wary of allowing the public to know much at all.
He says that is so notwithstanding the fact that the only Bill introduced into an Australian Parliament to give freedom of information was introduced by this Government, and notwithstanding that the Labor Party had three years in office after having promised in its policy speech to introduce legislation to give effect to freedom of information. I must say that I was somewhat alert to the fact that members of the Labor Party had an interest in this matter. There was a book written by a gentleman by the name of Spigelman. An Inside Dopester's Index of 100 Examples of Secrecy was included in that book by Mr

Spigelman, his book being entitled SecrecyPolitical Censorship in Australia. In relation to those 100 examples of secrecy I sought information from the then Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam. I asked him to specify which of those 100 items were not publicly disclosed up until 1972, how many of those items had been made publicly available since he took office and, if all of them were not readily available, what the reason was for the continuing secrecy in each case. I think that was a fair question to ask. There were 100 examples and I expected him to do a little work in relation to those matters which he had spoken of and which his private secretary had written so much of when the Labor Party was in Opposition. The then Prime Minister had the following remarks to make when he answered my question. They were published in the House of Representatives Hansard of 15 December 1974. He said:
I am, of course, aware of the book to which the honourable member refers. The author is now my Principal Private Secretary and I did most of the research for the book.
With respect to the items listed in this index and the many other examples of secrecy of which my Government became aware on assuming office. the honourable member would be aware that most are of historical interest only.
What an excuse to offer. He continued:
On 2 April 1973, I wrote to all Ministers suggesting that they exercise their discretion on items of current interest and in cases of doubt should await the criteria for release of documents in the proposed Freedom of Information Act.
How convenient! He never introduced it. He continued:
I believe a number of documents were released in 1973. If the honourable member is interested in any of the particular documents, I suggest he ask the Minister responsible.
That prompted my asking 100 questions of each of the Ministers in relation to each of the documents. Honourable members may be interested to know the results of those inquiries because they involve some prominent front benchers of the Opposition today and many prominent Ministers in the Labor Party at the time. I will take honourable members through a few of them. Mr Barnard, as Deputy Prime Minister, refused to make available the report of an independent firm of consultants on community attitudes to Service careers. Mr Barnard refused to make available a report on tests of anti-corrosive coatings carried out by the Central Testing and Research Laboratories. Mr Barnard refused to make available an interdepartmental study of housing problems of the Services. Mr Barnard refused to make public a report on the Defence Services Flying Training Program. Mr Barnard refused to make public the Morshead report on Army structure. Mr Barnard

434 REPRESENTATIVES. 19 August 1981

Freedom ofInformation Bill

refused to make public the Hasett committee report on Army reorganisation. Mr Barnard refused to make public the reports on the proposed triService academy. Mr Barnard refused to make public the report of the Commonwealth Paint Committee's tests on household paints. Mr Barnard refused to make public the submissions on the proposed Army base in Western Australia. Mr Barnard refused to make public the report of the court of inquiry on RAAF Laverton. Mr Barnard refused to make public the administrative directive on the responsibilities of the Department of Defence. Mr Barnard refused to make public details of the Defence Standards Laboratories consumer tests. Mr Barnard refused to make public the review of civilian substitution in the armed services. He refused to make public advice and analysis concerning the reintroduction of conscription.
Mr Whitlam also was involved in some refusals. Mr Whitlam refused to make public the statistics on Public Service applicants rejected on security grounds. Mr Whitlam refused to make public records of the Commonwealth-State Ministers' official meetings. One could go on. Mr Hayden refused to make public the interdepartmental report on the state of the economy, also referred to by Mr Spigelman. Mr Charles Jones refused to make public the report of the Department of Civil Aviation on Electra aircraft noise levels on the ground that specific noise considerations were not mentioned in the report and were not in a suitable form for public release. Mr Charles Jones refused to make public the report on Sydney's second airport. Mr Connor refused to make public the blueprint for national resources. I could go on. There were others by Mr Enderby, some by Dr Cass and some by Dr Patterson, all of whom were Ministers in the previous Labor Administration.
I regard those refusals as very important examples of the way in which members of the Labor Party when in office dealt with these important items of secrecy upon which they base their campaign. I suggest to honourable members that their campaign was based upon a deceit, because they were not prepared, when they had to look at these matters coolly, as one might have expected from them when they were in office, to publish them. If they were not prepared to publish those items, what justification did Mr Spigelman have for his Inside Dopesters Guide for which Mr Whitlam did most of the research? Quite frankly, if we look at the comments of some honourable members of the Opposition and previous members of the Opposition we find that there were good reasons for the decisions that they took

when they were in government. Perhaps those decisions were justified, but I believe that it would be fair to say that the Government that in the first place withheld those documents which were identified by the Opposition was also justified in withholding them in the manner in which it did if the Labor Party was not prepared to release them itself when it came to office and had the opportunity to do so.

Senator Peter Rae asked a similar question to mine in the Senate. He asked all Ministers what reports and documents the then Labor Government had prepared but had not publicly released. I think that was a pertinent question for a member of the Senate, who was interested in the Labor Party's record on freedom of information when it was in office, to ask. I believe that Mr Whitlam's answer, given through Senator Wriedt in the other place, was interesting. Members of the Opposition might well be interested in the answer he gave. He said:

It would be clearly impractical to identify every unpub-
lished document produced by or for the Government and I am not prepared to authorise the expenditure, time and effort which would be involved in attempting to do so.

He went on to say:

In my answer on 13 May 1975, (House of Representatives Hansard, page 2198)-

That was in answer to the question that I had asked-

I pointed out that my Government's record in relation to

the release of information, in contrast to that of its prede-

cessors, has been outstanding. I draw honourable senator's

attention to illustrations I give in that answer of the Govern-

ment's performance in this area.

.

I come to the answer that the then Prime Minister, Mr Whitlam, gave me. It is most illuminating to learn what Mr Whitlam, when he was in office, thought that the public was entitled to know. I will paraphrase to a degree but I do not think it will destroy the content of the answer that WaS given. I shall quote from page 2198 of House of Representatives Hansard of 13 May 1975. Mr
Whitlam said:

The Government is committed to the principle of open government and will continue to honour that commitment.

Nobody could object to that. He went on to say:

My Government has made public details of its decisions; . . .

Well, fancy that! I would be most surprised if any government refused, on the basis of secrecy, to announce its decisions. He went on to say:

it has set up a large number of Committees, Commissions, etc. of inquiry before which interested members of the public have been able to put their views-and the reports of which are
being progressively released; I have provided the Parliament each half-year with a detailed account of the Government's
activities; . . .

Freedom ofInformation Bill

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 435

Having sat in this place and listened to the way in which he harangued us about the Government's performance arid its record, I know exactly what he meant when he said that. He continued:
the Australian Government Liaison Service has been instituted to provide ready access to official government information and an abstract of government decision, legislation and Ministerial statements and speeches is regularly published in the Australian Government Weekly Digest.
That was the Government propaganda arm with which we were all so familiar. The foregoing was Mr Whitlam's idea of freedom of information. It was to set up a mechanism by which the Government could propogate those decisions about which it wanted the public to know and to enable it to do so in the most efficient way with the taxpayers' support. As I have said, I did not want to be political in this debate. I decided to introduce this material only in a straightforward--
Mr N. A. Brown-In a statesmanlike way.
Mr RUDDOCK-I accept the accolade from the Minister-in a statesmanlike way because of the comments of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition in his speech yesterday, in which he impugned the motives of this Government in introducing legislation in this important area. I am not prepared to have our motives impugned because this is a most worthwhile reform of which this Government is proud and of which the people of Australia should be proud. I am disappointed that honourable members in this place would not accept it in the same way that it has been accepted in the Senate and contribute in the same positive way to improving the Bill, as members of the Senate did. The sort of remarks that were offered by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition were totally uncalled for and totally unwarranted.
I shall finish on the following note: I have followed these matters because I have had a long standing interest in questions on freedom of information. The Treasurer in 1975, was the honourable member for Oxley (Mr Hayden), now Leader of the Opposition. One would think that he would also have an interest in freedom of information, perhaps the same sort of interest that Mr Whitlam, the then Prime Minister, had demonstrated. One would have thought that, having been so critical of the then McMahon Government and its predecessor governments, when he was in Opposition, he would have been quite prepared to unlock all those secrets which his party had condemned the former governments for failing to disclose. But the fact of the matter is that Mr Hayden, then the Treasurer, was no different from the rest. He thanked me for my letter of 4 June which I had addressed to the Australian Loan Council concerning the confidentiality of

the proceedings of the Council. That was one of the items that Mr Spigelman had so carefully
selected. Mr Hayden's reply stated:

I have noted that in the first paragraph of your letter you draw on a reply dated 13 May 1975 given to you by my predecessor, in response to your question upon notice No. 2253.

Regarding the question of the confidentiality of Loan Council proceedings the facts are as stated in the answer to
that question. The Loan Council, as constituted under the Financial Agreement, comprises members of all State
Governments as well as the Australian Government, and al\ decisions taken by the Council, including those regarding the confidentiality of its proceedings and records are binding on
al\ members.

Well, fancy that! They were binding on Mr Hayden as well, even though he suggested, I assume along with his colleagues who were so committed to freedom of information, that they should be published. He went on to say:

It is not open to the Australian Government member or the Secretary to provide information in regard to them. It would therefore be inappropriate for me to provide further information except to say that al\ decisions on these aspects have
been carefully observed during the period that members of the present Government have participated in proceedings of the
Council.

I think it has to be observed that oppositions seem

to have one standard when they are in Opposition

and one standard when they are in government. I

would say that that was very plainly demon-

strated by the Labor Party's performance. I hope

that some honourable members opposite will have

regard to the comments of their colleagues in con-

sidering these matters and recognise that perhaps

there are cases which, if they were faced with the

facts and the information, were in office and had

to make decisions, they would wish to consider

very carefully before they made them public. I

hope that they will settle down to review this

legislation essentially in a bipartisan way, looking

at what might properly be made available, which-

ever party is in office. I believe that then we will

have much better legislation, legislation which is

worthy of support.. I can assure honourable

members opposite that I am prepared to examine

such legislation and to look at their proposals in

that way. I hope that they will stop the acrimony

that was evidenced by the Deputy Leader of the

Opposition in relation to this mattetarid debate it

in good faith.

..

.

Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (8.40)-It is a matter of great regret that on this occasion the Parliament is considering legislation which is so clearly deficient in terms of the objectives that it purports to have. The concern about this legislation is not exclusively with the Opposition. In fact, the Opposition finds itself in a position where it shares this concern with very wide sections of

436 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Freedom ofInformation Bill

the Australian community whose objectivity, fairness and concern could not be impugned. It is surprising to hear statements of the kind that have just been made by -the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock). His honesty in connection with this question will be determined when this House considers the amendments that will be moved and which have been foreshadowed by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen). At this time it will not be sufficient for the honourable member for Dundas to claim that the Opposition took a political stand on this because the amendments will commend themselves. At the time we will see the way in which the honourable member for Dundas, with all of his high sounding concern about this issue, responds to sensible and desirable amendments which will be moved by the Opposition. The Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) in his second reading speech said:
The crucial element in drafting the Freedom of Information Bill has been to strike the appropriate balance between openness and confidentiality.
The Opposition does not quibble with a statement of that kind. Despite the fact that such a significant proportion of the total time of the honourable member for Dundas was used in lis~ ing examples of Labor Ministers who, for very legitimate reasons, chose not to make public some documents, I am firmly convinced that the question of adequate balance between those two conflicting objectives in relation to legislation of this kind and to which the Minister made reference has, to a disproportionate degree, come down in favour of confidentiality. I am not surprised that the list that the honourable member for Dundas read out contained a greater number of reports that were not made public by Mr Barnard when he was Minister for Defence. That is the situation we would expect to find. It is certainly not the claim of the Opposition, any other section of the Australian community or any individual that the issues of government can be carried out in a goldfish bowl. No such claim has been made and no such claim is being made in connection with our consideration of this legislation.
The omissions of this legislation indicate quite clearly that the Government, which has been responsible for formulating it, is suspicious of the Australian people. It is suspicious of the Australian electors, fearful of open Government and feels threatened by public access to information. If it were possible for us to have full community participation in democratic decision-making that would probably be the most desirable form of

democracy we could have. The practical difficulties of that, of course, preclude it. We have settled for an alternative which involves representatives of the community taking the responsibility for making those decisions. There is no concern on our part that legislation of this kind would or could in any way damage the essential nature of
that decision-making process. The contrary applies. If details of the legislation were more effective, legislation of this kind would strengthen the operation of democratic government.
I emphasise, particularly to Government members, that they, like Opposition members, should realise that the question of freedom of information in connection with government operations-the operation of departments, bureaucrats and public authorities-is not a question for debate between the Opposition and the Government. In fact, it is a question of whether the Parliament will assert its authority over the bureaucracy and over the Executive and whether the Parliament-Opposition and Governmentwill ensure that people within the Australian community will have reasonable, ready and simple access to documents which are not matters of vital national security.
The Deputy Leader of the Opposition emphasised our concern about the exclusions in this legislation and the wording of some of the provisions of this legislation. He has already foreshadowed the fact that the Opposition will be moving amendments. If there are any Liberal democrats or any democratic Liberals on the Government side someone from the Government side will need to support the amendments that will be moved. If, in fact, no member on the Government side chooses to support those amendments, the political nature of this debate and the oolitical nature of the decision which will follow it will not be of the making of the
Opposition.
It is probably as well, because reference was made to the role of the Australian Labor Party when it was in government in relation to this legislation and in consideration of this particular issue, to have a look at the background to the situation that We now find ourselves in. Certainly before the election in 1972 the then Leader of the Opposition who became Prime Minister, Gough Whitlam, promised open government. In 1974 while the Australian Labor Party was in government the first "interdepartmental committee, which was appointed to investigate the provisions whichcould be involved in freedom of information legislation, delivered its first report. A subsequent report was delivered by the second interdepartmental investigation in 1976. In 1978 the

Freedom ofInformation Bill

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 437

first legislation was introduced. Certainly the Government and honourable members speaking for the Government have attempted to claim some credit for that legislation. It was suggested that members of the Opposition should hang their heads in shame. The same thing could be said about the Government in relation to the 1978 legislation. The attitude towards that legislation was reflected by all responsible thinking persons in Australia. It was a shameful piece of legislation. It was an apology for freedom of information and, in fact, it was referred to as a Bill which was designed to ensure freedom from information. That legislation, on the motion of an Opposition senator, Senator John Button, was referred to the Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs. That Committee produced a unanimous report recommending major changes in the Bill. The total number of recommendations made by that Committee was 93. This legislation we are considering now in no way accommodates all of the major matters of concern that were raised and decided unanimously by that Committee.
In a ministerial statement in 1980 Senator Durack rejected most of the recommendations despite the fact that senators on his side of the Parliament were parties to the unanimous decision that was made and the unanimous recommendations which that report brought forward. From 1972 until now-and probably into the futurethe parallel furrows that have been made by the dragging heels of those reluctant bureaucrats can be traced from one stage of the development in connection with this legislation to the next. The people who have resisted freedom of information have been the bureaucrats. The results of the two interdepartmental inquiries reflected very
unfavourablyon the extent to which the bureaucracy will go to ensure that the community does not have access to information which is vital to it.
For all the high sounding platitudes of the honourable member for Dundas, the simple fact remains that some of the most significant and valuable features of this legislation would not be here had it not been for the fact that Government senators crossed the floor in relation to some amendments and threatened to do so in relation to other proposals had the legislation not been changed. Those senators were Senator Alan Missen, Senator Kathy Martin, Senator Chris Puplick, Senator Neville Bonner and Senator David Hamer. They joined the Australian Democrats and the Opposition in voting for the amend-
ments. The result was, of course, that, even after the legislation had been introduced in the Senate, it was withdrawn and redrafted. No claim can be

made that the Government has been enthusiastic about ensuring that adequate safeguards and adequate provisions would be included in this legislation. In fact the contrary has been the case.
Ministers have, in consort with the bureauc-
racy, attempted at all stages to make sure that this legislation will be less effective than it should be and less effective than it might otherwise have been. That is the reason why the Parliament must assert its authority not only over the bureaucracy but also over the Executive and the Executive arm of Government. I include as the major component of the Executive arm of Government Ministers of the Government. One of the most important changes which resulted from that revolt in the Senate was the establishment of the Document Review Tribunal to review the conclusive certificates given to exempt documents. Of course the provisions in that respect certainly do not go far enough. But, of those changes that were introduced, certainly that was the most important and did overcome some of the reservations that existed in relation to the original legislation. The provisions for the correction of personal records that go back five years was another very important change introduced into the legislation. The Opposition certainly supports not only those changes but also others which have a less significant character. Changes were introduced also to ensure improvements in the mechanical means by which accessibility to documents would be facilitated. For example the indexing of documents was another desirable change and there were some relatively minor changes in the exemptions. One of the most disturbing aspects was that when the legislation was reintroduced in the Senate not only had there been some improvements built into it but also were additional exemptions for documents written into the legislation, which had not been considered in the 1978 legislation, and which had proved to be so insufficient that it was thrown out and reconsidered completely.
The Government resisted other well founded and desirable changes that were proposed by the Opposition in relation to such matters as the jurisdiction of the Ombudsman, the time limitation, prior documents, personal records and the exemption list. In relation to this legislation, I emphasise the fact that the Opposition, as I have said, does not find itself alone in its concern. For example, the Sydney Morning Herald in an editorial on 1 June this year in relation to this legislation stated:
On the whole, the Federal Government's Freedom of Information Bill, in the amended form in which it will go through the Senate this week, is probably better than nothing-but not much better. It cannot be greeted with enthusiasm, in spite of the many concessions-some of them fairly important, most

438 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Freedom ofInformation Bill

of them minor-made by the Government in response to sustained pressure from critical senators, especially five dissatisfied Liberals. These five, in the words of Labor and Australian Democrat spokesmen, now seem to have capitulated to counterpressure from the Government, or to have done a deal with it.
They are not my words; they are the words of a responsible, national newspaper. Certainly that newspaper does not act as a spokesman for the Labor Party. If anyone is going to suggest that the Labor Party is conjuring up concern about the deficiencies in this legislation he needs only to refer to editorials of that kind and other types of comments that have been made by other individuals and interest groups within the community.
Mr Ruddock-Which one was that?
Mr ROBERT BROWN-It was the Sydney Morning Herald of 1 June.
Mr Ruddock-It gives the Labor Party a very good run.
Mr ROBERT BROWN-I could not have written a better editorial myself. There is one example that I will make particular reference to because it indicates better than any other example with which I am familiar the excessive secrecy, the obsession with secrecy, the fear of freedom of information which has accompanied decisions of this Government. I refer to the attempt by the Government to ensure that the book Documents on Australian Defence and Foreign Policy 1968-1975 would not be published, would not be distributed, would not be sold or be made available to the Australian people. That attempt on the part of the Government was defeated as it should have been defeated, but it was not defeated until the matter went before the court. Mr Justice Mason described the contents of that book, about which the Government had been so obsessive and so determined in its attempt to prevent publication, in these terms:
The book sets out a large number of Government documents. The book does not contain technical information of military significance; it does not deal with weaponry, armaments, military technology, logistical information or dispositions of forces. It is not affected by the '0' Notice procedures. Even the two documents referred to in the ex parte injunction contain no material of value to a hostile power.The appreciations made of Australia's strategic situation ahd the outlook in South-East Asia are based on information which is generally known. The judgments made are fairly elementary and they are now quite out of date.
Will we ever forget the attempt that was made by the Government on that occasion to frustrate the endeavour on the part of the publishers of that book to publish it and make it available to the Australian people? If that is not obsession with secrecy, I would need to be shown a better example.

I also quote a statement from the evidence of Mr Henderson, the Secretary of the Department of Foreign Affairs, in that case. He said:
. . . it is much more likely to facilitate our future relations if the Government has been seen to try its utmost to prevent that (disclosure) happening.
In fact it appears that the attempt was made to frustrate the publication of that book because of the Government's concern about its relationship with its powerful friends. The Sydney Morning Herald states:
This led to a suggestion, as Mr Justice Mason noted, that the Government acted as it did merely to demonstrate its bona fides to foreign Governments. If that is well founded-and Mr Henderson's evidence seems to bear no other constructionthen the Government's philosophy would seem to be: Keep our foreign friends happy-even if this can be done only by taking away Australian freedoms. Popularity at any price.
I will quote from another editorial of the Sydney Morning Herald because I find the writer of these editorials a very comfortable bedmate in relation to this question. I refer to an editorial of 3 December 1980 which relates to an attempt by the Government to prevent publication of the book Documents on Australian Defence and Foreign Policy 1968-75. It stated:
The Government acted in haste, if not panic, with a demonstrable lack of political nous. It acted to preserve not security but face and the convenience of ministers and public servants. And in acting it ignored from habit, if not arrogance, the principle affirmed by Mr Justice Mason, that against one kind of public interest, the confidentiality of government processes, there has to be weighed another, the need for the public to be fully informed of the actions of those who govern them.
The whole purpose of having effective freedom' of information legislation is to ensure that the processes of democratic government are strengthened, that the decisions mady by the bureaucracy which impinge so much on the lives of ordinary Australian people will be open to public scrutiny and that the electorate will have the opportunity to determine the nature of the evidence upon which decisions are made and the nature of the decisions that are made and then make some sensible and balanced judgment about the adequacy of those decisions and the purposes that those decisions are designed to fulfil.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (9.10)-It has been some years since the introduction of freedom of information legislation was proposed and there is no escaping the fact that the Government has taken a long time to present legislation which seems to find acceptance in both chambers of the Parliament. I suppose that if one looked back upon the years that the matter has been before the House, one could count on one hand the number of letters that one has received demanding that this legislation be implemented. The public interest would probably

Freedom ofInformation Bill

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 439

be best typified by saying that there are only three people in the Speaker's Gallery of this chamber tonight. When one looks at the Press gallery one sees that there is one lone reporter there who is probably wondering what she has done wrong to be sentenced to cover the debate on the Freedom of Information Bill. It is a matter which is of limited interest. I compliment the honourable member for Hunter (Mr Robert Brown) for having such deep compassion on a subject which seems to pass unnoticed by the vast majority of the community. I know, of course, that some people in some areas have had a vital interest in this subject, but there is no escaping the fact that they have been in a teeny-weeny minority overall. As a member of the Government side, I suppose it would be expected that I would be here this evening supporting the Bill in to to.
Mr Robert Brown-You are too honest to do that.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-I appreciate that compliment. Perhaps during the next election campaign the honourable member might care to stand on my platform and tell the people of my electorate just that. I am quite sure that with the earthiness of the honourable member for Hunter, at the next election I would sweep home with a larger majority than even I would have predicted. Whilst this Bill may be seen to have some shortcomings and indeed whilst some senators of the Liberal Party of Australia and the National Country Party may have some difficulty in accepting the legislation in its final form, I ask . whether all members of the Parliament recognise that at least we have made steps forward. As far back as the early 1970s, while I was an external student of the University of Queensland and a member of Parliament, I was doing an assignment for the University on this very subject of freedom of information as it existed in the United States. I remember my heart beating fast and thinking how wonderful it would be. That was a decade ago. Those feelings in terms of reasonable access to reasonable information have not abated. However, I believe that honourable members on both sides of the chamber should concede that there is some information which is of a very vital nature and which, if the Government were to believe that it was to become public property the day after, would result in the functions of government suffering. We should be prepared to accept that this legislation goes a long way further than anything we have had before. We should also accept that in the years ahead after the nation has had an opportunity to assess the legislation there will be further chances to amend the legislation if it is found to be necessary and if it is found to have the

shortcomings that honourable members on the other side of the chamber are predicting. Indeed, they share a view which is shared even by some
members of my own party in the Senate.
I wish to make some criticism of the Bill in terms of the various schedules where exemptions exist. I refer particularly to Part 1 of Schedule 2,
which classifies exempt agencies. As all honourable members know, Schedule 1 sets out the courts and tribunals which are exempt in respect of non-administrative matters. In Schedule 2 there is a Part I and a Part II, and Part II classifies the agencies exempt in respect of particular documents. It is my view that the Government has been over sensitive in terms of classifying some agencies in Part 1 of Schedule 2. In regard to the
Australian Secret Intelligence Service and, indeed, the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation, I have absolutely no argument with the need for the operations of those two organisations to remain private and confidential. The responsible Minister is fully aware of what is going on, and indeed the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) at times is consulted and informed as to the events and happenings in those organisations. But I turn to some other agencies which have been given total exemption. When we give an agency total exemption we are saying that its operations are so vital to the security of the nation that we must expose nothing and that it must all be kept secret. Alternatively, what the Government might be saying when we consider some of the other organisations is that it has forebodings in terms of some of the activities of these organisations becoming known publicly.
I have already said that I completely accept that some agencies deserve exemption in terms of certain aspects of their operations, but let me read through this list of organisations which fall within the same classification as ASIO and the Australian Secret Intelligence Service. I shaH refer to them alphabetically. They are: The Aboriginal Lands Councils and Lands Trusts; the Auditor General; the Australian Industry Development Corporation; the Australian National Airlines Commission; the Australian National Railways Commission; the Australian Overseas Projects Corporation; and the Australian Shipping Commission. The next is the Canberra Commercial Development Authority. We must be careful there! The next ones are the Commonwealth Banking Corporation-it isperhaps a legitimate item in terms of the commercial operations of these entities-the Commonwealth Trading Bank; the Commonwealth Savings Bank; and the Commonwealth Development Bank. The next one is the Commonwealth Serum Laboratories

440 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Freedom ofInformation Bill

Commission. Nothing of its activities must be known by anybody.
In Schedule 2, Part I, listed just under ASIO, are the Export Finance and Insurance Corporation and the Health Insurance Commission. What a wonderful opportunity that presents to me! I did not even realise that it was in it. During the recess I had the audacity to make criticisms of the Health Insurance Commission over its operations in the financial year 1979-80 which were nearly a bomber. It lost millions of dollars in Queensland arid millions of dollars in New South Wales. In Tasmania it lost $600,OOO-odd. All that saved the Commission in Australia was a profit of $8m in Victoria where it is probably ripping off the people.
I had a solicitor's telegram stating that if I did not withdraw my observations I would be subjected to legal threat. Now, a grievance debate is on tomorrow. I had intended to keep this matter for tomorrow. This is only phase one of what I have in store for tomorrow. That weenie, measly organisation threatened me in a telegram. To defend myself, to prove that I was right, would have eaten up a thousand times my salary increase that was recently granted. Yet, we give the Health Insurance Commission total exemption. I did not realise that I was to be given the opportunity to become so emotionally involved in this argument tonight.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)-I would not test the Chair too far.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-No, Sir, I will not. As I see it the Federal Government has allowed the membership of three private health funds to go to the wall. As those private health funds went to the wall I believe that I have a right, as a member of this Parliament, to question the activities of the Health Insurance Commission.
Mr Peacock-They should not intimidate you, either, as a member of Parliament.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-Well, they intimidated me. We will hear more about that in the grievance debate tomorrow when I will have a time to grieve. The Government has given this organisation an exemption. I wonder how many thousands of dollars that organisation spends in legal fees every time somebody has a poke at it or questions its activities. But the organisation is to be written into Schedule 2, Part I of the Freedom of Information Bill. I go on to the rest of the exempt agencies: The Housing Loans Insurance Corporation, the National Debt Commission, the National Labour Consultative Council, the Office of National Assessments, the Pipeline Authority, the Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation

and the Superannuation Fund Investment Trust. All those organisations I have just alluded to are in the same classification as the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation and the Australian Secret Intelligence Service. How reactionary can we be? Whilst I concede that there may be aspects of the operations of those organisations which because of various reasons should not be open to public scrutiny as closely as this Bill makes so many other areas of Government, I believe that they should be in the second part of Schedule 2.
Lest it be said that this is the first occasion on which I have expressed that view I say that I expressed it in the Party room when this matter was before the combined joint parties some months ago. I wish that I had realised prior to my rising to speak tonight that the Health Insurance Commission had been included in Schedule 2. I might have made my speech even more powerful than the one I have delivered. Nevertheless, all that aside, I believe that this Bill is a new concept in this country. Australia has not exactly been fast at gripping the nettle. At long last we have something with which to experiment and something to observe. I earnestly hope that if this Bill has the shortcomings that honourable members on both sides of the chamber have predicted as possible, the Government will at least make amendments in line with the changes which can safely be brought about.
Finally, I make this plea concerning the Health Insurance Commission. Indeed, I might even go away and word an amendment to this Bill to delete that organisation from the special section of the schedule. When an organisation resorts to intimidation and threats to a member, I wonder what it has to hide. I wonder whether its activities are as inefficient as I believe. I conclude by drawing to the attention of the House the fact that the cost of administering the Government's health insurance scheme is double or even three times more than that of the private health schemes. It is quite fair to observe that there is a grave possibility that the Health Insurance Commission is bedridden with inefficiency.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (9.15)-1t was interesting to hear the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) in his tirade against the previous Australian Labour Party Government. It seems to be the stock in trade of Government members to do this sort of thing when they have nothing very much to say.
Mr Armitage-He was brought up in a very bigoted fashion indeed.
Mr MILTON-Yes, I agree, That is the point. I think he really had nothing to say about the

Freedom ofInformation Bill

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 441

Freedom of Information Bill because, in fact, he is very worried about it. One of the problems with conservative governments is the fact that basically they do not believe in divulging information. The present Government, without doubt the most conservative Federal Government since Federation, is no exception. Because members of this Government do not really believe in freedom of information they have produced a Bill which is full of exemptions and obstacles designed to block the attempts of persons wishing to investigate. the activities of government. What is more, despite protests from Opposition members in the Senate, the Government pushed the concluding stages of the debate through on the last day of sitting of the autumn session because it knew that this most unsatisfactory piece of legislation would not be approved by the Senate after I July.
I find it particularly objectionable that the Bill lists in two schedules a number of agencies and documents which are exempt from the requirements of the Bill. I note that the honourable member for Chisholm (Mr Harris) in his speech yesterday also indicated his concern about certain organisations that were exempt. The honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron) also in a very brilliant speech which he gave a little while ago referred to certain organisations. I believe he also mentioned some writings that he made as a university student but unfortunately he did not tell us whether he happened to pass that particular exercise.
Mr Hyde-Have a guess.
Mr MILTON-I have given the right answer, I think. What justification can there be, for example, for a cloak of secrecy over the activities of the Aboriginal Land Councils and Land Trusts or the National Labour Consultative Council? They are two of the agencies listed in Part 1. No doubt the two classes of people against whom this Government appears to harbour its greatest hostility, namely, the Aboriginals and trade unionists would also like to have that question answered. There are also a number of other bodies included in Part I. This makes a mockery of the contention by government members that people have the right to know what is being done by government. Whilst it can be argued that there is a need to avoid the disclosure of military information it is of great concern to me and should be a great worry to all freedom loving Australians that the Australian Secret Intelligence Service and the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation are granted complete exemption. The activities of these organisations have frequently been the subject of complaint by many individuals, occasionally even members of this House.

It is interesting to note the report in the Age newspaper today which refers to an allegation by a member of the New South Wales Parliament that the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation planted the bomb which caused the death of three people outside the Hilton Hotel in Sydney in 1978. The aIlegation was accompanied by a request for an inquiry on the incident, particularly in view of the fact that no inquest had been held on the three deaths. It should be possible for a serious allegation of this nature to be investigated so that members of the public can feel satisfied that our security agencies are working in the best interests of Australians. It should also be possible in the case of the Hilton bombing to examine the substance of the documents which led to ASIO being granted far greater investigatory powers only three weeks after the bombing incident.
Mr Kent-Because they planted the bomb.
Mr MILTON-Of course, what the honourable member for Hotham (Mr Kent) says is quite right. Such an examination might allay the suspicions of those people who believe that persons acting for ASIO had, in fact, planted the bomb to support the claim that ASIO needed greater investigatory powers and that the bomb had subsequently exploded inadvertently.
Mr Kent-It was so inept that it points to ASIO.
Mr MILTON-That is why the matter needs to be cleared up. There can be no justification for such secrecy. I submit that exempting these bodies in such a blanket way means that innocent people can be harassed, browbeaten or even lose their lives as a result of the ignorant and bigoted activities of officials without redress for the individuals concerned or for their families. Another matter which concerns me is the fact that clause 24 of the Bill gives the agency concerned, or the relevant Minister, the power to refuse to grant access to documents on the grounds that the resources of the agency are insufficient to deal with the request without interfering with its normal work. In effect, almost any request for s1jbstantial information could be refused on those grounds. It would appear that this clause has been inserted to ensure that any such request which may prove embarrassing to an agency or a Minister can be denied for seemingly innocuous administrative and financial reasons.
As has been indicated by other critics of this BiII, the Government is not really interested in open government. On the contrary it has shown itself to be obsessed with secrecy. I call on the Government to withdraw this most dishonest piece of legislation and to give honourable

442 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Freedom ofInformation Bill

members on this side of the House the opportunity to incorporate amendments which will make this Bill a real vehicle for freedom of information. I repeat what was said in the Sun Herald on 12 April 1981 by Peter Robinson:
A much dirtier trick has been the so-called freedom of information bill which, like so much legislation in South Africa, has a practical effect diametrically opposed to what is suggested by its title.
At present the title is a mockery and the provisions will per~anent1y enshrine the present lack of access of the public to the operations of government departments and public authorities.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (9.24)-The speech made by the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron) following earlier in the evening the speech made by the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock) was, by comparison, a breath of fresh air. The honourable member for Dundas seemed to have the view that it was not possible for a member of Parliament to be pleased that a certain advance be made in a piece of legislation like this without, at the same time, being obliged to form, with his colleagues, some sort of Greek chorus to chant approval of it in every detailor have some set of Barnum and Bailey claqueurs to dance at the back of the show to make sure that the general approval, in all circumstances, was expressed. He was also extremely churlish in his treatment of the record of the Whitlam Government and of the Australian Labor Party on freedom of information questions, this particular legislation and the general question of open government. I do not think there could be any doubt at all that the argument could be sustained that the Whitlam Government's record in office was a dramatic advance in openness on anything that had preceded it since 1949. It is a dramatic improvement and the honourable member's treatment of that was quite churlish.
The honourable member for Dundas then proceeded to go through a list of documents allegedly withheld from the public by the Whitlam Government. I listened fairly carefully to that list but I very much doubt whether one of the items on it would be permitted unfettered disclosure under the terms of the Feedom of Information Bill. If he really is that enthusiastic about the particular items covered in that list and the fact that they ought to be readily available to the public, I look forward to his appearance on this side of the House when we move amendments to that effect later this week. He was quite churlish about the record of the Whitlam Government and its association with this Freedom of Information Bill.

I will not go into it in detail but I refer honourable members to the report on freedom of information by the Senate Standing Committee on
Constitutional and Legal Affairs. At pages 5 and 6 of the report, the Committee points out quite emphatically that the Labor Party was the first major political party in Australia to commit itself to freedom of information legislation. The Labor Party set up an interdepartmental committee. It needs to be remembered that a majority of Government senators are members of this committee. It was conceded by that majority of Government senators that that committee laid the foundations for the initial efforts of this Government in the freedom of information legislation in 1978. It must also be said that the Whitlam Government was only three years in office. This Government has been in office for six
years, and it has had all the advantages of having the groundwork laid by the Labor Government, but it has taken it six years to bring this legislation before the House. I submit that the Labor Party's record on this amply stands in comparison with the record of the Government. It stands particularly in comparison as we look at particular aspects of the legislation.
This is a Bill with many unsatisfactory features, some of which we shall attempt to deal with at the' Committee stage. When it was initially presented to the Senate earlier this year the Bill entailed only 20, of the 71 recommendations for a freedom of information Bill that would be compatible with Australia's procedures, Constitution and tradition, made by the Senate Standing Committee
which examined the matter in 1978-79. It was a Senate Standing Committee with a Government majority. The Senate amendments have picked up only a few omissions. Many omissions which continue to be ignored are quite critical to the Bill's effectiveness. Most of these omissions appear to be at their most glaring in Part IV of the Bill. I intend to deal with that later.
I now wish to address myself to the matters of principle which the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) considered in his speech yesterday. As this debate proceeded over a number of years, a line of argument has been produced by Ministers, by sections of the Public Service and by the Queensland Government, in particular, in submissions to the Standing Committee, that this legislation is incompatible with the Westminster system by which we are governed. I still think that some of the trepidation on the other side bf the House in supporting the amendments that we will put forward at a later stage is based on similar misconceptions about the operations of the Westminster system as expressed by the Minister. In

Freedom ofInformation Bill

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 443

the course of the debate what is essentially a vague set of governing principles, when compared at least with those based on written constitutions extensively separating executive, legislative and judicial functions, has in this debate assumed a positively mystical aspect. It has inspired definitions of processes which those of us who are supposed to be at the core of the Westminster system in Parliament would find unrecognisable when applied to practice. The Minister has taken the trouble to define the Westminster process in such a manner. He has done so implicitly to excuse the Government's failures to implement substantially some very well thought out recommendations by the Senate Committee and by a number of public interest groups and to justify a vague promise to review the operation of the Act some years in the future.
The Minister's speech, as a lesson in primary school civics, has its merits. Here it is laughable. The Minister invites us to consider the relationship of Ministers to Parliament as an example of information dissemination-he went on about this at some length-which obviates the need for more stringent open government legislation. He said:
In this regard it is significant that Ministers are subject to questioning in Parliament on matters within their ministerial responsibility both without notice and upon notice by members of the Parliament. By second reading speeches on Bills, by their participation in debates, and by making of ministerial statements Ministers also give much information about government activity directly to Parliament.
He could have fooled me. This is a fine statement of theory. It does not take very long in this chamber to recognise that what takes place in this chamber during the processes that the Minister describes, except on the least controversial of matters, is a vigorous stoking of the boilers to lay the thickest possible smokescreen over most aspects of government decision-making. The evasive answer is admired by government supporters. Frankness provokes dismay. Paroxysms of delight ripple through Government ranks when a pointed, information-seeking opposition question draws a raving irrelevant ministerial counterattack chock full of appropriate ideological red meat. Standing Orders enshrine a Minister's right not to answer questions.
The whole process of a lack of information reminds me of what happened to an old friend of mine, Tom Hartrey, who was a former member for the State seat of Kalgoorlie in Western Australia. He was deputed by the citizens of Kalgoorlie who were then boycotting the pubs in Kalgoorlie to investigate reasons for a beer price rise in Perth. Tom Hartrey went down to investigate the reasons for a beer price rise and subsequently

reported back to his thirsty constituents. He said to them on that occasion: 'Ladies and gentlemen, I have been to the Premier to find an answer to the problem that we confront. I have been to the Government to find an answer to the problem that we confront. I have been to the breweries to find an answer to the problem that we confront. I have even been to the Opposition to find an answer to the problem that we confront. I have been everywhere but never has alcohol been so anonymous'. I would suggest that this is precisely the sort of problem that we find ourselves confronted with at Question Time. Never is any aspect of government activity more anonymous than it is when it finally hits this House in the processes so beloved of the Minister in justifying his position on what is supposed to be open government.
The basis of democracy is not responsible government, separation of powers or any other constitutional formula or legislative administrative process. They are tools to create the possibility of an orderly life and the advancement of democratic principles. The basis of democracy is that each individual in society has a right to determine how he or she is collectively governed. Implicit in this is a right of access to information on how decisions are made that directly and indirectly affect our lives. Proper freedom of information legislation would address those questions effectively.
The Westminster system of government as a model is not only vague but also fluid. It changes through time. It exists and its institutions exist in a dialectical relationship with society and are modified in their practice by social change. This process is usually cumulative and imperceptible so that Ministers who rely on textbook formulas may indeed not perceive changes though they are in fact obliged to act on them.
Let us take the question of ministerial responsibility. Westminster theory suggests a process of decision-making which moves from Public Service to Minister to Cabinet and then of explanation from Cabinet to Minister to Parliament to public. The Minister is responsible for his Department to the Cabinet, Parliament and the public. It is many years since this paradigm actually reflected reality. Ministers will not and cannot accept responsibility for all aspects of their Department's operations. How often have honourable members heard Ministers qualify answers to questions posed by the public or in this House with a statement that to the Minister's knowledge, such and such an answer is correct. How often in recent times have Ministers resigned when their inability to exercise fully control of their departments has

444 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Freedom ofInformation Bill

been exposed? Indeed, in the area of national security policy, largely excluded from this legislation, Ministers have positively wallowedhistorically anyway in Australia-in their irresponsibility.
One former Liberal Prime Minister and Minister for Defence was pleased to say about one of the joint US-Australian installations under his direct jurisdiction:
I don't even know what Pine Gap is all about. I didn't then-
That was in 1969-
I could have asked but it didn't arise. I didn't ask about it.
More recently, the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen), who is an ornament to this House and one of the last vocal defenders of the doctrine of ministerial responsibility, was compelled to reveal considerable ignorance of the operations of his Department several years ago when he discovered from a reading of the Press, a significant upgrading of the North West Cape facility. Ministers cannot be expected to be so fully in command of the departments because the areas of government responsibility have expanded so massively since the nineteenth century when most contemporary definitions of the doctrine of ministerial responsibility were devised.
That is not a plea for small government. It is a vital argument for effective freedom of information type legislation as an aid to continued application of democratic principles in a modern industrial society. It is ironic that it is the democratic socialists in this House who are obliged on this legislation, as they are in so many other cases, to carry the liberal case for the rest of the Parliament, as I suggest we did strongly in the senate and as we are doing in this debate in this chamber.
I turn now to one part of the Bill which I think is most unsatisfactory and that is Part IV dealing with exempt documents in particular areas of government responsibility. Almost all the 15 exemptions leave unclear the criteria on which documents will be available to the public. The lack of clarity foreshadows heavy usage of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal and the Document Review Tribunal. In particular, I would like to discuss clause 33 dealing with questions affecting national security, defence, international relations and relations between the States. In the first place, it is positively ludicrous that communications between State and Commonwealth governments should be given the same exemption as documents involving national security. I do realise that conservative parties thrive on the

prospect of a return to pre-190 I constitutional arrangements. But it would be nice if they kept that strictly to statements of principle rather than incorporating it in their legislation. State conservative governments in particular are obsessive about secrecy and that is one of the major reasons why I suggest that they had this particular section added to clause 33.
Mr Coleman-Are you referring to the New South Wales Labor Government?
Mr BEAZLEY-I will come to it in a minute. The Queensland Government, for example, has already said that it will not abide by the decisions of the Freedom of Information Act and that it will do everything in its power to preclude correspondence it has from the Federal Government on it. Recently, in Western Australia, some of us were involved in an exercise to try to screw out of the Western Australian Government some information on the materials it had put before the Grants Commission when presenting the Western Australian case. Since the honourable member for Wentworth (Mr Coleman) is so interested in the New South Wales Government and its relationship with its public, I point out that the New South Wales public had a chance 12 months previously to look at their Government's submission to the Grants Commission. The New South Wales Government did not make it a closed document. But the Western Australian Government obsessively gripped the document to its heart and would not reveal a single detail of it to the public. So we were obliged to read through the Grants Commission report and make some sort of assessment of the type of case that the Western Australian Government put to the Commission. One can only say from the results that the case that the Western Australian Government put was extremely weak. So it is no wonder--
Mr Kent-No wonder.
Mr BEAZLEY-So it is no wonder at all that that document has not appeared before us. Evidently also there would be bits and pieces of it that would be extremely embarrassing to the Western Australian Government. For example, for the last two or three weeks or a month or so those of us who are active in politics in Western Australia have been obliged to watch the dancing across the screen of the Western Australian Minister for Education as he attempts to conceal various aspects of his Department's operations and the reasons for his making heavy cut-backs in that Department. He has gone to the public and said that we can afford these cuts because we have one of the best student-teacher ratios in Australia. Yet when we go to the Grants Commission documents

Freedom ofInformation Bill

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 445

we discover that a case was made two or three months previously by the Western Australian Government in which it pleaded for extra funds because it said that Western Australians had one of the worst student-teacher ratios in Australia. It is no wonder, therefore, that the Western Australian Government does not want these documents revealed. What a sorry contrast the Western Australian Government is with the Government of New South Wales which includes its people on matters vitalto them. And how necessary it is that the Western Australian Government is compelled to face the light of public scrutiny with the sorts of cases it puts forward to the Grants Commission. How sad it is that this Government will not acquiesce to decent amendments to make sure that the Western Australian Government will have to do so in the future.
I am concerned about the possibilities of a continuation of excessive secrecy in the foreign affairs and defence field. The Opposition is concerned not because it does not agree that a wide variety of intergovernmental communications, technical defence aspects and Public Service assessments ought not to be placed before the public view. Clearly they must not. We had an appaJling case last year when a diplomat serving in India had his position compromised by the premature revelation of quite appropriately frank assessments to his Department of the Indian Government. We are concerned, however, because in this area gross abuses have occurred where secrecy has not been based on national security but on nakeli political advantage. Recently I was privileged to accompany the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence arOl,md the various joint United States-Australian installa~ions. I was interested to see a film which is regularly shown to tourists in Western Australia which connects quite directly the operations of the North West Cape installation with United States submarines. Yet, when the legislation to create the North West Cape installation was introduced in this Parliament in 1963, what any old tourist visiting the North West Cape installation now knows was not given to the Parliament or to the public at that time. A piece of information which was vital to an important foreign affairs debate and which was clearly not a matter of national security was concealed for deliberate political purposes.
Mr Armitage-And the commandant says himself that it was never classified.
Mr BEAZLEY-That is right. It was an Australian decision, not an American one. This secrecy, particularly When applied to key aspects

of the United States alliance, has massively hindered effective public debate on the American alliance and foreign policy and defence issues related to it. This has been despite the fact, or probably because of the fact, that governments have sought to win elections on the issue. We have the ludicrous situation in which any Soviet foreign affairs or defence official or United States congressman is far more likely to know details of many aspects of our relationship with the United States than are Australian parliamentarians and citizens.
The legislation will not make a great deal of difference to this situation. Where the Minister declares under clause 33 that the revelation of a document is not in the public interest there is no provision for overruling his decision. There is a provision whereby documents may be reviewed by a Document Review Tribunal but acceptance of the decisions of the tribunal on the classification placed on particular documents will not be binding on Ministers. We would much prefer a situation such as that which obtains in the United States whereby judicial review can overturn the security classification given to a particular document. The operation of the United States Act in this area provides us with a very useful insight into what the operation of such a system would be here. About 40,000 documents annually are sought from the United States Department of Defense by interested parties. Most of those documents are released. As to those which the Department wishes not to be released, the courts have been very restrained in compelling it to do so. They are loath, as they should be, to overturn a decision which the Department strongly supports. But as the moment of court action nears in the United States, the Department tends to review its classifications and release very substantial amounts of the material without a fight in court, revealing that the material to that point has been overclassified.
As the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) pointed out, this occurs not'only in the Department of Defense and the Department of State but also in much more security conscious departments, such as the Central Intelligence Agency. We ask for nothing more in this legislation than the same rights as are enjoyed by United States citizens, a nation so rightly beloved of honourable members opposite. We invite them to give the Australian public those rights. We will invite them to do that through the legislation we will put forward. We invite them to act like liberals and not people solely devoted to the possession of power, recognising that information is

446 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Freedom ofInformation Bill

part of power, and wishing to preclude not only us but also the general Australian public from it.
Mr HYDE (Moore) (9.43)-The Freedom of Information Bill is significant for two reasons. First of all, the Bill is significant in its own right. It is also significant because the debate on it has been one of those occasions-regrettably they are rare occasions-when the Parliament has exercised its powers and authority to bring about significant improvement in legislation before it. During the last session of Parliament we debated this Bill, the Broadcasting and Television Amendment Bill and the Airlines Agreement Bills. On those three occasions the Parliament exercised more influence than it has been wont to do for many years. That is significant in itself.
I come to the Bill. It is useless for the Opposition to decry the Bill and say that it has no signincance because it does not do everything that it wishes. The point is that it will improve the democratic processes of this country. For that reason, it is to be supported. Perhaps in time in the light of experience we will make further amendments. Perhaps the government of the day will do so. But let us support this Bill for the time being. Let us use it for the time being. I will endeavour to demonstrate to the House that it will make a significant contribution. Perhaps this Bill would be less necessary if we did not have so much public sector intervention in private lives. In fact if we had less to be informed about maybe we would need the access to information less. It is government's capacity to interfere in the life and freedom of each citizen that makes this sort of democratic process necessary. We ought to think also about curtailing the over-interference of government in the first place.
I would like to quote briefly from the second reading speech of the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner). He said:
This Bill will establish for members of the public legally enforceable rights of access to information in documentary form held by Ministers and government agencies except where an overriding interest may require confidentiality to be maintained.
The basic principles of the Freedom of Information Bill are simple. Firstly, government departments and authorities should make their structures and functions known to the public and publish the rules and guidelines they apply in making decisions affecting members of the public.
Secondly, members of the public are entitled to access to documents held by government departments and authorities unless there are special reasons for not making those documentspublic.
That is a very good sentiment and I support it. Just to indicate to the House that my support has not come lately, because I wish to use the Bill and the freedom it will give me, I will quote again

quite briefly from one of my speeches. On an earlier occasion I said:
And when the Government assumes it is a better judge of individual welfare than are the consumer and producer working it out between them-consider taxi regulations, airlines, shopping hours-then it ought to say how that it is so, which is a reason why most free marketeers favour open government.
I just quote that to establish my credibility in this matter. I invite the House to consider a case study which will demonstrate that this Bill has relevance to the process of government and will in fact be useful. It will be known to honourable members that the jet trunk air routes in Australia are in the hands of two companies-Ansett Airlines of Australia and Trans Australia Airlinesand that these companies operate a duopoly that is to all intents and purposes a monopoly. They are protected from competition and are denied the opportunity to compete with each other except in respect of such relatively unimportant matters as hostesses' uniforms and meals. They are not able to compete with each other on any of the important things such as the price of travel and capacity loading of the aircraft. Even the aircraft they buy have to be approved by the Minister for Transport. There is no reasonable market to discipline these two bodies that provide so much service and disservice to the Australian people. There is no market that will work. The report of the Independent Public Inquiry into Domestic Airfares-the Holcroft report-made it quite clear that there was unlikely to be a functional market. In a letter to the Minister for Transport the Holcroft committee said:
. . . Ansett however proved far more spontaneous and the delay in settling the basis of agreement to supply information hampered the Inquiries' operations.
It went on to say:
As the Department of Transport is the regulatory authority for domestic airfares determination in Australia we also found it quite unhelpful that its submission was not received until 10 December, that is, some two weeks after the government had already moved to curtail the Inquiry. This made it impracticable to examine the Department in public hearing. Nor was any written submission received from the Bureau of Transport Economics.
It seems that the people who regulated this section of Australian economic life were less than forthcoming even when there was a government inquiry charged with the job of finding out what they were up to. The Holcroft inquiry at paragraph 1.56 of its report, said:
The Inquiry feels that progressive deregulation of all but safety requirements is the preferred solution.
The point is that the Holcroft inquiry did not believe, whatever happened, that the regulated environment could be made to work properly. It did not believe that a proper market discipline

Freedom ofInformation Bill

19 August J981 REPRE;SENTATIVES 447

could be applied to these two airlines. The relevance of that point is that in the absence of a market discipline, the only other discipline available is the democratic discipline of complete disclosure. When the Holcroft inquiry reported the Government was not happy with the findings and it appointed Price Waterhouse to make a further inquiry. Price Waterhouse recently reported and came down with a quite radically different formula, but it also agreed that the regulated environment was not likely to work very well. I quote again, this time from the Price Waterhouse report:
A rormula which provides a reasonable return to one airline could provide the other with an inadequate profit.
I remind honourable members that in a J2 month period air fares on these routes have risen by 16.7 per cent, a great deal more than the inflation rate, and that those fare increases have been justified from cost. There may be little doubt that the costs were actually incurred, but the relevant questions are whether the costs should have been incurred and whether there was waste and unnecessary featherbedding. However, there is a difference. Price Waterhouse reported its formula and sent it to the Government under separate cover in secret. Unlike the Holcroft formula, the Price Waterhouse formula is secret. Those of us who have been interested in this issue and who have called for deregulation are prepared to accept any reasonable formula. We want an unfettered and free environment, but if we are going to have a regulated environment and we cannot achieve a free environment we will accept a reasonable formula. However, it is necessary that all those calculations be made public or no member of the public should be expected to accept them, particularly when there is such prima facie evidence that it is all inefficient. An increase of 16.7 per cent is a very big increase for one 12-month period. The freedom of information legislation will enable me, other members of this House and all other members of the public to gain access to that fodemocratic discipline where this 'free enterprise' Government has not applied a market discipline. I intend to demonstrate that not from the Bill but from the explanatory memorandum because I believe that is easier to follow, at least for non-lawyers. I read from the explanatory memorandum:
Clause 51 places the onus or establishing that a decision given in respect or a request was justified on the agency or Minister to whom the request was made.
In other words, the onus is on the Minister if he refuses to provide documented evidence. If he does not co-operate, he must then demonstrate

that he had a reason not to. I will read again from the explanatory memorandum:
Sub-c1ause 22( I) accordingly provides that where it is possible and reasonably practicable to prepare a copy or the document with the exempt matter deleted, and the copy document so prepared is not thereby rendered misleading, the applicant shall be given access to such a copy . . .
In other words, if the Minister is able to delete sufficient material from the document so that it does not disclose the information that he is entitled to hold back, he is obliged to provide the rest. The onus is on the Minister to provide the document in as full a form as he can but there are certain areas in relation to which he can hold back information. The explanatory memorandum states:
Sub-c1ause 43 (I) provides that a document is exempt ir its disclosure would disclose trade secrets or other inrormation having a commercial value where the commercial value or that information would be diminished or destroyed by that disclosure. The sub-c1ause would also make exempt a document which contains inrormation concerning the business or proressional affairs or a person or the business, commercial or financial affairs or an organisation or undertaking where the disclosure of that inrormation would unreasonably affect adversely the person, organisation or undertaking in respect or the lawrul conduct or his or its business etc.
Sub-clause 43 (3) makes it clear that the protection or commercial privacy given by the clause extends to commercial undertakings carried on by the Commonwealth, a State or the Northern Territory.
However, as it is a regulated duopoly and as the profits of the organisation are guaranteed I do not believe that any information that could be disclosed could possibly be claimed to prejudice the organisation. The Minister must provide a document en request for information. Should he not do so the onus is on him to demonstrate that he is entitled under some clause of the Bill to withhold that information. The Government has commissioned a submission to be presented to it. Price Waterhouse has submitted in secret and yet, as I read the terms of this legislation, once the Bill becomes law the Government will not have the power to withhold the secret formula that ,has been put forward by Price Waterhouse. I believe that will make it easier for all those members of this House and those members of the public who have a genuine interest in this issue to argue their case, to look at the relevant information and, if necessary, to apply the proper democratic disciplines to the Government.
I understood originally that when Price Waterhouse was to report it was to report publicly. In fact, I understood that all information was to be made public and that the democratic disciplines were to be applied in the absence of the market disciplines. This piece of legislation gives

448 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Adjournment

the Parliament and the public the opportunity to ensure that that does, in fact, happen. Mr Deputy Speaker, 1 have merely taken you and the House through a case study but 1 believe I have demon-

I am a clerk Class 5 with Australia Post, my wife has not been employed until 2 weeks ago when she commenced work
on a temporary basis as a typist because of necessity. We have
an II year old daughter who is going to high school and now comes home to an empty home which is the one thing we did

strated that this is useful legislation, that it wi\l not want.

contribute to the democratic processes in We would appreciate any advice you can offer or help you

Australia and that it should be supported.
Debate (on motion by Mr Les Johnson) adjourned.
ADJOURNMENT Interest Rates-Industrial Relations: Trucking
Industry-Retirement of Mr F. W. Temperly-Department of Social

can give to overcome our problem. We really feel strongly that we are entitled to a home savings grant and hope you can arrange for us to receive same. If there is no form of low interest loan available (surely there is some form of Government finance loan at a reasonable rate-even if it covered only a portion of our total loan) maybe there are some Liberal MPs who can make a donation to us to alleviate our desperate situation.
Hoping to hear some good news from you soon.

Security-Poland-Pensions-Community

Yours faithfully,

Youth Support Scheme

The letter is signed. It then states:

Motion (by Mr Viner) proposed:

P.S. We are hoping the worry of this matter will not affect

That the House do now adjourn.

'our health as we were forced to cancel our Medibank health

Mr KENT (Hotham) (IO.l)-Mr Deputy Speaker, before the parliamentary recess I received a letter from one of my constituents and as 1think it is of great interest to this House and to the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) who is at the table I propose to read it. It states:
Dear Mr Kent, I write to seek your help and assistance if possible in obtain-
ing some form of relief from the situation my wife and myself

insurance on 30.7.80 because the contribution had risen to $27.91 per fortnight.
In view of repeated answers to questions in this House by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) stating that higher interest rates are helping Australians to buy their homes, wi\l they get up in this place and answer the questions of

find ourselves in.

my constituent? For their benefit 1 repeat the

On 28 November 1979 we purchased our first home in Noble Park. The home we bought cost $52,000 of which we had saved a deposit of $14,000 leaving a balance of $38,000.

questions asked in the letter:
I. Is there any form of lower interest loan available to us?

We borrowed the $38,000 from the Commonwealth Savings

2. Is it likely that interest rates will continue to rise and

Bank at 9.5 per cent interest at a repayment of $340 per

force people out of their homes?

month which we could just manage. The following details outline the incredible turn of events since that time:
17.2.80 Initial repayment $340 per month for only four months 9.5 per cent

I will be eagerly awaiting the Ministers' answers, especially in view of the fact that since this letter was written interest rates have risen to 12.5 per

Then to $354 per month for only 3 months 10 per cent Then to $366 per month for only 5 months 10.5 per cent 17.2.81 Then to $393 per month-current rate 11.5 per cent

cent. The family in question now has to pay approximately $420 a months and its plight is even
more desperate.

Obviously an increase of $53 per month is way beyond our

Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (10.5)-During my

wildest expectations and has us wondering where it will end. The disturbing thing is that all these increases took place in the period of 12 months. We now have to consider whether it
is worth staying in our own home or selling up and moving

maiden speech to this House on 26 February 1981 I made reference to sweetheart deals in industrial relations. In fact, I said:

back into a flat or some other rented accommodation. What has happened in the first 12 months of our loan's term has hor-
rified us.

These same competitors achieve industrial harmony through sweetheart deals registered through a tame arbitration system. This allows those wage increases to be in-

We now ask you the following questions:

cluded in their rise and fall clause of work contracts and so

I. Is there any form of lower interest loan available to us?

flow on to suffering clients.

2. Is there any chance of consideration being given to granting us a home savings grant? (The maximum value of the house being purchased was lifted after we bought our home).
3. Is it likely that interest rates will continue to rise and force people out of their homes?

I choose to remind the House of that statement tonight in the light of the present Australian Road Transport Federation-Transport Workers Union dispute. The road transport industry has been under severe pressure from industrial action. That

After making 12 payments for a total of $4,252.00 we have
just received a letter from the Commonwealth Bank telling us we now owe only $37,916.57 out of the original amount of' $38,000 i.e. we have paid off the princely sum of $83.43 in 12
months-what an achievement!!

is bad for business. The owners want to get off the hook. The simple and time honoured solution is for them to buy their way out of the situation. Consequently, before and during the recent strike

Adjournment

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 449

the industry continuously stated its desire and intention to pay its workers $20 a week and to provide some other benefits. However, the Federation also said that it required the increase to be approved by the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. It has inferred that it takes this action in support of the arbitration system and the notion of the rule of the umpire. It has further inferred that as it is prepared to pay the court is being obstructive in continuing to refuse to rubber stamp the proposal. It encourages the public to see the Arbitration Commission and the Government as the villains of the piece who are unnecessarily obstructing the worker from being granted a legitimate wage claim. This is hypocrisy in the extreme.
The facts are that the trucking industry does not want to pay its workers an extra $20 a week plus benefits and, further, it is probably reasonable to say it cannot afford to do so. The trucking industry is trying to get its customers to pay the increase. In many cases this would follow the traditional and meekly accepted policy of announcing a price increase. The dilemma facing the truck owners is that a large amount of their business is conducted under contracts. These contracts have rise and Jail clauses which, in the case of wages, are tied to decisions of the arbitration system. If there is no Arbitration Commission approval there is no increase in contract payments. The change that has occurred since I made my statement in February is that the Arbitration Commission apparently has recognised the grave injustice it does the Australian consumer when it rubber stamps sweetheart deals. I congratulate it for its courage and new-found determination. The Australian consumer is where the buck stops being passed.
Many would argue that the companies that have these large contracts with the trucking firms make large profits and could afford to pay. Unfortunately, their customers, as users of truck freight services, generally deal in consumer goods. They do not have contracts with their clients and can pass on the increased costs at any time. They do so, just as the bread and milk industries, which are direct employers of TWU members, will do so now that they have agreed to pay the increase to TWU members. To overcome the court's resistance, the employer and employee representatives are both now arguing that there has been an increase in work value. To me, an increase in work value infers an increase in productivity. If the productivity increase is equal to the increase in wages there will be no need to pass on cost increases to anyone and the consumer will not suffer. If this is

the case, why are the trucking companies so determined to ensure that they can pass on the cost? Irrespective of the evidence now being presented to the Arbitration Commission, the total cost of the wage increase will be passed on. This proves to me that the productivity argument is equally fallacious. The trucking companies are not restricted from paying the wage increase provided they take it from their profits.
I close by saying to the arbitrators: Please continue to remember your responsibility under section 40 of your Act, the Conciliation and Arbitration Act, which says, in part 'the Commission shall act according to equity, good conscience and the substantial merits of the case'.
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (lO.lO)-Last Tuesday the House paid tribute to a very personal friend, Fred Temperly. We reached agreement on both sides of the house that there would be only two speakers, and I honoured that. I would like to place on record my personal and sincere thanks to a very kind friend. I have known Fred since I became a member of this Parliament 12 years ago. He has had something like 26 years service in Hansard. He had a lengthy service inside this Parliament and a splendid military record. He has helped not only me personally as a new member but also many members both in this chamber and in the Senate for a variety of reasons and on a variety of problems which all new members face. I sincerely regret the reasons for his resignation. I think they were unfortunate and unnecessary and if appropriate action had been taken I think his resignation could have been avoided.
Fred joined the Department of the Interior in 1939 and was promoted to the Parliamentary Reporting Staff as Clerk and Accountant in April 1955. He was promoted to Assistant Reporter, a designation. which changed to Administrative Officer in 1968. He held that position until he retired in July of this year. Fred was an extremely dedicated and diligent officer. He helped everybody who went to him for .advice and help with courtesy and kindness. This Parliament has lost a very good officer. The members have lost a very good officer. I speak with a great deal of sadness and regret. I conclude by saying that honourable members, honourable senators and officers of the Parliament who worked with Fred and knew him, as I did personally, found him to be a very courteous, helpful and dedicated officer to the Parliament, the reporting staff and the people with whom he worked. I regret to say that unfortunately he was not appreciated at the level he ought to have been. This Parliament has lost a dedicated officer but fortunately I have not lost a

450 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Adjournment

friend. I wish Fred and his wife good health and a long and happy retirement.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (10.13)-Tonight I want to talk about the functions of the Commonwealth Employment Service and the Department of Social Security in Kiama which is in my electorate. The reason I draw these matters to the attention of the House is that the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West) whose electorate adjoins mine has done me the courtesy of discussing them in the local media with his usual incapacity to report accurately the facts. I advised the honourable member for Cunningham that I would be replying to his comments tonight. I regret that he is not in the House. I note that he is now entering the chamber. I welcome him. It is extraordinary that the honourable member should have found himself capable of discussing the closure of the CES office in Kiama without being able to bring himself to concede the fact that the Department of Social Security had opened an office in Kiama to deal with the very issues and the very subjects that he complained would no longer be dealt with because the CES office had been closed.
For the benefit of the honourable member for Cunningham, who may well have been outside both his and my electorate examining matters in the remoter parts of Australia which appear to interest him more than the realities in both our electorates, I advise him that the Commonwealth Employment Service has given up the functions about which he complained. In fact, they are now performed by the Department of Social Security. This is why there is no longer a CES office in Kiama and why the Department of Social Security has opened an office in Kiama to deal with the very problems that, in fact, the honourable member for Cunningham app.arently is unaware have been transferred from one department to the other. It may well be that the honourable member for Cunningham simply did not know that, or it could be that he chose to ignore it when making his statements to the local media.
I draw to the attention of the honourable member for Cunningham the fact that on the first and third Wednesdays of each month the Department of Social Security has a presence in its temporary premises in Kiama-I regret that they are temporary and I think the Department should do something about them-to handle matters relating to unemployment benefits, among other matters, raised by the people of that town. I am advised by the manager of the local social security office that despite the fact there is a big placard outside and despite the publicity generated by the honourable member for Cunningham in my local

media during the week, 12 people attended that office today. There is obviously a massive demand for the services of the local social security office. I hope that what the honourable member for Cunningham has done, by his mis-statements, may bring to the attention of many people the fact that this facility is available, rather than the contrary, which is the mistaken public view of the honourable member for Cunningham.
There is no doubt that there is a need for a greater and a more regular presence of the Department of Social Security in Kiama. However, I would point out to the honourable member one simple thing: When the Commonwealth Employment Service was in Kiama it was housed in the only available space, which was up a very sharp flight of stairs. After some discussion with me the Department of Social Security agreed that it would be unreasonable to require pensioners, who use the services of the Department, to walk up those stairs. Ground floor facilities have been established. I hope that those facilities will be more frequently available. It is possible to send matters to the Department of Social Security and CES offices by post. In fact the Department can backdate claims received by post for seven days. So there is no disadvantage to the residents of my electorate by this change of function. The fact that only 12 people managed to turn up to the Department of Social Security clearly indicates--
Mr West-You are more worried about paying the dole than finding jobs.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member for Cunningham will resume his seat.
Mr BAUME-He is maintaining his usual level of high competence. I suggest we need better services but we have some now.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (10.18)-1 raise in the House tonight the situation in Poland and the need, as I believe it, for the Government to offer substantial assistance at this time to the Polish people. I think there can be no question that the substantial democratic gains made by the Polish people over the last 12 months, largely through industrial activity, are being placed in jeopardy by Poland's economic state. The Polish Government has had considerable trouble in convincing Western banks to re-schedule its debts. Poland has had considerable trouble in securing the amounts it needs from the most immediate Western nations in immediate assistance to feed its people. The problem of the shortage of food is a particular crisis.

Adjournment

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 451

Since World War II the Polish regime has been faced with popular revolt when food supplies are short or when prices substantially increase. In the past this has posed problems of survival for rigid communist regimes. It now poses a' problem of survival for the liberalised Polish regime and for the general reforms that have been achieved, largely in an orderly fashion. As it happens, the principal need of the Polish people in foodstuffs is meat and sugar. Meat and sugar are staples of the Polish diet. In this, Poland is different from other nations in central and eastern Europe, where cereals form the basis of the diet. In the Polish case, meat a,nd sugar are the staple diet. As I have said, it is no accident that when there have been shortages of meat or meat prices have risen that has been the point at which the Polish people have found the Government or the system in which they are operating least sustainable. It is no accident therefore that, at this point, the Polish people should be in a state of revolt.
I am reliably informed that at this time we have in this country reasonable stocks of meat and sugar. We are in a position to offer immediate and substantial aid to the Polish people. The Opposition has raised the Polish question in this House on a number of occasions. The Government has expressed sympathy for the plight of the Polish people. The time has come for people to put their money where their mouths are. In the developments in Poland, we have rightly seen a major advance in democratic principle, a major advance in the rights of people to organise industrially, the right of people to have a say in their own affairsrights it must be said in regard to which members on the other side of the House do not necessarily offer the same degree of sympathy when they are sought in this country. Nevertheless, members on both sides of the House have welcomed those developments in Poland. Those developments need to be sustained. They can only be sustained if the population is secure in the belief that the governing processes that they have recently established for themselves are capable of delivering to them their basic needs. We all understand that in a period of chaos there will be many areas of dislocation. These areas may continue for some considerable time. We need to be sympathetic to that and to adopt a generous attitude towards it.
We have made available to the Polish people about $40m in credit for wool sales. In fact that is not a particularly generous offer and I understand it has not yet been taken up, although negotiations are proceeding. We can do a lot better than simply offer the Polish people a guarantee which they will in large measure wish to meet and repay themselves. We can do better than that. I think we

need to make an outright grant, not a grant of credits, from our substantial stocks of meat and sugar.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (10.28)-1 wish to speak tonight about the Government's policy of taxing means tested pensions. Pensions in this country are without doubt only paid to those who are judged poor enough by a means test to qualify them.
Mr Howard-That was Gough Whitlam's policy. You introduced it.
Mr MILTON-A heavy burden of the Government's taxation policy on pensioners falls on lone parents who choose to work at casual or part time rates.
Mr Howard-Absolute nonsense.
Mr MILTON-I am very glad that the Treasurer (MrHoward) is here tonight to hear what I have to say. The present policy in fact acts as a disincentive for lone parents to join the work force and re-establish themselves as effective contributors to their family's well being. I wish to describe briefly the situations of two of my constituents who have called on me for help. These two women are both supporting parents with two and three children respectively. To augment their widows' pensions, they have obtained employment with a catering firm on a casual basis. This employment requires them to accept particular assignments at very short notice. By dint of accepting any work offered to them, both women have established regular work on a part time basis with this catering firm. This has enabled them to maintain a home and provide some of the requirements of their growing children. However, such employment by its very nature is casual. When the firm has a job, the employee is contacted and expected to take the work. Under these circumstances it is very difficult to average out a weekly income.
Mrs Darling-Impossible.
Mr MILTON-Some time may pass with no income at all. As the honourable member for Lilley says, it is impossible. At other times there is a lot of work. The arrival of the annual group certificate then becomes an object of dread for these women. If they are over the acceptable amount, they lose their fringe benefits-a vital security for all pensioners. The ftinge benefits scheme, which undoubtedly can be calculated to an amount each week in money, is far more than this to a lone parent. It is security for health care for their children and themselves, their travel and communication and in fact any disaster, which intrudes on

452 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Adjournment

their lives, which must be severe because of their the termination of the Community Youth Sup-

lone status.

port Scheme. Government money should be spent

Of necessity, these women must have a telephone so that they may be informed of jobs. They must have a car to travel to these jobs, which frequently involve late night bookings.

on the creation of jobs for young people, but in the absence of such action, there was one area which was assisting a number of young people who, psychologically, were falling apart--

Under the circumstances of their employment, Mr Baume-An extra $24m is to be provided

they are in such a bind that they cannot refuse for that purpose.

'

work or the employment itself will be threatened. Mr Howard-An extra 22 per cent is to be pro-

But if they do not refuse it they are likely each year to be a few dollars over the allowable income level and thus forfeit their fringe benefits.

vided. Don't you read?
Mr Dawkins-What an absolute liar the Treasurer is.

Lone parents such as these are already econolTlicaliy disadvantaged. They still have to pay the same amount fot most services and facilities that are available to two-parent families, and are usually more in need of such services as child care, home services and maintenance costs. I suggest

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member for Lilley will resume her seat. The honourable member for Fremantle will withdraw.
Mr Dawkins-Withdraw what?

that in these circumstances the Government's polMr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable

icy of taxing income which augments a pension is member will withdraw his interjection. The Chair

too inflexible. These women are in a situation in does not propose to repeat it.

which they are virtually forced to refuse work offered by their employer and run the risk of losing their jobs, or must give up the struggle and become totally unemployed.
Individual millionaires and large companies are able to record massive profits year after year without any additional taxation being paid. Tax avoidance on a grand scale as we know it exists in this

Mr Dawkins-In deference to the Chair, I withdraw.
Mrs DARLING-The one area in which some funding was going to the support of kids who psychologically were falling apart because they could not obtain work-and I am talking about reality, about people whom I know in my electorate and like people in many other electorates--

country, is out of the question for the recipient of a ocial service pension, who must face deductions from the pension for every dollar earned over the acceptable limit. I suggest that when a pensioner

Mr Tuckey-What are their parents doing?
Mrs DARLING-Quite often, as the privileged may not realise, there are parents who have

who brings home $106 a week thereby loses the turned their children away, or children who have

vital security of fringe benefits our society has lost come to live in the city and are without parental

all compassion.

support. In my area they are spending the night at

As Government members have been quoted in this House as saying, the concept of fairness also implies that tax should be levied according to capacity to pay. I suggest that a single parent with a ' combined pension-employment income of $106 a week has no capacity to pay income tax, and that
the ever impinging threat of loss of fringe benefits is an emotional problem of great intensity for . those single parents who are fortunate enough to be able to find some outside, paying employment. I urge the Government to lift the levels of allowable income which may be earned by pensioners without loss of fringe benefits.

hostels which are run by the Roman Cathqlic church, and during the day they are wandering around. They are street kids and no doubt Government members wish that they would simply, disappear, just as many Government members wish that the Aborigines would disap-
pear when they call for land rights; but they will not disappear. They exist and they are a problem of which all social workers and concerned persons are aware. To date they have been turning to the Community Youth Support Scheme. In my electorate there are projects at Deagon and Windsor. I have been in touch with project officers there today. They are as appalled as I am that the sup-

Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (10.27)-I rise to port has now been withdrawn. Hundreds of young

protest on behalf of that most abused and people have been gaining some sort of support.

neglected section of our society today, our unemThey get some training. Some go to jobs from that

ployed teenagers. At the moment these poor kids training. The terrible cycle of desperation which

do not have much with which to make life grasps people when they cannot get a job has been

comfortable or happy, but what they have had has broken by the work of these CYSS projects.

been taken away from them. I refer, of course, to Those who do not go on to other work can learn

Adjournment

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 453

leather tooling and different arts and crafts. There is companionship and an awareness that other people are in the same boat as they are. It sustains them until such time as we can offer these young people full employment.
Those under 16 years of age get only $36 a week. These young people are living below the poverty line. They will become the street kids of Brisbane. I am not drawing a fanciful picture; it is a real problem. ] am sorry if I am not coherent, but it upsets me that this has happened. I condemn the Government for what it has done. I do not know what is up with Government supporters and how they can face each other. I call on them to reverse this decision until such time as these young people are able to gain employment instead of putting them on the scrap heap of the unemployed and placing them in this circle of desperation. Government supporters should be ashamed of themselves. These people are only young; they are not adults yet. It is a shame that I am saying this to a handful of grinning people who think 'Ha, ha, how funny'. I will fight for these people in the area, and they will not give up on stirring up public opinion until all people in the Government know that they are not bludgers and that they are not to be scorned. These young people are the greatest resource of this nation and they should be supported.
Motion (by Mr Hodges) proposed:
That the question be now put.
Mr Dawkins-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. The matter of whether you put the question that the question be now put is a matter for the discretion of the Chair. The Chair should not accept the motion that the question be now put &t this time.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! There is no point of order.
Mr Dawkins-There is a point of order.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order.
Mr Dawkins-There is a discretion in the Chair, and you have to exercise that discretion. The point is that -~
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Chair is not prepared to hear the honourable member further. There is no point of order.
Mr DawkinsWhy not?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-It has been proposed that the question be now put.
Mr Dawkins-It is a matter of discretion as to whether you accept that motion.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Chair has no discretion.

Mr Barry Jones-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. I would appeal to you and to the Deputy Government Whip to take into account the fact that this is the first adjournment debate for two and a half months.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order.

Question put:

That the question be now put.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

59

Noes

38

Majority

21

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier,J. W. Bradfield, I. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D.B. Dean,A.G. Drummond,P.H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D.
Fife, w.e.
Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom, R.J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J.
Hodges, J. e. (Teller)

Armitage, J. L.
Beazley, K. e.
Blewett,N.
Bowen, Lionel Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Charles, D. E.
Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross,M.D.
Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E.
Dawkins, J. S.
Duffy, M.J. Free,R. V.
Hawke, R. J. L.
Holding, A. e.
Howe, B. L.

NOES

Hodgman, W. M. Howard,l. W. Hyde,J. M. lull,D.F. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M.J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore,I.C. Nixon, P. J. PeaCOck, A. S. Porter, J. R. Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson,1. B. C.
Hurf~rd, C. I. Jacobi, R. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kent, L. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morrison, W. L. SCOll, J. L.
Theophanous, A. e.
Wallis,L.G. West,S.I. Willis,R.

454 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Notices

NOES

Humphreys, B. e. (Teller)

Young, M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Question put:

That the House do now adjourn.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr p, C. Millar)

Ayes

60

Noes

38

Majority

22

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M. E. Birney,R. J. Bourchier,J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N.A. Bungey, M. H. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carllon, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D. B. Dean,A.G. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.e.- Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J.

Hodges, J. e. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W. Hyde,J. M. Jull,D.F. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Moore,J.e. Nixon, P.J. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury. M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. Mce. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, e. W. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. e. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J. Free, R. V. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. e. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller)

Hurford, C. J. Jacobi, R. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kent, L. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morrison, W. L. SCOll, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Wallis, L. G. West,S.J. Willis,R. Youn&,M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative,

House adjourned at 10.44 p.m.

NOTICES

The following notices were given:

Mr AnthOliy to present a Bill for an Act relating to export grants.
Mr MacKellar to present a Bill for an Act to provide for confidentiality in relation to certain epidemiological studies.
Mr Nixon to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973,
Mr Wilson to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Norfolk Island Act 1979,
Mr Sinclair to move-
(I) That, in accordance with the provisions of section 8 of the Parliament House Construction Authority Act 1979, the House of Representatives declares the construction and fitting-out of the building that is to constitute Parliament House, together with-
(a) the construction, on the site of Parliament House, of access roads, parking areas and other Facilities to be provided on that site in connection with Parliament House; and
(b) the landscaping of that site, to be a declared stage in the construction of Parliament House for the purposes of that section, and
(2) That a message be sent to the Senate acquainting it of the resolution agreed to by the House of Representatives.
Mr Sinclair to move-
That, unless otherwise ordered, the following amendments to the Standing Orders be adopted for the remainder of this session-
( I) Days and Hours of Meeting Standing Order 40 be amended to read40. Unless otherwise ordered, the House shall meet for the despatch of business on each Tuesday and Wednesday at 1.45 p.m.; and on each Thursday at 10.00 a.m.
(2) Adjournment and next Meeting Standing Order 48A be amended to read48A. At 10.00 p.m. on each sitting day the Speaker shall propose the question-That the House do now adjournwhich question shall be open to deba te; if the House be in committee at the time stated, the Chairman shall report progress and upon such report being made the Speaker shall forthwith propose the question-That the House do now adjourn-which question shall be open to debate. No amendment can be moved to question:
Provided that(a) if a division be in progress at the time fixed for inter-
ruption such division shall be completed and the result announced; (b) if, on the question-That the House do now adjourn-being proposed, a Minister requires the question to be put forthwith without debate, the Speaker shall forthwith put the question; (c) a motion for the adjournment of the House may be moved by a Minister at an earlier hour; (d) any business under discussion and not disposed of at the time of the adjournment shall be set down on the Notice Paper for the next sitting, and (e) iF the question-That the House do now adjourn-is negatived, the House or committee shall resume the proceedings at the point at which they had been interrupted:
Provided further that, ifat 10.30 p.m. the question before the House is-That the House do now adjourn-the Speaker shall interrupt the debate, at which time-

Notices

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 455

(f) a Minister may require that the debate be extended until 10.40 p.m. to enable Ministers to speak in reply to matters raised in the preceding adjournment debate; at
10.40 p.m., or upon the earlier cessation of the debate, the Speaker shall forthwith adjourn the House until the time of its next meeting, or (g) if no action is taken by a Minister under paragraph (f), the Speaker shall forthwith adjourn the House until the time of its next meeting.

(3) Precedence to general business Standing Order 104 be amended to read-

104. Unless otherwise ordered, government business shall, on each day of sitting, have precedence of all other business, except that on the sitting Thursday alternate to the sitting Thursday to which Standing Order 106 applies, general business shall have precedence of government business until 12.15 p.m.

(4) 'Grievance' Debate Standing Order 106 to be amended to read-

106. Notwithstanding the preceding standing order, the first order of the day, government business, on each alternate sitting Thursday commencing with the first sitting Thursday
after the Address in Reply to the Governor-General's Speech has been adopted shall be a question to be proposed by the Speaker "That grievances be noted" to which question any
Member may address the House or move any amendment. If consideration of this question has not been concluded at 12.15
p.m., the debate thereon shall be interrupted and the Speaker
shall put the question.

Mr Sinclair to move-

That, unless otherwise ordered, the following sessional

orders to provide for the operation of estimates committees be

adopted:

.

Committal and consideration in estimates committee:
( I) After the speech of the Leader of the Opposition, or a
Member deputed by him, on the motion for the second reading of the main Appropriation Bill for a year, the proposed expenditures for ~he Departments and services contained in the Schedule to that Bill may be re, ferred to an estimates committee. Such referral sha~i
be on motion, moved by a Minister, of which notice has been given. A committee may be ordered to report by a specified date.
(2) There shall be 6 Estimates Committees to be known as Estimates Committees, A, B, C, D, E and F, which
shall not vote on, but shall examine and report upon proposed expenditure for the Parliament, Advance to the Minister for Finance and each Department of
State; such report may contain a resolution or expression of opinion of the committee but shall not vary the amount of a proposed expenditure.

Members: (3) Each estimates committee, to consider each proposed
expenditure, shall consist of the Minister responsible in
the House of Representatives for the proposed expenditure under consideration, together with 10 Members, excluding the Chairman.
(4) Members of an estimates committee shall be nomi-
nated by either the Prime Minister, the Leader of the House the Government Whip or the deputy Whip and either the Leader of the Opposition, the Deputy
Leader of the Opposition, the Opposition Whip or the deputy Whip and every nomination of a member of the committee shall be forthwith notified in writing to the
Speaker. (5) In nominating Members to'an estimates committee to
consider each proposed expenditure regard shall be had to the qualifications and interest of those Members nominated and to the composition of the House.

Either the Prime Minister, the Leader of the House, the Government Whip or the deputy Whip and either the Leader of the Opposition, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, the Opposition Whip or the deputy Whip, shall have power to discharge from time to time any of those Members nominated by them and to nominate others in substitution for those discharged. The responsible Minister may nominate another Minister to act for him as required. (6) The nomination of Members to consider the proposed expenditure of each department or service shall be announced to the House as soon as practicable after the proposed expenditures have been referred to a committee.
Chairman: (7) The Chairman of an estimates committee shall be- (a) the Chairman of Committees; or (b) a Deputy Chairman of Committees to be appointed by the Chairman of Committees.
(8) The Chairman of Committees, a Deputy Chairman of Committees of any member of the committee shall take the Chair temporarily whenever requested so to do by the Chairman of the Committee during a sitting of that comittee.
Quorum: (9) The quorum of an estimates committee shall be 5, excluding the Chairman, and, if at any time a quorum be not present, the Chairman shall suspend the proceedings of the committee until a quorum be present, or adjourn the committee.
Participation by other Members: (10) Members of the House, not being members of the committee, may participate, at the discretion of the Chairman, in the proceedings of the committee, but shall not vote, move any motion or be counted for the purpose of a 'quorum.
Minutes of Proceedings: (II) All proceedings of a committee shall be recorded by the Clerk to the Committee, and such records shall constitute the Minutes of Proceedings of the committee, and shall be signed by the Clerk to the Committee.
Proceedings in estimates committee: (12) Consideration of proposed expenditures in an estimates committ'ee shall follow, as far as possible, the procedures observed in a committee of the whole with the following exceptions: (a) Speech time limits and the restriction on the number of times a Member may speak to each question (S.O. 91) shall not apply. (b) Voting shall be taken by a show of hands; tellers shall not be appointed.
Time limits on Report: (13) During consideration in the House of the reportsJrom estimates committees, the maximum period for which a Member may speak shall beEach question before the ChairMinisters-Periods not specified Any other Member-IO minutes.
Report from estimates committee and further consideration: (14) A report of an estimates committee shall be presented by the Chairman of that committee or a member of the committee deputed by him and shall contain any resolutions or expressions of opinion of the committee. (15) On a report from a committee being presented, a future day shall be appointed for taking the report into consideration. (16) On the calling on of the order of the day for the consideration of a report from an estimates committee, the

456 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981
following question shall be proposed in respect of each proposed expenditure:
'That the proposed expenditure be agreed to (and that the resolution(s) or expression(s) of opinion agreed to by the committee in relation thereto, be noted)"
(17) Upon the completion of consideration of the reports of estimates committees, the question shall be proposed forthwith-'That the remainder of the Bill be agreed to',
(18) When an Appropriation Bill which has been referred to an estimates committee is finally agreed to by the House, a future day shall be fixed, on motion, for the third reading,

Notices
REQUEST FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Department of the Parliamentary Library Mr Barry Jones to ask Mr Speaker:
(1) Is there any substance to the recent press reports regarding the pending retirement of the Parliamentary Librarian, Mr. Harold Gibson Weir.
(2) If so, when will the Presiding Officers make a statement to the Parliament about this matter.
(3) What are the details of the procedures to be followed in the recruitment, selection and appointment of Mr. Weir's replacement.

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 457 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Works of Art
(Question No. 116)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) How many works of art from collections under the control of the Commonwealth and Government instrumentalities have been lent or hired to (a) Federal, State and local government departments and instrumentalities or (b) private individuals and corporations.
(2) What are these works and where are they exhibited.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am informed that (a) as at November 1980, 1410 works of art were placed with Federal, State and local government departments and instrumentalities. This figure excludes those works loaned from the National Collection for placement in Official Establishments within Australia: as at 30 June 1981 there were 204 such works on loan from the National Collection; (b) 17 as at November 1980. I am also informed that, in addition, in November 1980, 31 works were placed on loan with bodies such as international organisations or on loan to the artists for exhibition purposes.
I am advised that the above figures exclude short-term loans to exhibition management bodies and exclude any loans which may have been made by agencies outside my portfolio responsibility.
(2) The works involved are too numerous for identification of works by artists, title and location to be incorporated in Hansard. I should be pleased to provide that information to the honourable member if he would call at my office.

German Age Pensions

(Question No. 282)

Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs upon notice, on 4 December 1980:

(I) Has his attention been drawn to the claim in the periodical Die Woche of 23 September 1980 that the Constitutional
Court of Karlsruhe has ruled that Australian citizens of German origin are entitled to German old-age pensions.

(2) Is there any substance to this claim.

(3) If so, will he make appropriate representations to the

Government of the Federal Republic of Germany to ensure

prompt payments,

'

(4) Ifnot, will he make representations to the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany that contributory pension entitlements should not be lost when the eligible person becomes an Australian citizen.

Mr Street-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:

(I) Yes.

(2) Yes. On 23 March 1979, the Federal Republic of Germany's Constitutional Court in Karlsruhe ruled that the present situation whereby people who renounce their German nationality and live abroad lose their entitlement to a German pension is not in accordance with the basic law of the Federal Republic of Germany.

The Constitutional Court has now asked the Federal Pensions Office in Berlin to work out a system enabling pensions to be paid to former German citizens abroad. The Pensions Office is at present working on this but cannot say when the system will be in place. It has stated that the proposed system would probably take the form of a pension based on contributions paid within the present borders of the Federal Republic of Germany since 1945, thus not including contributions paid before 1945 in the former German Reich or after 1945 in parts of the Reich not now part of the Federal Republic of Germany for example the German Democratic RepUblic. Applications for payment of such pensions cannot yet be approved since enabling legislation has not yet been drafted.
(3) and (4) See (2). Under the circumstances representations would not be appropriate at this time.

Recruitment of Skilled Labour from Overseas
(Question No. 284)
Mr Hawke asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
Further to the commitments he gave in a speech to the Oil and Gas Conference on I December 1980 in Perth, Western Australia, what procedures or regulating machinery does he maintain to ensure that recruitment of skilled labour from overseas is restricted to those employers who maintain maximum apprenticeship levels and training effort.
Mr N, A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Approval of applications for immigration, including employment nominations, is the responsibility of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs. The Department of Employment and Youth Affairs assists in the provision of occupational information and is consulted, where appropriate, on matters relating to worker entry.
Overseas recruitment by Australian employers is dependent upon a prior canvass by them of the Australian labour market, together with clear evidence that they have a satisfactory training record. Where employers are not considered to have a satisfactory training record, approval to recruit overseas would not normally be given.

Rural Finance

(Question No. 314)

Mr Kerin asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on

4 December 1980:

-

(I) What are the total avenues of finance available to the rural sector.

(2) What are the interest rates and terms of the loans or facilities available from the instrumentalities referred to in part
(I ).

(3) What has been the increase in rates of interest and terms of loans over each of the last 10 years.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) There is a wide range of sources from which finance is made available to rural producers in Australia. Rural producers have access to certain institutions and facilities de-
signed explicitly to provide finance for the rural sector, as well

458 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

as to sources of finance available to the community more generally.
For more detail I refer the honourable member to the Bureau of Agricultural Economics (BAE) publication 'A Review of Credit in the Australian Rural Sector (1977), which gives a comprehensive list of these sources to that time. (See in particular Chapter 4 and Attachment E.) Since that BAE study another institution-the Primary Industry Bank of Australia Limited-has been established to refinance loans made to primary producers by banks and other lenders. Another relevant summary reference is the occasional table 'Estimated Rural Debt to Specified Lenders' published most recently on page 331 of the Reserve Bank Statistical Bulletin for December 1980.
(2) and (3) Historical data of interest rates charged on term loans, farm development loans and overdrafts by major trading banks and on rural loans by the Commonwealth Development Bank of Australia are produced in Tables EIV and EX on pages 154 and 162 respectively of the BAE publication. The following figures provided by the Reserve Bank of Australia update these records. Loans refinanced by the Primary Industry Bank of Australia Limited currently carry maximum interest rates of 12.0 per cent per annum for loans of less than $100,000 and 13.75 per cent per annum for loans of $1 00,000 and above.
INTEREST ~ATES CHARGED ON OUTSTANDING TERM LOANS, FARM DEVELOPMENT LOANS
AND OVERDRAFTS BY MAJOR TRADING BANKS
(As at 30 June)
(Per cent per annum)

Year

Farm

Term Development

Loans

Loans

(average

(average

rate)(a)

rate)(a)

Overdrafts (maximum
rate)(b)

1977 1978
1979 1980 (c)

10.9

10.7

10.5

11.1

11.2

10.5

11.3

11.2

10.5

11.7

11.3

(d) 10.5

(a) Includes both large and small loans (the threshold was $50,000 from 4 February 1972 and $100,000 from I February 1976).
(b) Overdrafts drawn under limits of $50,000 and over from 4 February 1972 and $100,000 and over from I February 1976 are specifically exempted from the prescribed maximum interest rate requirement.
(c) Since January 1980, all banks have submitted returns as at the second Wednesday of July and January.
(d) The maximum overdraft rate was raised to 12.5 per cent on 3 December 1980. Banks currently charge a range of rates within that maximum and interest rate concessions are being granted to certain primary producers adversely affected by drought.
COMMONWEALTH DEVELOPMENT BANK OF AUSTRALIA INTEREST RATES ON NEW RURAL
LOANS
(Amounts less than $100,000)
(As at 30 June)
(Percent)

Year

Loan Equipment finance(a) finance(b) ,

1977

10.50

8.25

Loan Equipment

Year

finance(a) finance(b)

1978

10.50

8.25

1979

10.00

8.25

1980

(c) 10.50

(d) 8.25

(a) Basic rate for rural loans (the Development Bank also makes 'farm build-up'loans which have generally carried a rate 0.5 percentage points lower than the basic rate).

(b) The rates quoted are flat rates.

(c) These rates were increased in December 1980 to 11.50 per cent and in April 1981 to 12.0 per cent.

(d) These rates were increased in December 1980 to 8.75 per cent flat and in April 1981 109.0 per cent flat.

The terms of loans available vary between institutions and types of finance and depend on a number of factors, including,
for example, the purpose and size of the loan and the borrower's circumstances. Terms may also be renegotiated in the light of special factors such as drought.

The Term Loan Fund, established in 1962, initially provided loans for fixed periods varying from 3 to 8 years; this was changed to 3 to 10 years in 1978.

The Farm Development Loan Fund was establshed in 1966

with a view to facilitating access to medium to long term

finance for periods generally ranging from 8 to 12 years.

Finance from the Commonwealth Development Bank of

Australia is usually made available by way of medium to long

term loans repayable over a period suited to the circumstances

of each individual borrower; equipment finance is generally

for terms of 3 to 4 years. Loans refinanced by the Primary In-

dustry Bank of Australia Ltd are for terms of between 8 to 30

years (currently averaging about 16 years). Loans from other

sources would generally be for shorter terms than those pro-

vided by the above mentioned institutions.

-

National Indoor Sports Centre in Canberra
(Question No. 448)
Mr Adermann asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
In the planning of the National Indoor Sports Centre in Canberra what facilities and opportunities will be provided for handicapped persons to participate in various sporting activities.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
There is no special access for handicapped persons to the playing area of the. National Indoor Sports Centre. The National Capital Development Commission, in conjunction with the Department of the Capital Territory, is currently considering the provision of sp~cial access for handicapped persons.

Importation ofCommun~cations Equipment
(Question No. 451)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
What factors prevent the application of a general prohibition on the importation of those types of communications equipment, the use of which is illegal.

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 459

Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
There are no factors preventing the introduction of import controls on specific communications equipment which cannot be used legally in Australia. The regulations under the Customs Act, however, must set out complete details of the equipment under control and, therefore, a general prohibition would not be approp'riate.
An import prohibition was imposed recently on CB radios which do not comply with the specifications set out in the regulations.
In addition provision exists in the regulations to prohibit the importation of equipment which is considered to be dangerous to users.
Department of Defence: Special Arrangements for Disabled Persons
(Question No. 467)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) In view of the fact that 1981 is designated as the International Year of Disabled Persons, what special arrangements has the Department of Defence made to assist disabled persons.
(2) Do any special arrangements made include (a) increased employment of disabled person and (b) improved access for disabled persons to any building or other facility occupied by the Department of Defence; if so, what are the details.
(3) What budgetary allocations were made in 1980-81 to facilitate any special arrangements for disabled persons in the Department of Defence.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the Prime Minister's response to parliamentary question upon notice, No. 458, which appeared in the weekly Hansard of 10 June 1981.
Department of Transport: Special Arrangements for Disabled Persons
(Question No. 473)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) In view of the fact that 1981 is designated as the International Year of Disabled Persons, what special arrangements has his Department made to assist disabled persons.
(2) Do any special arrangements made include (a) increased employment of disabled persons and (b) improved access for disabled persons to any building or other facility occupied by his Department; if so, what are the details.
(3) What budgetary allocations were made in 1980-81 to facilitate any special arrangements for disabled persons in his Department.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I) The special arrangements made to assist disabled persons can be seperated into two areas. First, programs specifically introduced because of the International Year of Disabled Persons (IYDP) and second, programs focusing on the needs of the disabled but not specifically initiated for IYDP.
(i) Programs specifically introduced because of IYDP:

The Department of Transport convened a workshop on transport planning and research and the handicapped in March 1981. The workshop enabled the transport planners who attended from all States and Territories to discuss Australian and overseas developments and generally review developments in making land transport services more accessible to the disabled. The workshop will report to the July 1981 meeting of Australian Transport Advisory council (ATAC) , and will advise on the need for a common code of practise to meet the transport needs of the disabled.
The Commonwealth undertook to disseminate to all State and Territory Governments results of current initiatives in this area ranging from staff awareness programs, paratransit trials, vehicle restraint research, parking provisions, and low-cost modifications to fixed route systems. As a result of the workshop, the Commonwealth will look at possible ways to encourage greater utilisation of existing fleets of specialised vehicles for the disabled, as well as the possibility of reducing the costs of audio-tactile aids through bulk ordering.
In February I held a meeting with members of the Australian Council for rehabilitation of the Disabled (ACROD) to discuss problems associated with the use by the disabled of airports and airline services. The agenda covered among other issues, classification of people with disabilities, certificate of fitness for regular air travellers, use of personal wheelchairs on aircraft, use of Row Number One seats in aircraft, adequacy of airport wheelchairs, modification of new aircraft, staff training for the disabled, and responsibility for terminal facilities. As a consequence of the meeting Departmental officers will act as liaison officers between the airlines and ACROD to discuss the issues raised.
The Department is also preparing a brochure to inform the disabled of facilities and services available to them at all major airports.
The Office of Road Safety is undertaking a research project on the restraint of the disabled in motor vehicles; the aim of the project being to increase the use of suitable occupant restraints by disabled persons through simple design improvements and propagation of information on 'best practise'. A guidelines booklet may be produced for circulation to hospitals, organisations for the disabled, and parents.
(ii) Programs focusing on the needs of the disabled but not specifically initiated for IYDP:
Under the Transport Planning and Research program, the Commonwealth has provided financial support to the States for a number of projects related to transport and the disabled. Between 1975 and 1981, Commonwealth support to the States for such projects, which is provided on a dollar for dollar basis, has amounted to almost $100,000.
New airport design and construction incorporates the requirements of the Australian Standard 1428 of 1977, 'Design Rules for Access by the Disabled'.
The Office of Road Safety has a continuing responsibility in accident and disability prevention and maintains a public awareness and education program.
There have been no special arrangements made to assist disabled persons employed in the Department.
(2) (a) Special arrangements made to increase employment of disabled persons in the Department:
The Department co-operates with the Public Service Board through its Special Placements Scheme. In 1980, six officers-three permanent and three temporary-were placed in Central Office, Canberra, under the program and a further three are employed in the New South Wales RegionalOffice.

460 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Victoria/Tasmania Regional Office is participating in a survey initiated by the Regional Director's Office of the Public Service Board, to identify base grade clerical/administrative and keyboard positions which could be suitably staffed by the disabled.
Since August 1980 a permanent officer, Clerk Class 8, has been given duties covering the Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) area. It is foreshadowed that policy recommendations espousing the EEO philosophy will emanate from this area and have a significant input in to recruitment, selection and personnel development procedures. The employment of the disabled and their needs as employees will come into this area.
An .ancillary function of the Departmental EEO officer has been to co-ordinate activities relating to IYDP. One significant project being planned is an education program directed at staff with the purpose of sensitising staff to an awareness of the disabled, their rights as individuals and citizens, and the causes and prevention of disablement.
(2) (b) Improved access for disabled persons:
The Department is aware of the needs of the disabled in their use of facilities for which it is responsible. The example given of Departmental adherence to the Australian Standard 1428 of 1977, 'Design Rules for Access by the Disabled', in the construction of airports has in recent years increased access for the disabled in their use of air transport.
The Department has notified airlines that certain procedures and training in respect to the carriage of handicapped persons are to be adopted. The procedures were introduced from 30 September 1979 and Air Navigation Orders, Sections 20.1 I and 20.16 are being amended accordingly.
(3) No budgetary allocations were made in 1980-81 to facilitate any special arrangements for disabled persons working in the Department.
All projects and programs undertaken either specifically for IYDP, or in consideration to the general needs of the disabled, have been funded within the normal budgetary allocations of the particular Division or Region involved.

Visit by United States Nuc1ear Powered Submarines
(Question No. 508)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:

(I) What were the names and dates on which United States of America nuclear powered submarines visited HMAS Stirling in (a) 1978, (b) 1979,and (c) 1980.

(2) Is he able to state how many USA nuclear powered attack submarines have operated in the Indian Ocean; if so, how many.

(3) Is he also able to state whether, and if so where and on what dates, any of these submarines which visited HMAS Stirling called on other ports in the Indian Ocean region in (a) 1978, (b) 1979, and (c) 1980.

Mr Killen-The following additional information is submitted to that given to the answer published in Hansard (5 May 1981, Page 2004):

(I) (b) and (c)-

Name of submarine USSHaddo

Dates of visits 16-22 December 1980

Royal Australian Air Force: Boeing 707 Aircraft
(Question No. 610)
Mr Jull asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
In respect of each of the 2 Boeing 707 aircraft purchased by the Royal Australian Air Force which came into' service in 1979, how many (a) flights have been made and (b) hours flown as (i) special transport tasks, (ii) crew conversion and continuation training and (iii) defence tasks, including (a) passenger/cargo flights to Butterworth involving changeover of personnel, (b) movements of personnel on international exercises, (c) movement of personnel within Australia and (d) other cargo transport and (iv) other tasks.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
TASKS UNOERTAKEN AND HOURS FLOWN BY B707 AIRCRAFT TO 28 FEBRUARY 1981

Aircraft A20624 Aircraft A20627

Category

Hours

Tasks Hours Tasks (a)

Special Transport
Crew Conversion Training
Crew Continuation Training
Butterworth Changeover
Defence SupportOverseas
Defence SupportAustralia
o the r Car g 0 Transport
Squadron Support
National Commitment(c)

345.7 113.8 291.1 377.8 124.1 46.9
Nil 15.8 38.0

7 164.3

4

10 349.0

25

48 198.8

32

21 237.5 (b)13

6 253.6

13

5 105.0

II

Nil

Nil

Nil

5 22.4

8

2 84.5

4

Notes:
(a) The term 'task' is used rather than flight in the sense that task encompasses all flights performed for a particular purpose during the specified task period.
(b) An additional 4 tasks involving the carriage of personnel to Butterworth were undertaken during this period. However, as the primary purpose of these tasks was Crew Conversion Training the tasks and associated hours have been included in that category.
(c) National Commitment tasks are usually initiated by the Government and may include such tasks as assistance to Government and Civil Agencies and disaster relief operations.

Industrial Relations Bureau
(Question No. 622)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 25 February 1981:
(I) Has he discussed the reformation of the Industrial Relations Bureau with his Department; if so, what proposals have been made to reform the Industrial Relations Bureau.
(2) Has he considered resumption of the functions of the Bureau within his Department rather than as a separate bureau.

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 461

Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The Government having reviewed the Industrial Relations Bureau's functions decided that the Bureau stiould be maintained.
The Government believes that the Bureau is operating with increasing elfectiveness.

(b) Other payments(i) Pensioners . . . . . .
(ii) 40 per cent Commonwealth Benefit (CB) payable for all schedule services rendered between I November 1978 and 30 August 1979 toregistrants with a fund for CBonly . . . . . .
privately insured persons

33845777
17267739 139601237

For the nine months to 31 March 1981 the Bureau had completed 20,400 award inspections, detected 13,400
breaches and recovered $977,000 for employees.

Since its inception the Bureau has received more than 1,000 inquiries concerning the Act and the Regulations of which over 450 related to the rights of individuals as members of
organisations.

hasMboereenovsetrr~nthgethBenuerdeabuy'sdceacpisaiocintsy

to of

carry out its functions the High Court affirm-

ing the validity of legislation designed to protect the rights of

individuals as members of organisations.

The Bureau 'has taken a number of recent initiatives, in-
cluding recourse to the courts to safeguard and to protect the rights of individuals including self-employed persons.

Furthermore, it is evident that as the work of the Bureau becomes better known and understood, more individuals and organisations are taking advantage of its existence and its
powers.

Commonwealth Reimbursement for Medical Services
(Question No. 641)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 February 1981:

(I) What has been the total payment by all medical funds in Australia for medical services rendered during 1979-80.

(2) What amount of this sum has been paid. for by ~he Commonwealth (a) by reimbursement for services costmg more than $20 and (b) in other ways.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(l) The information is not available. However, information supplied by funds on the basis of payments made during 1979-80 (regardless of date of service delivery) shows that I'Qedical funds paid out a total of $869013747 during 1979-80.

(2)-

(a) Reimbursement for -services costing more than $20 schedule fee-paid in respect of insured persons in medical taliles . . . . . . . -pai~fin respect of uninsured persons registered with a fund

$
177 802 600 5317185

183 119785

156868976

Note: The above figures exclude payments made during
1979-80 for services rendered prior to I November 1978, which are no longer collected but which are not expected to be significant.

Government Funding of Growth Complex in the Fitzroy Region, Queensland
(Question No. 708)

Dr Everingham asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 4 March 1981:

(I) Was Queensland invited to agree with the Commdn-

wealth Government on development of a growth complex in

the Fitzroy region, including Rockhampton and Gladstone

and 2 other regions in 1973.

.

(2) Did the Commonwealth Government provide funds for similar purposes to (a) New South Wales, (b) Victoria and (c) South Australia in 1974.

(3) Did those States referred to in part (2) undertake to ensure, as far a,s possible, that use of land should conform to
the agreed growth centre development programs.

(4) Has $5m been allocated in 1980-81 for Federal funds
on the basis of a two-thirds grant for non-urban land costs, one-third as grants and two-thirds as loans for municipal works.

(5) Should Queensland decline to agree on similar funding
to relieve high accommodation and municipal costs in Glad-
stone, will the Government negotiate with local governments, export industries in the region and an appropriate development body to provide help to the Gladstone region in 1980-81
or foreshadow help to be given in 1981 in accordance with need by comparison with the less pressing needs of established growth centres.

Mr Malcolm Fraser~The answer to the honourable member's questions are as follows:

(I), (2) and (3) Yes.

(4) No.

(5) Decisions have been taken concerning the role of State and local governments in financing regional development. The Commonwealth already provides substantial support to State and local governments through the provision of funds to be spent at their discretion.
Human Rights

(Question No. 709)

Dr Everingham asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 4 March 1981:
(I) Was it stated in a spe~ch delivered on his behaif in December 1980 that political self-interest requires developed countries to work energetically to solve the problems of north-south relations and that the humanitarian case based on terrible sulfering and degradation in the Third World is unanswerable.

462 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questio~'t

(2) Is it a fact that (a) Australia's import controls are growing and (b) there has been a declining proportion of gross domestic product (GDP) allocated by his Government to foreign aid for Third World suffering; if so, does this accord with his expressed view.
(3) Can he say whether Aboriginal communities in Australia are suffering degradation comparable to those of the Third World.
(4) Has there been a decline in real value and a decline in the share in total or per capita of GDP allocated to Aborigines and other Australians living below various poverty lines; if so, has this added to the suffering and degradation of Aboriginal communities in Australia.
(5) Is an increasing share of GDP being taken by large undertakings along with increased government allowances, exemptions and other financial incentives to them.
(6) Are levels of tax avoidance and evasion growing.
(7) Is a record proportion of Australia's GDP being expatriated to service capital investment and to cover transfer pricing arrangements and invisible imports such as freight and insurance paid to associates of foreign-controlled companies in Australia.
(8) Are Aborigines in Queensland and Western Australia suffering increasing encroachments in their land and are they un~ble to achieve equal payor voting rights through legal actIOn.
(9) If the position is as stated in part (5) to (8), have his Government's policies contributed to this position.
(1.0) Did the speech referred to in part (1) recognise the forel~~ trad~ bene~ts to Australia and the impetus to productIVIty gainS which accompany increased aid and less restrictive trade policies.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes, in the address I gave to the Commonwealth Club in Adelaide on 9 February 1981.
(2) (a) Industries Assistance Commission figures show that the average effective rate of assistance in aggregate of Australian manufacturing industry has fallen from 36 per cent in 1968-69 to -an estimated 26 per cent in 1978-79 and has not risen in recent years.
(2) (b) Yes. The Government's policy is to make best efforts to achieve an aid volume of 0.7 per cent of GDP.
(3) No meaningful comparison can be made. (4) Insufficient information is available to make the necessary calculation.
(5) No official information is available on the share of GDP accruing to 'large undertakings'.
(6) The Budget Papers estimated identified revenue shortfalls for 1978-79 and 1979-80 due to tax avoidance activity at $230m and $280m respectively. An allowance of $300m for reduction in, or deferment of, collections attributable to the use of tax avoidance schemes was included in the 1980-81 Budget estimates. Available statistics do not permit the amount of tax being evaded to be estimated with any degree of accuracy.
(7) Information in the degree of detail required is not available. Balance of payments statistics indicate that Australia's

net deficit on invisible transactions has been a fairly steady proportion of GDP since the late 1960's.
(8) The Government's record in respect of land rights and other support for Aboriginal people is well known.
(9) See (5) to (8) above.
(10) Not explicitly.
Conservation of Endangered Species on Christmas Island
(Question No. 717)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 5 March 1981:
What action has the Government taken on each of the 23 recommendations contained in the report of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation on the conservation of endangered species on Christmas Island presented to the House on 24 October 1974 (Hansard, page 2838).
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
My Department has provided the following information in consulation with the Department of Administrative Services and the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service, on the position as at June 1981.
(1) Fields 22A and 22B remain untouched and the sensitive areas of Field 22B and parts of Murray Hill have been included in a National Park which was declared in 1980. The remainder of Field 22B is not planned for cle'aring.
Any clearing in Field 22A is still subject to the outcome of any decisions which may flow from a detailed expert panel appraisal of a survey (1979-80) of Abbotts Booby. Decisions on the expert panel's recommendations are expected before a moratorium which has been placed on the clearing of Field 22A and certain other fields expires on 31 August 1981.
Sections of Fields 22c, 23A and 23B were selectively cleared between November 1976 and September 1978 in line with plans and procedures agreed between representatives of Government and the British Phosphate Commissioners (BPC) at the time. Fields 22c and 23B are now part of computer block area 22c with respect to which the expert panel has made re,commendations.
(2) This sllggested procedure was generally instituted and sections of Fields 26 and 27 were selectively cleared in accordance with plans mutually approved by the parties (on the advice on the Government Conservator and BPC Conservation Officer) commencing July 1977. These areas are quite large, and judicious and approved clearing in sections of these fields has continued from time to time except during relevant moratoriums. The recent expert panel report has confirmed and recommended that clearing in these two fields should be permitted to proceed according to agreed plans.
(3) Clearing is undertaken between late November and early March to the extent that this is practicable.
(4) An inquiry into the long-term future of the island is currently being undertaken, on behalf of the Government, by Mr W. W. Sweetland. The inquiry will, inter alia, examine and report on the resources of Christmas Island and on appropriate machinery for the planning and control of the use of resources, particularly land.
(5) and (6) Mining guidelines have now been in use for a number of years. An Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service (ANPWS) officer has been appointed to

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 463

manage the National Park on the Island. He has also been expert from the CSIRO Division of Wildlife Research was

appointed Conservator to advise and assist the Adminisengaged to remove the threat of abandoned domestic dogs

trator, and indirectly the BPC, on conservation matters running wild. His advice has formed the basis for sub-

and in the consideration of mining proposals. BPC also sequent programs to eradicate semi-wild dogs and cats.

employs a Conservation officer. An Island Conservation Procedures have been laid down for strict control of stray

Committee consisting of the Administrator, the BPC dogs and cats.

Island Manager, the BPC Conservation Officer, the Conservator and other senior BPC and Administration officers meet regularly to consider all conservation and environment issues.
A selective jungle clearing procedure was adopted by BPC around the time of the 1974 report and has been in operation ever since. It involves the submission of detailed plans for areas to be cleared for mining together with a plot of Abbott's Booby sites. The areas proposed for clear-

(19) Powerlines are kept to a minimum over open expanses of water.
(20) Except in a few instances where tracks have been kept open for conservation and similar purposes the jungle has been allowed to overgrow the transect and survey lines.
(21) An incinerator has been erected and provision has . been made for the burying of solid waste in safe mined-out

ing are walked and traversed to confirm the presence of areas.

Booby sites before the submitted plans are approved.

(22) Some progress has been made. A number of scien-

The approval process involves amongst others the Adtific experts have made visits to the Island in recent years

ministrator, Island Manager, BPC Conservation Officer and the Government Conservator on Christmas Island.
The detailed plan for each field is approved and signed

to study the Abbott's Booby, the Imperial Pigeon, plant fauna, fish fauna, land crustacea including the Robber Crab, and introduced ant species.

before clearing operations commence in the area under

(23) Apart from the educational activities referred to at

consideration.

(8), the Conservator has assisted in the setting up of a

The Christmas Island National Park, covering the south-west portion of the Island, was proclaimed under the National Parks and Wildlife Act 1975 by the Governor-General on 19 February 1980 and gazetted on 21 February 1980.
(7) There is a ban on the use of firearms and poaching is

Natural History Society to serve as a focus for community concern for the conservation of endemic wildlife species. Close involvement with the local school on environmental education has been developed and student excursions to the park and other natural areas of the Island are undertaken as part of the environmental education program.

policed by the authorities. Successful prosecutions have been made against poachers.

Naming of New Domestic Terminal at Brisbane Airport

(8) The. Conservator referred to in (5) and (6) above has, as part of his functions, the role of disseminating in-

(Question NC). 761)

formation and increasing the awareness of Island residents

Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport,

on conservation issues. A series of posters depicting the fauna and flora of Christmas Island has been prepared and given wide distribution.
(9) BPC's policy of clearing for these purposes observes this recommendation.
(10) Implemented.

upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the outstanding achievements of pioneer Australian airwoman, Mrs Lores Bonney.
(2) In view of the lack of recognition accorded Mrs Bonney in Australia in contrast to recognition given her in certain

(II) and (12) Backfilling and replanting are being other countries, will he give consideration to naming the new

undertaken by BPC, under the supervision of BPC's Condomestic airport terminal in Brisbane, or a room in that ter-

servation Officer. Tree nurseries have been expanded and minal, in honour of Mrs Bonney.

planting of some mined-out areas has taken place. (13) Implemented. (14) Turtle poachers have been prosecuted but the
isolated beach areas make policing difficult.

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.

(15) Not applicable. The Radio Australia proposal was not pursued.
(16) Few fires occur. BPC has a fire station at Drumsite and trained fire officers.

(2) I thank the honourable member for her suggestion. I recently wrote to Mrs Bonney asking her whether she would agree to having her contribution to Australian aviation recognised in some way in the new domestic building at Brisbane Airport. I am pleased to advise that Mrs Bonney has

(17) The Prohobited Imports Ordinance 1977 was graciously consented to having a room or suitable public area

made to prohibit the entry into the Territory of, inter alia, in the terminal building named in her honour.

animals, including birds, unless the Administrator has granted permission for their entry. The Administrator is

Canadian Pacific Airlines Ltd: Advertising in

empowered to specify conditions to be complied with by

Australia

the applicant. The Importation of Dogs and Cats Ordinance 1973 was
also amended in 1977 to prohibit the entry by air of those

(Question No. 817)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport,

animals.

upon notice, on 12 March 1981:

The Endangered Species Ordinance 1980 has the effect, inter alia, or prohibiting the entry of any specimen of an endangered species likely to affect adversely the survival of any of the Island's endangered species.
(18) The Christmas Island Administration is extremely conscious of the need to protect native fauna. In 1975 an

(1) Is he able to say whether (a) Canadian Pacific Airlines Ltd arranged for advertising in Australia between 1965 and 1979, the payment for which was made by way of contra account credit notes and (b) these contra account credit

464 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

notes were issued under agreements made between Canadian Pacific Airlines Ltd and media organisations which provided that the airline would honour the contra account credit notes and permit travel as arranged by the media organisations up to the value of the credit notes.
(2) If so, were these arrangements approved by his Department under the appropriate Air Navigation Regulations.
(3) If the arrangements were approved by his Department, what were the circumstances of this approval.
(4) If the arrangements were not approved by his Department, why were they not approved.
(5) Is he also able to say whether persons have travel1ed on tickets in the manner referred to in part (1) who have no connection with Canadian Pacific Airlines Ltd or the relevant media organisations, by exchanging cash payments or goods and services for the tickets obtained by the use of contra account credit notes; if so, is this practice proscribed by the Air Navigation Regulations.
(6) Has his attention been drawn to allegations concerning this practice and that some media organisations still hold contra account credit notes issued by Canadian Pacific Airlines Ltd; if so, has he taken action in relation to this matter; if he has taken action, what action has he taken.
(7) Has he refused to instruct his Department to investigate the actions of Canadian Pacific Airlines Ltd in these matters.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) and (b) My Department commenced recording contra arrangements, entered into by licensed carriers, on 3 June 1977. The first contra lodged by Canadian Pacific Airlines Ltd involving a media organisation, of which I am advised, was dated 13 October 1977. Further contra arrangements involving a media organisation were lodged by the same company on 31 January 1978 and 17 October 1979.
(2) Formal approvals are not given in individual instances.
(3) Not applicable.
(4) The contras were lodged with the Department and processed in accordance with procedures set down by the Department on 2 June 1977 and 3 January 1978 and notified to all international carriers.
(5) I am not able to say whether such travel has taken place.
(6) and (7) Certain allegations were made in representations received by myself and my Department. I am advised there is no basis for -action under the Air Navigation Regulations, as the statutory time period within which action could be initiated had expired before the matters were brought to attention.

Office of Women's Affairs
(Question No. 833)
Dr Theophanous asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a report by Anne Summers in the National Times of 1-7 March 1981, entitled Can Women's Affairs survive the Government's razor gang? in which it is claimed that the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions is considering abolishing the Office of Women's Affairs.
(2) Can he give a categorical assurance that the Government is committed to the continuance of the Office of Women's Affairs.
(3) Will he consider upgrading the authority of this Office, in view of the many-faceted needs of women in the community which are still to be met.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable members question is as follows:
(1) to (3) I refer the honourable member to the Prime Minister's statement to the Parliament on Thursday, 30 April on the Review of Commonwealth Functions where it was stated that the functions of the Office of Women's Affairs in the Department of Home Affairs and Environment and the Women's Bureau in the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs were to be continued.
I would like to reassure the honourable member that the Government is fully committed to its policy of equality of opportunity, freedom from discrimination and equal status for women and that the Office of Women's Affairs will continue to monitor, co-ordinate and develop Commonwealth policies and programs to ensure that activites accord with the Government's objectives in women's affairs.
Chief Justice: Use of Diplomatic Passport
(Question No. 850)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:
Further to the answer to my question No. 5472 (Hansard 22 May 1980, page 3211) has the Chief Justice been advised that he should not again use a diplomatic passport if he visits South Africa.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No. The Chief Justice, Sir Harry Gibbs, is entitled to a diplomatic passport in respect of all overseas travel under guidelines established by successive governments.
Commonwealth Cars
(Question No. 854)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Administrative Services; upon notice, on 24 March 1981:
Which persons, and under what circumstances, are authorised to specifically request the provision of a Commonwealth car.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Any person who is authorised to use car transport at Commonwealth expense may specifically request the provision of a Commonwealth car with driver. Whether such a request is conveyed to the booking office of my Department's Transport

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 465

and Storage Division is at the discretion of the ordering authority.
The allocation of a Commonwealth car to a specified booking is dependent upon the availability of a car-with-driver at the time. When a Commonwealth car cannot be provided for a specified booking, a contractor's hire car or taxi of appropriate standard is engaged.
The entitlements to use car transport at Commonwealth expense are as determined by the Remuneration Tribunal, the Prime Minister, the Minister for Administrative Services, and by specific Government decisions.
Government Information Unit
(Question No. 863)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(I) How many staff are employed in the Government Information Unit.
(2) Will staff be added to the Unit during 1981; ifso, how many.
(3) What was the yearly running costs of the Unit for each year since its inception.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Government Information Unit has a staffing establishment of seven.
(2) There are no proposals to increase the establishment.
(3) 1978-79 $86,159; 1979-80 $155,861; 1980-81 $170,849.
35-Hour Week
(Question'No.906)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(I) What is the standard working week for the Australian Public Service.
(2) What industrial awards currently provide for a 35 hour week.
(3) What proportion of the total Australian labour force currently enjoys a standard 35 hour week, exclusive of overtime.
(4) What proportion of (a) white collar and (b) blue collar workers currently work a 35 hour week.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The standard hours of duty of Australian Public Service staff vary from category to category. Virtually all Australian Public Service Staff work either a standard 361 hour week or a 40 hour week. Clerical and office-based categories generally work a 361 hour week and trades and related staff normally work a 40 hour week.
(2) At the present time there are almost 1000 operative federal awards and agreements. A comprehensive examination of the provisions of all of these awards and agreements to obtain the information requested by the honourable member could not be justified in terms of the staff resources required. However, some federal awards and agreements which are known to contain provisions for a 35 hour week for employees covered by them are listed below:
Administrative Clerks (Container Terminals and Depots) Award 1978.
AFSA (Container Terminals) Award 1978. AFSA (Union Bulk Ships Pty Ltd) Award 1980.

Australian Shipping Commission (Terminal Foremen)

Award 1980.

"Australian Workers Union (Oil Companies) Award

1978.

BWWD-FCU Container Agreement 1978.

Chemical Workers (Carbon Black) Award 1979.

-Clerks (Oil Companies) Award 1978.

Clerks (Shipping) Award 1978.

Clerks (Port Waratah Stevedoring Co Pty Ltd) Award

1974.

"Engineering (Oil Companies) Award 1978.

"Engine Drivers and Firemens (Shell Refining (Aust.)

Pty Ltd) Agreement 1956.

Engine Drivers Geelong Harbour Trust Award 1978.

Foreman Stevedores Award 1978.

Foreman Stevedores (Northern Territory) Award 1978.

Foreman Stevedores (Port Waratah Stevedoring Co Pty

Ltd) Award 1978.

Hospital Employees (Radiographers-ACT) Award

1970.

Kevin Waters Maintenance Trades (Container Ter-

minals) Award 1979.

Maintenance Trades Award-Stevedoring 1980.

Maintenance Trades (STL Container Terminals, Mel-

bourne) Award 1978.

Miscellaneous Workers (ANL Terminals) Security

Officers Award 1980.

Miscellaneous Workers (Container Terminals Depots)

Security Officers Award 1976.

Miscellaneous Workers (Port Waratah Stevedoring Co

Pty Ltd) Watchmen and Gatekeepers Award 1980.

Mobile Crane, Forklift and Tow Motor Drivers

(Geelong Harbour Trust Shipping Work) Award 1975.

Mobile Crane, Forklift and Tow Motor Drivers Award

1946.

Municipal Officers (City of Sunshine) Award 1973.

Municipal Officers (Melbourne City Council) Award

1955 (Librarians only).

Municipal Officers (NSW Electricity Undertakings)

Award 1964.

Municipal Officers (NSW Electricity Undertakings) Sal-

aried Division Award 1969.

Municipal Officers (NSW Electricity Undertakings)

Senior Officers Award 1969.

Municipal Officers (NSW Gas Works Undertakings)

Award 1969 (Gas engineers only).

Municipal Officers (Victoria) Consolidated Award 1974

(Librarians only).

Northern Territory (Oil Companies) Consolidated

Award 1978.

Oil Refinery Employees (AOR Pty Ltd and ALOR Pty

Ltd) Interim Award 1976.

'

Oil Refinery Employees (Total Refineries Australia Ltd)

Interim Award 1976.

Operational Clerks (Container Terminals and Depots)

Award 1978.

Port Waratah Stevedoring Company Pty Ltd and Water-

side Workers Federation of Australia Agreement 1980,

Standard Hours (Oil Companies) Award 1974.

Stevedoring Industry Commission Order No 9 1949.

Storemen and Packers (Carbon Black) Award 1979.

Storemen and Packers (Container Depots) Award 1974.

-Storemen and Packers (Oil Companies) Award 1978.

"Storemen and Packers (Oil Refineries) Award 1978.

Transport Workers (Container Depots) Award 1976.

Transport Workers (Oil Agents/Contractors) Award

1981.

Transport Workers Oil Agents (Northern Territory)

Award 1981.

-Transport Workers (Oil Companies) Award 1978.

Transport Workers (Special Vehicles) Agreement 1971.

Tugboat Industry Award 1974.

466 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Waterside Workers Award 1977. Waterside Workers (Container Terminals) Award 1980. Wharves and Ships Watchmen (Northern Territory) Award 1975.
In addition to these Awards, the following federal awards will be varied shortly to rellect the agreements to introduce a 35 hour week for employees of 6 companies at the Altona petrochemical complex in Victoria:
Australian Workers Union-Australian Synthetic RubberCo Ltd Chemical Workers Award 1979.
Australian Workers Union-BASF Australia Limited Chemical Workers Awiud 1978.
Australian Workers Union (Dow Chemical Australia Ltd) Award 1979.
Australian Workers Union Chemical Workers (B F Goodrich Chemical Ltd) Award 1979.
Australian Workers Union-Hoechst Australia Ltd Chemical Workers Award 1978.
Australian Workers Union-Union Carbide Australia Ltd Chemical Workers Award 1979.
(3) and (4) The inFormation sought by the honourable member is not available and the data required to enable estimates to be made could not be obtained without an expenditure of scarce resources which could not be justified. Nevertheless, the honourable member might be interested to know that the Australian Bureau of Statistics in its Earnings and Hours of Employees' Distribution and Composition series (Catalogue No 6306.0) publishes details of Weekly Ordinary Time Hours Paid For. The most recent data available, For May 1979, suggests that'6.3 percent of males and 10.2 percent of female full-time non-managerial employees aged 21 years and over were working at least 35 hourS'and under 36 hours per week.
-While Awards marked by an asterisk do not specify hours of work as being 35 per week, under the Standard Hours (Oil Companies) Award 1974, such hours of work wereTeduced to 35 per week.

Cost of Unemployment

(Question No. 914)

Mr Willis asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 26 March 1981:

What is the estimated cost to the Treasury in 1981 of an in-

crease of 10,000 in the number of persons out of work, taking

account of revenue lost, benefits paid and administrative

costs.

'

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

[t is not possible to assess with any precision the net effect
on Commonwealth outlays and receipts of a hypothetical increase of 10,000 in the number of persons looking for work. Any such calculation would require a large number of
assumptions to be made, the nature of which would bear heavily on the figuring.

On the receipts side, the outcome would be inlluenced by
the causes that brought about the rise in the number looking for work. IF, for example, more people were entering the labour force and were looking for work because employment was expanding strongly (as it now is) then a rise in unem-
ployment could occur without any adverse effect on taxation receipts. ,On the other hand, a rise in unemployment
occasioned by a downturn in particular sectors of the economy could be associated with lower budget receipts.

rhe effect on expenditures also' would be uncertain and dependent on underlying assumptions. To illustrate, most married women looking for work, and people looking for part
time work, are not eligible for unemployment benefits, and

the payments received by beneficiaries are related to their age, the number of dependants and the extent of other income. Moreover, some unemployed persons eligible for benefits do not apply. Without knowing the characteristics of the unemployed in question, it would not be possible to estimate the benefits that might be paid. An indication of the average annual cost per unemployment benefit recipient can be gained from the 1980-81 Budget estimates,which provided for total unemployment benefit payments of $959 million on the basis of an average number of beneficiaries of 300,000 (that is, an average annual cost of about $3,200),
The number of unemployment benefit recipients varies considerably over the year and a small change in the number of recipients during the year would be unlikely to have a major impact on administrative costs.
Training of Tradesmen
(Question No. 965)
Mr Hawke asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(I) What are the current numbers of tradesmen being trained by major resource developers in those States where the Government has entered into agreements with State Governments to urge project developers to undertake substantial training efforts. '
(2) In what (a) States, (b) regions and (c) trades is the training taking place.
(3) What assistance (a) has been afforded or (b) is planned, through Commonwealth and State manpower programs.
(4) What is the level of demand For tradesmen likely to be generated in the next 2 to 3 years on the basis of the early assessments of manpower requirements by project dev~lopers.
(5) Is there any intention to involve relevant trade uRions as well as the resource companies in the liaison and cooperation process with the State and Commonwealth Governments.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) It is not possible to provide the level of detail sought. However, preliminary data provided by State and Territory apprenticeship authorities indicates that the level of training in the key metal, electrical and building trades is increasing significantly in those States most directly affected by major development projects. In New South Wales, Queensland and Western Australia total apprentice intakes in those trades in the period I July 1980-31 March 1981, were up 20 per cent, 35 per cent and 26 per cent respectively' on the corresponding period a year earlier.
(3) It is estimated that $65m will be spent in 1980-81 under the Commonwealth Rebate For Apprentice Full-Time (CRAFT) scheme. In addition, special assistance has been extended to support the Commonwealth/State trade training scheme in Western Australia and for the training of apprentice draughtsmen in New South Wales. Offers of special assistance have been extended to all States for the development of trade training programs directed at accelerated training for skills in short supply.
(4) InFormation on the likely level of demand for tradesmen generated by major development projects was detailed in the report of the DOLAC Working Party, 'Prospective Demand for and Supply of Skilled Labour 1980-83 with Particular ReFerence to Major Development Projects' published by my Department last September. The main conclusion drawn at that time was that major developments would add an

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 467

annual demand for a further 7,000 metal, electrical and building tradesmen over each of the three years examined.
(5) Yes.
Special Youth Employment Training Program
(Question No. 967)
Mr Hawke asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(I) On the basis of evaluative data available within his Department what proportion of Special Youth Employment Training Program (SYETP) trainees are retained by their SYETP employers.
(2) What proportion of SYETP trainees have obtained alternative stable employment after completing their SYETP training.
(3) What is the incidence of job substitution between SYETP trainees and other potential employees.
(4) What is the rate of dropout from the SYETP scheme, and what are the main reasons involved.
(5) What is the degree of improved employability as the result of SYETP training.
Mr N. A. BrownThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The latest" evaluation report of SYETP trainees is dated June 1980. The survey results in this report show that 50.7 per cent of trainees were still employed with the employer providing training some 4-5 months after the end of the subsidy period.
(2) The same report shows that 17.8 per cent of trainees found full-time employment elsewhere, and 2 per cent found part-time employment.
(3) One third of placements were assessed as net additional positions.
(4) The data shows that 33.9 per cent of trainees do not complete training. Most of these were dismissed but others left of their own accord, either because of dissatisfaction with the job, or to go to another job.
(5) The same study included employer assessments of trainees at the beginning and at the end of the 17 week period. These two separate assessments related to job skills, the need for supervision, and the willingness to help. When compared the assessments indicated 63.5 per cent improved in job skills; 51.3 per cent improved in the need for supervision and 18.5 per cent improved in willingness to help. Those still with the training employer or employed elsewhere included 62.7 per cent of trainees who had been assessed as less than satisfactory on commencement.

Service Personnel: Overseas Stationing
(Question No. 976)
Mr Holding asked the Minister. for Defence, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(I) How many Australian service personnel, both military and civilian were stationed overseas as at (a) 30 January 1980, (b) 30 July 1980and (c) 30 January 1981.
(2) Where were those personnel stationed, what services did they represent, what was the reason for stationing each unit in that particular location and what joint or unilateral exercises did each unit participate in while stationed there.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) (b) (c) 2,665 servicemen, 94 civilians; 2,575 servicemen, 91 civilians, 2,796 servicemen, 100 civilians.
In addition, at each date, an average of approximately 300 members of the Royal Australian Navy were deployed on ships outside Australia, and an average of 54 school teachers' seconded from State Education Departments were employed in service sponsored schools in Malaysia and Singapore. .-
(2) The following tables show the locations, service affiliations and reasons for stationing personnel overseas at each date. Approximately one half of all Defence personnel overseas were stationed in Malaysia and Singapore on unit duties to fulfil Australia's obligation to the Five Power Arrangement. Other activities involving Defence personnel overseas included defence co-operation, representing at Australia's overseas missions, training and exchange with other Defence forces and Departments, communications related duties, materiel project work and United Nations commitments.
Participation by Units in exercises would have been limited to the Butterworth-based RAAF Units which took part in the following exercises during the period of31 January 1980 to 31 January 1981:
MAJORADEX 1/80-17-20 March 1980 MINOR ADEX 2/80-11 June 1980. MINOR ADEX 3/80-18 June 1980. MAJOR ADEX 4/80-6-9 October 1980 MINOR ADEX 5/80-3 December 1980 MINOR ADEX 6/80-10 December 1980.
Each of these exercises were Air Defence Exercises conducted and controlled by the Integrated Air Defence System established under the Five Power Arrangement.
Individual servicemen on exchange normally participate in the exercises of the units to which they are attached. Com" p1ete and accurate records of all such exercise participation are not maintained by the Service Offices.

Table 1 DEFENCE PERSONNEL STATIONED OVERSEAS AT 30 JANUARY 1980

Location

Service/Department represented

Reasons for stationing

Antarctic Canada Federal Republic of Germany
Fiji Hong Kong
India Indonesia Israel/Syria/Lebanon Japan Kashmir

Army Navy and Army Army
Navy Army, Air Force and Defence
Army and Air Force Navy and Army Army Navy, Army and Air Force Army

Support toANARE Training and exchange
Materiel project, exchange (with BAOR) and training
Co-operation Representation, training and communi-
cations related duties.
Representation and training Representation, co-operation lind training UN observer
Representation UN observer

468 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Location
Korea Malaysia
New Zealand Pakistan Papua New Guinea Philippines Singapore
Thailand Tonga UnitedKingdom
United States of America
Zimbabwe

Service/Department represented

Air Force Army, Air Force and Defence

Navy, Army, Air Force and Defence

Navy and Army

Navy, Army, Air Force and Defence

Navy and Army

.

Navy and Air Force

Army
Army, Air Force and Navy Navy, Army, Air Force and Defence

Navy, Air Force and Defence

Army

Reasons for stationing
Representation Representation, co-operation, security
duties, training and unit duties Representation and exchange . Representation and training Co-operation and representation Representation and training Representation, co-operation and unit
duties Representation and training Co-operation Representation, commissioning crew,
exchange training and material projects Representatio~, standby crews, materiel
projects, training and exchange UN commitment

Table 2 DEFENCE PERSONNEL STATIONED OVERSEAS AT 30 JULY 80

Location

Service/Department represented

Reason for stationing

Antarctic Canada Federal Republic of Germany
Fiji France Hong Kong
India Indonesia Israel/Syria/Lebanon Japan Kashmir Korea Malaysia
New Zealand Pakistan Papua New Guinea Philippines Singapore Thailand Tonga United Kingdom
United States of America

Army Army Army
Navy and Army Navy and Air Force Army, Air Force and Defence
Navy and Army,. . Navy, Army and Air Force Army Navy, Army and Air Force Army Air Force Army, Air Force and Defence
Navy, Army and Defence Navy and Army Navy, Army, Air Force and Defence Navy and Army, Navy, Army and Air Force Army Army, Air Force and Navy Navy, Army, Air Force and Defence
Navy, Army, Air Force and Defence

Support to ANARE Exchange and training Materiel project, exchange (with BOAR)
and training
Cooperation Representation
Representation, communications related duties, exchange and training
Representation and training
Representation, cooperation and training UN observer Representation and training
UN observer
Representation Representation, cooperation, security
duties, training and unit duties
Representation and exchange Representation and training
Cooperation and representation Representation and training Representation, cooperation and unit duties Representation and training
Co-operation Representation, exchange, training and
materiel projects Representation, standby crew, materiel
projects, training and exchange

Table 3 DEFENCE PERSONNEL STATIONED OVERSEAS AT 30 JAN 81

Location

Service/Department represented

Reason for stationing

Antarctic Canada Diego Garcia Federal Republic of Germany
Fiji France Hong Kong
India Indonesia Israel/Syria/Lebanon Japan

Army Army and Defence Navy Army
Navy and Army Navy and Air Force Army, Air Force and Defence
Navy, A~my and Air Force Navy, Army and Air Force Army Navy, Army and Air Force

Support to ANARE Exchange and training Logistics liaison Materiel project, exchange (with BOAR)
and training Cooperation Representation
Representation, communications related duties, exchange and training
Representation and training Representation, cooperation and training
UN observer Representation and training

Answers to Questions

.19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 469

Location
Kashmir Korea Malaysia
New Zealand Pakistan . . Papua New Guinea Philippines Singapore Solomon Islands Thailand Tonga United Kingdom
United States of America

Service/Department represented
Army Air Force Army, Air Force and Defence
Navy, Army and Defence Navy and Army Navy, Army, Air Force and Defence Navy and Army Navy and Air Force Navy Navy and Army Army, Air Force and Navy Navy, Army, Air Force and Defence
Navy, Army, Air Force and Defence

Reason for stationing
UN observer Representation Representation, cooperation, security
duties, training and l,mit duties Representation and exchange Representation and training Cooperation and representation Representation, cooperation and training Representation, cooperation and unit duties Co-operation Representation and training Co-operation Representation, exchange training and
materiel projects Representation standby crews/ships
companies, materiel projects, training and exchange

Aluminium Processing
(Question No. 977)
Mr Howe asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(1) Is an expansion proposed of the aluminium industry in Australia from current levels of production of 283 000 tonnes per annum to 1.2 million tonnes by 1985.
(2) If so, what investigations have been carried out to assess the appropriateness of the conventional Hall/Heroult process to Australian circumstances.
(3) Has this process been in use since the 1880s without substantial modification.
(4) Does the process require the consumption of up to 17000 kilowatt hours of electricity per tonne of aluminium.
(5) Are there serious pollution problems associated with the Hall/Heroult process, particularly with the production of gaseous flourides.
(6) Has the Minister or the Department of National Development and Energy investigated alternative processes involving direct ore reduction, e.g. the production of Al alloy with 13 per cent Si which is apparently used for industrial production in the United States of America.
(7) Is the Minister able to say whether Alcoa was granted, by the American Research and Development Administration, a credit for the manufacture of AISi master alloys by oxygen blast furnace without electrical heating.
(8) Has the Minister or the Department of National Development and Energy investigated other new processes such as (a) the condensation of aluminium vapour, (b) carbothermic reduction of aluminium and (c) electrolysis of aluminium chloride.
(9) Has the minister or the Department of National Development and Energy investigated possible improvements in the Hall/Heroult process which might result in a substantial reduction in energy use or the emission of flourides.
(10) In view of the dramatic increase in aluminium production in Australia, has the Minister taken any steps to ensure that Australia has access to the latest technology and the technology which is most appropriate to Australia's circumstances.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) Expansion of the Australian aluminium industry of that order is proposed. It is expected that existing annual production capacity of around 280000 tonnes will rise to around 1.4 million tonnes by 1986.
(2) The adoption of a particular production process by a company remains, in Australia, the outcome of normal commercial considerations. Of course, GovernmentsCommonwealth, State and local-affect such considerations; for example, through their setting of environmental standards.
(3) It is true that the Hall/Heroult process was first developed in the l880s. It was the development of this process which facilitated the commerical production of aluminium. The process has, of course, been developed and refined over the last 90 odd years. The smelters it is proposed to construct in Australia will take advantage of recently developed technology relating to pot design, anode manufacture, control of airborne emissions from the potline, and reduced electricity consumption in the smelting process.
(4) The potlines in older smelters do use about 17 000 kilowatt hours of electricity per tonne of primary aluminium produced. However, as indicated in (3) above, the smelters it is proposed to construct in Australia will be taking advantage of the latest commercially available technology. Accordingly, it is estimated that the electricity requirement for the proposed smelters will be between 14-15000 kWh per tonne.
(5) As is the case with many industrial processes, there are environmental side effects associated with thejimelting of aluminium using the Hall/Heroult process. Advances in smelter design and technology have generally reduced such side effects, including the emission of gaseous 1I0urides, to acceptable levels. Nevertheless, before proceeding, each project is required to satisfy the provisions of environment protection legislation of the particular State in which it is to be located. Aluminium smelter proposals requiring Commonwealth decisions are also assessed in accordance with the provisions of the Environment (Impact of Proposals) Act.
(6) and (8) The Department of National Development and Energy is aware of reserach being undertaken into alternative processes to the Hall/Heroult process. The alternative processes referred to are still all in their developmental stages and it will be some time befo're any of these alternative processes attain commerical viability if, indeed, any do prove to be suitable for application on a large-scale.
(7) In 1977, Alcoa (US) entered a contract with the United States Department of Energy to investigate the technical feasibility of reduction of alumina-silica ores, based on combustion heating. Again, the success or otherwise of this long term project remains to be determined.

470 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

(9) As indicated in (3), (4) and (5) above, the smelters to be built in Australia will be utiising the most advanced commercially available technology.
I
(I O~ See (2) above.
Air Navigation Charges
(Question No. 979)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 1 April 1981 :
Has his attention been drawn to repeated claims by operators that air navigation charges For international flights in and out of Australian airports are the most expensive in the world; iF so, is he able to Furnish details of the airport charges on international flights including all landing Fees, customs charges, holding room charges, passenger head charges, airport staff overtime charges, etc. on (a) DC8, (b) DCIO, (c) Boeing 747, (d) Boeing 747 SP, (e) Airbus A300, (F) Boeing 737 and (g) Boeing 727-200 series aircraft, at (i) Heathrow and (ii) Gatwick Airports, United Kingdom, (iii) FrankFurt and (iv) Munich Airports, Federal Republic of Germany, (v) Orly Airport, France, (vi) Tokyo Airport, Japan, (vii) Nadi Airport, Fiji, (viii) Auckland and (ix) Christchurch Airports, New Zealand; (x) Los Angeles, (xi) San Francisco, (xii) New York and (xiii) Honolulu Airports, United States of America and (xiv) Ontario and (xv) Vancouver Airports, Canada.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
My attention has been drawn to these claims. However such claims are normally based on the erroneous assumption that the landing charges imposed overseas equate with the Australian air navigation charge.
Australian air navigation charges, unlike most overseas countries, are a composite Fee covering landing Fees, parking Fees, terminal air traffic control and en-route aids and services. New Zealand has a similar single charge to Australia.
In overseas countries an aircraft normally pays:
airport charges which can include landing Fees, customs charges, security Fees, passenger head. charges etc (some of these charges can attract peak and off peak rates)
terminal area control Fees which are sometimes included under airport charges

an en-route navigational aids and service Fees.
As shown by the Following table, the single Australian air navigation charge compares Favourably with charges levied For operations to the UK. The table is based on a Qantas QFI flight Sydney to Heathrow by a Boeing 747-200 at 60 per cent capacity. It compares charges For operations out of Sydney and Australian en-route Facilities to charges For en-route Facilities For a similar distance From Heathrow (ie, approximately 3750 kms including charges For en-route Facilities of Syria, Cyprus, Greece, Euro-Control, and Yugoslavia) and Heathrow airport charges. The charges For operations into Heathrow were provided by Qantas.
QFI. BOEING 747-200 AT 60 PER CENT CAPACITY
Sydney to London

Charge

Amount Peak
(I April to
31 October)

Amount Off Peak

Sydney ..Air Navigation Charges
Heathrow En-route Facilities
Landing Fee Terminal Navigation
Parking Security (inbound only) Passenger Service Charge

$ 2,765

$ 2,765

3,080 2,390
847 2,121
774 3,987

3,080 1,195
847 909 774 No charge

Total charges

13,199

6,805

-There is no difference iii charges For peak and off peak times.
The attached is a schedule of airport charges based on the latest inFormation available to my Department. As I have stated beFore comparison of these charges to the single air navigation charge is difficult. For example, no direct charge is made For air navigation Facilities in' America. Attempts are made to recover these costs through a system of aviation user taxes on domestic airline tickets, value of cargo' way-bills, departure tax on international travel and a tax on aviation fuels used in non-commercial operations.

Ai'rport

Type of charge

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g) Additional

DC8-60 DCIO-30 747-200 747SP A300-B4 737-200 727-200 non-specific charges

(ii) Gatwick AircraFt Charges Landing Charge

462.40 912.54 1,281.67 1,128.60

Parking Charge/HR 51.75 85.80 113.71 102.14

Air Navigation Service

347.87 576.23 764.40 686.60

Passenger Charges

Govt Security Charge

Per arriving pax

3.CO 3.00 3.00 3.00

Passenger Charge Per departing pax

6.00 6.00 6.00 6.00

Offpeak

(iii) Frankfurt Aircraft Charges
Landing Charge Parking Charge/
24hrs Passenger Charges
Per arriving pax

926.15 1,535.50 2,035.10 1,828.00 131.45 217.90 288.80 259.40
3.70 3.70 3.70 3.70

(iv) DusseldorF Charges are the same as for Frankfurt

485.00 53.80 359.31
3.00 6.00
962.70 135.75
3.70

48.25 18.05 121.30
3.00 6.00
332.50 49.00
3.70

170.20 29.62 199.10
3.00 6.00
545.85 80.50 3.70

Details of Hangar charges are available From Airport Manager.

472 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Airport

Type of charge

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g) Additional

DC8-60 DCIO-30 747-200 747SP A300-B4 737-200 727-200 non.specificcharges

General terminal

62.60 62.60 62.60 62.60 62.60 62.60 62.60

charge

Passenger charges-

Porter service

.48.48.48

.48

.48

.48

.48

charge/pax

Inspection space

3.35 3.35 3.35 3.35 3.35 3.35 3.35

charge/pax

General terminal

2.25 2.25 2.25 2.25 2.25 2.25 2.25

charge/pax

Other charges-

Boarding gate security 639.25 639.25 639.25 639.25 639.25 639.25 639.25

patrols/24 hrs

(xiii) Honolulu Aircraft charges-

Landing charges

327.50 543.50 718.50 646.15 338.25 113.40 186.70

Holding room

charges

Diamond head

92.20 92.20 92.20 92.20 92.20 92.20 92.20

holding room

Central Concourse 63.50 63.50 63.50 63.50 63.50 63.50 63.50

Hard stand ramp

35.65 35.65 . 35.65 35.65 35.65 35.65 35.65

(xiv) Ontario There is no Ontario Airport, however, both Toronto and Ottawa are international airports

within the Ontario province-charges are the same as for Vancouver

(xv) Vancouver Aircraft charges-

Landing charges

Parking charges/24

hrs

Hangar charges/24

hrs-

Heated

Unheated

General terminal

charges

Air navigation

service-

Via Nth Atlantic

Via Polar route

Via Pacific

- AustralianAircraft charges-

Airports

Category B Hangar

Charges per 24 hrs

Air Navigation .

charges

Passenger Charges

Departure TaX/Pax

17.50 19.80 29.70 23.70 16.95 6.15 10.85 169.40 281.15 371.60 334.20 174.95 58.65 96.60

13.50 7.30

15.25 8.30

22.85 12.45

18.25 9.90

13.05 7.10

89.25 160.65 229.10 172.55 160.65

6.20 8.40 2.60 4.55
68.45 101.15

47.65 42.00 25.65

47.65 42.00 25.65

47.65 42.00 25.65

47.65 42.00 25.65

47.65 42.00 25.65

47.65 42.00 25.65

47.65 42.00 25.65

4.50 6.00 8.00 6.00 4.50 1.60 3.00 755.34 1,253.34 1,659.21 1,492.38 782.73 241.02 423.80

10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 \0.00 10.00

-./"0
Heated Hanger space is available at Ottawa airport only on an emergency basis.
Charges for Aerodrome and Airways facilities are made through a single Air Navigation Charge based on aircraft weight and usage of facilities.

- Air Navigation Charges based on Sydney.Honolulu flights.

2,4,5-T
(Question No. 985)
Mr Howe asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the research carried out by Dr Peter Hall and Dr Ben Selinger of t.he Department of Chemistry at the Australian National University on the chemical 2,4,5.T.
(2) What is his assessment of the researchers' hypothesis that substantial amounts of 2,4,5.T, imported in 1969-70 may have been purchased cheaply in Singapore and come from Vietnam.

(3) Will he assess the researchers' claim that there may be a correlation between an increase in deaths of young babies from certain types of congenital abnormalities and low level exposure of large populations to herbicides with high TCDD (dioxin) levels.
(4) What are the implications of these findings for the study of Agent Orange being carried out by the Commonwealth Institute of Health.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) My Department has no knowledge that 'Agent Orange' or 2,4,5.T from Vietnam has ever been imported into

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 473

Australia through Singapore or elsewhere. According to a report of the Tariff Board of 12 April 1973, imports of material used in herbicide manufacture, namely free 2,4,5trichlorophenoxyacetic acid, 2,4,5-trichlorophenol and its potassium salt (KTCP) occurred in the late 1960's and early 1970's. These materials appeared to have originated in Singapore, the United States of America, Japan and Britain.
(3) Dr Hall and Dr Selinger have claimed that there has been an increase in congenital abnormalities of the central nervous system in the years 1968-77 but the statistical significance of their claim is debatable. At the same time, they have also recognised that there is no clear evidence to link this alleged increase with the use of phenoxyacetic acid herbicides.
I am not aware of evidence indicating that low level exposure of large populations to herbicides containing high TCDD (dioxin) levels has ever occurred in Australia.
(4) The Commonwealth Institute of Health is investigating the possibility that the health of Vietnam veterans has been adversely affected by those chemicals used in Vietnam, including 'Agent Orange'.
It has always been recognised by the investigators at the Institute that in their studies the possible effects of exposure to agricultural chemicals will need to be assessed and evaluated in relation to the control group as well as the veterans to ensure that a meaningful comparison of exposed and unexposed persons is made.
Officers involved in the Commonwealth Institute of Health study are aware of the Hall-Selinger results.
Royal Australian Air Force: Boeing 707 Aircraft
(Question No. 1028)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
(I) How many hours were flown by the 2 Royal Australian Air Force Boeing 707 aircraft in (a) 1978-79, (b) 1979-80 and (c) July to December 1980.
(2) How many hours were dedicated in each period to (a) VIP purposes, (b) defence purposes and (c) other purposes.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) 1978-79: 414.5. (b) 1979-80: 1295.9. (c) July to December 1980: 827.3.
(2)

Category
(a) Special transport (b) Defence purposes (i) (c) Other purposes (ii)

Year

July to Dec.
1978-79 1979-80 1980

Nil 381.4
33.1

428.7 811.8
55.4

81.3 746.0
Nil

Notes: (i) Includes hours flown on Conversion Training, Continuation Training, Butterworth Changeovers, Defence Support both Overseas and within Australia and Squadron Support tasks.
(ii) Represents hours flown on National Commitment tasks.

Medical Practitioners' Records
(Question No. 1032)
Mr Groom asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 2 April 1981:
(I) Have officers of his Department entered the professional rooms of any medical practitioner and taken possession of records or other written material containing the names and other personal information relating to patients during the last 5 years.
(2) If so, how many medical practitioners have been involved.
(3) If he cannot provide the precise number of medical practitioners referred to in part (2) will he give an estimate of the number of medical practitioners involved.
(4) Have the records or material, or part of these, been retained in some instances for a period of 3 months or longer without formal charges being laid.
(5) What is the longest period that records or material have been held without formal charges being laid.
(6) How many patients of medical practitioners have been interviewed by officers of his Department in connection with the investigation of medical practitioners during the. last 5 years.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) Since the responsibility for monitoring Commonwealth Medical Benefits reverted to my Department on I November 1978, on twelve occasions (involving 16 medical practitioners) officers of my Department have been associated with the removal of records or other written material from professional rooms of medical practitioners.
Of these twelve occurrences there were eleven occasions when Departmental officers accompanied officers of the Australian Federal Police who were in possession of search warrants and who took possession of records or other written material.
In the other instance the medical practitioner voluntarily gave documents to a Departmental officer during the course of an interview. The doctor also delivered other documents to my Department.
(3) See (I) and (2).
(4) and (5) Yes; insofar as my Department is concerned, in only one instance. A medical practitioner offered copies of various documents. These were retained for six months before formal charges were laid.
(6) At least 4000 patients have been interviewed, if not substantially more. The exact number is not known as detailed statistics of the number of patients interviewed durin~ initial evaluation of cases are not kept in all States.
Aircraft Noise
(Question No.10S1)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 2 April 1981 :
(I) Further to question No. 1029 asked by the Member for St George in the Notice Paper of Wednesday, 1 April 1981, (a) on which runways at the Eagle Farm Airport, Brisbane, Queensland, is an instrument landing system operative, (b) what is the glide slope on each runway served by the ILS and (c) what procedures have been introduced to ensure that the angle of the glide path is observed by pilots (i) when using the ILS and (ii) when using a visual approach.

474 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) The instrument landing system operates on runway 22 for landings over Moreton Bay.
(b) The glide slope is 3 degrees.
(c) There is no external monitoring of the actual glide path flown.
Pilot training in aircraft and aircraft simulators stresses the need to maintain stabilised approach on the electronic glide path of the ILS and on the T-Visual Approach Slope Indicator when making a visual approach. Indeed the whole landing procedure is based on the pilot consistently following this slope to the runway aiming point. A system of cockpit drills specifically alerts the pilot operating the controls if he allows the aircraft to deviate more than a stipulated tolerance below the glide path.
Meeting of the Federal Cabinet in Brisbane
Question No. 10S3
~rs Darling asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 2 April 1981:
(I) Prior to the Federal Cabinet's meeting in Brisbane in March 1981, when was the last occasion on which (a) the upper basement level entrance of the Australian Government Centre, Brisbane, and (b) the men's toilets of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Offices on the 12th Floor of the Australian Government Centre, were painted.
(2) What other sections of the Australian Government Centre were painted especially for the meeting of the Federal Cabinet in Brisbane.
(3) Are these meetings to be an annual event; if so, can Members in the Parliament Offices expect annual painting of the men's toilets.
(4) Is it a fact that the room temperature of the Commonwealth Parliament Offices was lowered to 65 degrees to accommodate the atmospheric preferences of the Prime Minister.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) and (b). The subject areas had not been painted since completion of the building in 1972.
(2) As part of the routine maintenance of the building the men's toilets on the I I th floor were also repainted.
(3) The Cabinet meets occasionally in State Capitals, but there is no fixed schedule for such meetings.
(4) No.
Depo-Provera
(Question No. 1062)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 2 April 1981:
(I) Is there evidence of the widespread prescription of the contraceptive drug, Depo-Provera, for Aboriginals and other groups of deprived women; if so, has the drug been approved limited use.
(2) If this drug has been approved for limited use, what is meant by this term.
(3) Is he satisfied that there are sufficient guarantees of the drug being absolutely safe.
(4) Does the approval for its limited use make adequate provision for ensuring the informed consent of patients using

this drug and, in particular, the informed consent of the many Aboriginal women for whom it is at present being prescribed.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) My Department only has access to prescribing data in relation to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (see (2) below). Data on use in hospitals and private prescribing data would only be available from the manufacturer. It should be noted that it is incorrect to refer to Depo-Provera as a contraceptive drug in the Australian situation where it has not been approved for this indication.
(2) Depo-Provera is available for use in Australia in the treatment of a number of indications including malignant neoplasia and precocious puberty and its availability as a Pharmaceutical Benefit is limited to these latter two indications. The use of Depo-Provera for contraceptive purposes would be limited to clinical investigational use only. To date, no application has been received by my Department in this regard. An application for its use as a contraceptive was rejected by the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee (ADEC) as there were unresolved questions relating to its safety for this indication.
(3) No potent therapeutic agent, such as Depo-Provera can be guaranteed as being absolutely safe. The product information for Depo-Provera distributed by the company contains the following statement:
"The use of Depo-Provera for contraception is not an approved indication and such use is investigational since there are unresolved questions relating to its safety for this indication" .
(4) The ADEC supports the concept of properly controlled clinical trials using Depo-Provera as a contraceptive provided they are designed to help resolve some of the questions raised and provided adequate measures are incorporated in the trial protocol to satisfactorily protect the participants. As with any drug which is marketed in Australia a doctor may decide that special circumstances warrant the use of the product for conditions other than those for which it has been accepted. In such cases the responsibility for adequately informing the patient or guardian and for any adverse consequences of the therapy must rest with the practitioner concerned.
Road Construction
(Question No. 1083)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :
(I) What studies have been undertaken or are proposed to be undertaken by the Bureau of Transport Economics or his Department into the comparative costs of road construction by private contractors and by Commonwealth, State and local government day labour.
(2) What are substantial quantitative comparisons of private and public road construction, over similar roads in Australian conditions.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) No studies have been undertaken which would enable firm conclusions to be drawn about the comparative costs of the two methods oflonstructing roads in Australian conditions. Because of the ~ifficulties involved in attempting an objective assessment, there al'd'no proposals at present by the Bureau of Transport Economics or by my Department to undertake a specific study to obtain comparative cost data.
However, the relative cost efficiency of these methods of undertaking roadworks would be established on a project by

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 475

project basis where day labour and private contractors are free to compete by tender for the work. The Government's decision to make grants to the States and the Northern Territory for National Roads construction in the Road Grants Bill 1981 conditional upon the application of tender arrangements will enable cost comparisons to be obtained for particular works on these roads. I intend to report the details to the Parliament when sufficient information becomes available.
Underspending of Estimates: Department of Communications
(Question No. 1094)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :
(I) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division 480-Administrative.
(2) Has there been an underspending in this division by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, State'ment of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos 141 and 142-Appropriation Acts (Nos 1 and 2) 1980-81 if so, what is the reason.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member'squestion is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Minister representing the Minister for Finance on 13 May 1981 (Hansard page 2374)
Underspending of Estimates: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 1116)
Mrs Dading asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(I) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division (a) l30-Administrative, (b) 330Administrative, (c) 336-Cocos (Keeling Islands), (d) 337Norfolk Island-Office of the Administrator,(e) 338Australia Council, (f) 342-Australian Film Commission, (g) 540-Administrative, (h) 558-Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority and U) 565-Protection of the environment in the Alligator Rivers Region from the effects of uranium mining.
(2) Has there been an underspending in these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, Statement of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos 141 and 142-Appropriation Acts (Nos I and 2) 1980-81; ifso, what are the reasons.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Treasurer to House of Representatives question on notice No. ltOl Hansard, l3 May 1981, page 2374.
Commonwealth Payment-of Air Tickets to and from Canberra
(Question No. 1120)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(I) What proportion of the total volume of air passengers travelling to and from Canberra with (a) TAA, and (b) Ansell in (i) 1977-78 (ii) 1978-79, (iii) 1979-80, and (iv) from I July 1980 to 31 March 1981, comprised persons whose

passage was paid by a Department or Statutory Authority of the Commonwealth Government.
(2) If the proportion of total tickets to and from Canberra paid for directly or indirectly by the Government is substantial, is an increase by the Government in the cost of tickets for air passage to and from Canberra for T AA and Ansell passengers tantamount to an indirect Government subsidy to those airlines.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The gathering of information of the kind requested by the honourable member would require the commitment of considerable resources which I do not feel could reasonably be devoted to this task.
(2) The increase in fares to and from Canberra resulted from the Government's decision to adopt a new cost based, nationally consistent air fare formula to meet the thrust of the recommendations of the Independent Public Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares. I announced the Government's initial response to the Inquiry's Report and the revised air fare formula in Parliament on I April 1981.
Fare increases resulting from the adoption of the new formula on I April are an adjustment to reduce the extent of cross-subsidisation from passengers travelling on long distance routes to those on short distance routes as identified in the Holcroft Report.
Departmental Air Travel: Department of Health
(Question No. 1141)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 7 Apri11981:
(I) How many travel warrants 'have been issued for his Departmental officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980 to 31 March 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this travel.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Records maintained in my Department are not in a form that readily provides the particular detail sought on an Australian-wide basis and I am not prepared to authorise use of the resources that would be required to identify that detail. It has, however, been possible to obtain some of the information in relation to persons based in Canberra.
My Department has issued travel warrants for Canberrabased officers and a small number of non-departmental Canberra residents who are members of the Department's Advisory Committees. Approximately 6 400 travel warrants have been issued during the period'i July 1976 to 31 March 1981 (I 400 in 1976-77; I 350 in 1977-78; I 350 in 1978-79; 1 300 in 1979-80 and I 000 in 1980-81 to 31 March 1981).
The cost of the airfares for the Canberra-based Departmental officers for that period amounted to $842463 ($150454 in 1976-77; $171898 in 1977-78; $208676 in 1978-79; $184 228 in 1979-80 and $127 207 in 1980-81 to 31 March 1981. These amounts do not include fares for nondepartmental persons.

476 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Departmental Air Travel: Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 1144)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) How many travel warrants have been issued for his Departmental officers' air travel to and from Canberra during:
(a) 1976-77.
(b) 1977-78.
(c) 1978-79.
(d) 1979-80.
(e) 1980 to 31 March 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this air travel.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) Not available. (b) Not available. (c) One thousand one hundred and twenty-six warrants
were issued in 1978-79. (d) One thousand one hundred and thirty-five warrants
were issued in 1979-80. (e) One thousand two hundred and Forty-two warrants
were issued in 1980-March 1981. (2) Not available.
Freight Payable on Shipping of Australian Exports
(Question No. 1164)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(I) Is he able to say what was the annual freight cost payable on shipping of (a) Australian bulk mineral exports and (b) total Australian bulk exports for each year from 1972-73 to 1979-80 and for the period I July 1980 to 7 April 1981.
(2) What percentage of these payments was payable to operators of Australian flag vessels for the same years and period.
(3) What estimates can he provide on the Future shipping costs of exporting (a) Australian bulk mineral exports and (b) total bulk exports, for (i) 1985 (ii) 1990 (iii) 1995, and (iv) 2000.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1 and 2) The Department of Transport does not compile the statistics needed to answer the honourable member's question. The Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) does compile some relevant statistics and it has provided the following information in regard to parts (1) and (2) of the question:
(1) (a) The ABS does not compile statistics on the freight cost payable on shipping of Australian bulk mineral exports separately From other bulk exports.
(I) (b) Figures on the freight cost payable on the shipping -of Australian bulk exports before 1974-75 are not available from the ABS. The available figures since then are shown in the accompanying table.
(2) The ABS does not compile statistics on the Freight payable to operators of Australian flag vessels, but details are

available on the Freight paid on bulk exports to Australian operators of any vessels_ This means that the Freight earnings accruing to an Australian operator From the carriage of bulk exports on a foreign vessel chartered by that operator would be included with any of his earnings from the operation of Australian flag vessels.
The percentage of the total freight cost pllyable to Australian operators for the operation of both Australian flag and chartered bulk ships and tramp ships is also shown in the accompanying table.
FREIGHT COST PAYABLE ON AUSTRALIAN BULK EXPORTS

Total freight cost payable

Proportion of total freight cost payable to
Australian operators

Bulk Tramp

Ships

Ships

Bulk Ships

Tramp Ships

1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78
1978-79 1979-80

$m

$m percent per cent

1070

8

1041

6

1233

7

1137

182

6

23

1221

201

10

24

1774

296

9

15

(3) None.
Elder Smith Goldsbrough Mort Ltd
(Question No. 1165)
Mr Hurford asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 8 April 1981 :
(I) Is it a fact' that under the Foreign Takeovers Act a substantial interest covers a holding of 15 per cent or more of the issued shares of a company by a single interest or associated foreign interest, and that the acquisition of such an interest mu-st be notified to the Foreign Investment Review Board.
(2) Has the purchase of a 19.9 per cent interest in Elder Smith Goldsbrough Mort Ltd by clients of the foreign-owned merchant bank BT Australia been notified to the Board.
(3) Will the acquisiton be investigated to ascertain whether a breach of the Act has occurred.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member:s question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) Yes.

Export of Minerals Sands
(Question No. 1170)
Mr West asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(I) Has Moreton Island, Queen~land, been placed on the Register of the National Estate; if so, when was this done.
(2) Is he obliged under section 30 of the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975 to refuse all applications for exports of mineral sands from areas listed on the National Estate.

Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows;
(I) Moreton Island was proposed for listing in the Register of the National Estate in the Commonwealth Gazette G2 of 17 January 1978. Objections were received to this listing and

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 477

following evaluation of these objections the Commission has made a decision to enter on the Register the whole of Moreton Island with the exception of the gazetted townships of Bulwer, Cowan Cowan, Tangalooma and Kooringal.
Moreton Island with the exc~ptiOh of these gazetted townships wiIl be officially advertised for entry in the Register in the early part of the 1981-82 financial year.
By virtue of section 31 of the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, the place, having been listed, has the same protection as it would have if it was on the Register.
(2) No. Neither I, as Minister, nor the Australian Heritage Commission, has the power to refuse any such application under Section 30 of the Australian Heritage Commission Act.
In respect of the export of mineral sands from Moreton Island Section 30 of the Act would require that Commonwealth Ministers or Authorities responsible for approving licenses for the export of mineral sands from Moreton Island shall not take any action that adversley affects the national estate value of the parts of Moreton Island proposed for the Regi~ter of the National Estate, uniess they are satisfied there is no feasible or prudent alternative, unless all reasonable measures are taken to minimise the adverse effect and un bless the Australian Heritage Commission is informed of the proposed action and given time to comment.
Subsidy of Air Travel for Inland Queensland Routes
(Question No. 1192)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to reports in the Press of a call by the Queensland Young Nationals for Commonwealth Government subsidy of air travel for inland Queensland routes; if so, wiIl he introduce this direct subsidy.
(2) Did the President of the Young Nationals call for National Party Members to adopt an aggressive stance on this issue; if so, will he reply aggressively to the President of the Young Nationals.
(3) Did the President of the YoungNationals call for a subsidy to rectify the anomaly where inland travellers were paying a 45 cent loading above that charged.on jet routes.
(4) Is an economy fare for air travel from Brisbane to Rockhampton, Queenslan~, approximately $35 less than for travel of an equivalent distance between Brisbane and Emerald, Queensland; if so, what is the reason for this apparent anomaly.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (3) The Government is aware of the keen interest of certain communities in inland Queensland air services. The new Airlines Agreement provides for an orderly withdrawal from uneconomic services it it is established that over a six month period the airline is not able to fully recover costs. In that event the airline will be able to give three months notice of termination. The new Agreement ensures stability 9f service by providing for notice of withdrawal and consultations on replacement operators. In circumstances where an airline serves notice that it proposes to withdraw from a route the Governments would have at least 3 months to consider whether arrangements to maintain the service, through a direct subsidy, were appropriate.
(4) The one-way economy fare. between Brisbane and Emerald (653 km) is $1 10.30 on a BPA Metroliner aircraft. The one-way economy fare between Brisbane and Rockhampton (530 km) is $75.60 on a TAAjet aircraft. The fare differential

is a consequence of different aircraft operators using different aircraft types and the distances involved.
Petrol Subsidy
(Question No. 1193)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 8 April 1981 :
(I) What are the guidelines which apply to the payment of a petrol subsidy to consumer or traders in rural areas.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to claims that some oil companies are encouraging private carriers, or jobbers, to attract this subsidy by transporting fuel beyond city limits by claiming a rural destination, then returning to sell their supplies to city service station operators at lowered prices.
(3) Is he able to say whether any of the following trucking companies operate in such a way: (a) Tartan Transport (Moorooka), (b) Petroleum Products Pty Ltd (Moorooka), (c) Centenary Fuel Supplies (Jindalee), (d) Professional Products P/L (Eight Mile Plains), (e) Independent Fuel Supplies (Rocklea), (f) Teraco (Coopers Plains), (g) South Coast Oils Pty Ltd (Labrador), (h) Gold Coast Oils Pty Ltd (South Tweed Heads) and (j) Pottsville Trucking (Pottsville) .
(4) What consequences arise from this practice in relation to (a) safety standards governing the syphoning of fuel from underground tanks and (b) the purity and grade of petrol sold to consumers.
(5) Will he consult with his colleagues on the Australian Transport Advisory Council to determine a concerted approach to end this practice.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Under the provisions of the Petroleum Products Subsidy Scheme, which is administered by the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs, oil companies and fuel distributors sell fuel to consumers or traders in rural areas at a price that includes no more than 0.44 cents per litre of the delivery cost of the fuel to the customer. Where the transport costs exceed 0.44 cents per litre. the oil company or fuel distributor claims the remainder from the Government in accordance with the Scheme.
(2) and (3) My attention has recently been drawn to nonspecific allegations of this nature. In relation to these the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs has advised that it has found no evidence that these practices occur. I am advised by that Department that all subsidy claims relating to Queensland are checked by the Customs officers in Brisbane. During these examinations the possibility of false invoicing is one of the factors which is checked.
(4) Regulation of fuel handling from underground tanks and fuel quality is primarily the responsibility of Stare and Territory Governments.
(5) As these issues are not generally the responsibility of transport authorities it is not appropriate to refer them to the Australian Transport Advisory Council.
Uranium Mining
(Question No. 1198)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to Dr Helen Caldicott's account of her visit to Mary Kathleen Mine in 1976 in her book Nuclear madness (Jacaranda Press, 1979),

478 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

in particular to claims that she found no monitoring of radiation levels between the mine face and the urine of miners despite clouds of dust enveloping workers.
(2) Can he say whether safety standards laid down before 1976 by the Depllrtment of Health were ignored by uranium mining authorities in (a) 1976 and (b) later years.
(3) Will the Minister table copies or provide displays in the Parliamentary Library of any information drawn to the attention of uranium workers in Australia in (a) 1976 and (b) 1980.
Mr Anthony-,-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The honourable'member will no doubt recall that when he was Minister for Health in 1975, the Code of Practice on Radiatiol1 Protection in the Mining and Milling of Radioactive Ores (1975) was drawn up by his Department. The draft code was distributed to 94 relevant bodies including mining companies, the ACTU, State Trades and Labour Councils and relevant trade unions prior to finalisation. The final code was released in 1976. An improved version of the Code was approvc;d under the Environment Protection (Nuclear Codes) Act as the Code of Practice on Radiation Protection in the Mining and Milling of Radioactive Ores (1980) on 10September 1980 and is lIvailable for incorporation into State and Northern Territory legislation as' required. The Mary Kathleen mine in Queensland was the only Australian uranium mine inoperation in 1976. Responsibility for the regulation and control of all mining operations including the enforcement of radiation protection standards in Queensland, at that time: and now, rests with the State Government. I understand that all uranium mines in Australia which have received Commonwealth Government development approval as well as Mary Kathleen comply with the standards set out in the Code.
0) The Code of Practice on Radiation Protection in the
Mining and Milling of Radioactive Ores (1980) was approved under the Environment Protection (Nuclear Codes) Act 1978 and laid before both Houses of Parliament. A copy is available in the Parliamentary Library. Other relevant information would be available from the responsible State or Northern Territory authority.
Ex:penditure Commitments: Department of Communications
(Question No. 1209)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What specific commitl)1ents for expenditure, excluding normal rc;curring costs of running the Department such as salaries and administrative costs, dQes his Department have for (a) 1980-~1 and (b) 1981-82.
(2) What sum is involved in each commitment and what is the purpose of the commitment.
. (3) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that when a similar question was answered by a number of Ministers in 1976, it was claimed that obtaining the information would inV01Vfi collectiori of detailed information from a diversity of records and sources, and would therefore require unjustifiable use of staff resources.
(4) Has the development of forward estimates in his Department now been advanced to a stage where a similar reply is no longer Y\llid.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Minister for Finance to Question No. 1216 (Weekly Hansard-IOJune 1981).
Expenditure Commitments: Attorney-General's Department
(Question No. 1218)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What specific commitments for expenditure, excluding normal recurring costs of running the Department such as salaries and administrative costs, does the Attorney-General's Department have for (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
(2) What sum is involved in each commitment and what is the purpose of the commitment.
(3) Has the Attorney-General's attention been drawn to the fact that when a similar question was answered by a number of Ministers in 1976, it was claimed that obtaining the information would involve collection of detailed information from a diversity of records and sources, and would therefore require unjustifiable use of staff resources.
(4) Has the development of forward estimates in the Attorney-General's Department now been advanced to a stage where a similar reply is no longer valid.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Minister for Finance to Question No. 1216 on 10 June 1981. (Weekly Hansard).
Expenditure Commitments: Department of Transport
(Question No. 1220)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) What specific commitments for expenditure, excluding normal recurring costs of running the Department such as salarieS and administrative costs, does his Department have for (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
(2) What sum is involved in each commitment and what is the purpose of the commitment.
(3) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that when a similar question was answered by a number of Ministers in 1976, it was claimed that obtaining the information would involve collection of detailed information from a diversity of records and sources, and would therefore require unjustifiable use of staff resources.
(4) Has the development of forward estimates in his Department now been advanced to a stage where a similar reply is no longer valid.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (4) I am aware that a similar question was asked by the honourable member in 1976, and that the honourable member was informed that the information requested could not be supplied because the task would have required a major commitment of staff resources which could not be justified in terms of the time and expense involved.
The development of the Forward Estimates has advanced since 1976 but these estimates are not designed to provide information of the nature requested by the honourable member.

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 479

I advise that extraction of that detailed information from a diversity of records and sources would still involve substantial and unjustifiable expense in time and resources..! note that the Minister for Finance replied on similar lines in response to
Question No. 1216.

Expenditure Commitments: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 1231)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What specific commitments for expenditure, excluding normal recurring costs of running the Department such as salaries and administrative costs, does his Department have for (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
(2) What sum is involved in each commitment and what is the purpose of the commitment.
(3) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that when a similar question was answered by a number of Ministers in 1976, it was claimed that obtaining tlle information would involve collection of detailed information from a diversity of records and sources, and would therefore require unjustifiable use of staff resources.
(4) Has the development of forward estimates in his Department now been advanced to a stage where a similar reply is no longer valid.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (4) I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Minister for Finance to House of Representatives Question on Notice No. 1216, Weekly Hansard, 10 June 1981.

Annual Reports and Other Publications: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs

(Question No. 1243)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 4 April
1981 :

(I) What annual reports are produced by his Department and authorities under his aegis.

(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.

(3) Are other regular publications issued by his Depart-
ment and these authorities; if so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of each.

Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Department of Employment and Youth Affairs Annual Report 1979-80 ($7,551.00). National Training Council
Annual Report 1979 ($1,971.00). 5th Annual Report of the
National Committee on Discrimination in Employment and Occupation ($2,774.00). Commonwealth Employment Service-Report of the National Director 1978-79 (Since in-
corporated in the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs Annual Report). ($3,344.00).

(2) Total $15,640.00

(3) Yes (see below)

(a) Publications and production costs for each in 1979-80

were as follows:

.

Employment Prospects by Industry and Occupation
Workbook for Women Facts on Women at Work in Australia 1978
Youth Affairs Newsletter
Apprenticeship Statistics Essential Features of the Apprenticeship
System Training Talkback
Careers Guide for Victoria Careers Guide for Tasmania
Job Guide for Queensland Job Guide for South Australia
Western Australia Job Guide Employment and Manpower Services
Guide . . . . . . .
Aboriginal Employment Newsletter Women and Work Newsletter

1,913.dO 5,828.00 1,600.00 6,800.00 1,590.00
5,204.00 12,000.00 33,058.00 15,935.00 15,453.00 24,568.00 13,706.00
11,967.00 n.a.* n.a.*

- These publications were produced 'in-house', therefore detailed figures on costs are not available.

(b) The distribution cost of each publication is not recorded separately under the Freight and Cartage Item and is, therefore, not readily available.

Annual Reports and Other Publications: Department of Education

(Question No. 1248)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(I) What annual reports are produced by his Department and authorities under his aegies.

(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80. .

(3) Are other regular publications issued by his Department and these authorities; if so, what are they,. and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribljtion of each.

Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) and (2) The following annual reports were produced in 1979-80.

'. Production cost

Department of Education Annual Report 1979
Report on the Operation of the Student Assistance Act in 1978 . . . . . . . .
Commonwealth Teaching Service-Anriual Report 1979 . . . . . . . . . .
Curriculum Development Centre An'riual Report 1979/80 . . . . . . . . . . .
Commonwealth Schools Commission Aimual Report 1980 . . . . . .
Independent Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1969-Report 1979 . . . . . .
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1977Report 1978 . . . . . . . . .
Education Research and Development Committee-Annual Report 1979-80
Commonwealth Tertiary Educatiqn Commission-Report for 1979-81 Triennium
Australian Maritime College-Report 1979
ACT Schools Authority-Annual Report Canberra College of Advanced Education Annual
Report 1979 . . . . . .

$ 4,570
661 1,042
3,003
7,317
362
4,899
2,920
3,120 2,570 1,700
2,673

480 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

* Production
cost

Australian National UniversitY-Annual Report 1979 . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

$ 6,874

(3) (a) (b) A num'ber of publications are produced on a regular basis:

Production cost
1979-80

Department of Education

Hemisphere

,,,,,

Education News

..,,,

Directory of Higher Education Courses

Australian Education Directory

Term and Semester Dates

Australian National Commission for UNESCO

Report 1977-1978 biennium

Australian Council for Awards in Advanced

EducationYearbook

OECD Activities in Education

UNESCO Review

Directory of Education Research and

Researchers . . . . . . . . .

Curriculum Development Centre-Triennial

Program 1979-80

.....

Canberra College of Advanced Education-

Faculty Handbook 1980

Office of ACT further Education

Canberra TAFE College Handbook

~ruce T AFE College Handbook

Canberra School of Art Handbook

Canberra School of Music Handbook

T AFEC Newsletters . . . . .

Selected T AFE Statistics

Australian National University-Faculty

Handbook 1980 . . . . . . . . .

Australian National University-Calendar

1980 . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Australian National University-Information

for Prospective Students 1981 . . . . .

Australian National University-Masters

Booklet 1981

........ .

Australian National University-Ph.D. Pam-

phlets 1981 . . . . . . . . . . .

Australian National University-Student

, Directory 1981 . . . . . . . . . .

Australian Maritime College-Hamlbook 1980

ACT Schools Authority

Education Capital . . . . .

Curriculum Development Journal

$
179,805 61,957 14,309
3,604 1,524
2,728
8,178 2,157 3,381
5,997
2,705
17,100
5,923 6,419 1,035
NIL 1,208 1,539
35,637
7,053
8,349
900
960
1,286 3,087
2,000 1,500

- Distribution costs are not readily available.
Annual Reports and Other Publications: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 1251)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(I) What annual reports are produced by his Department and authorities under his aegis.
(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.

(3) Are other regular publications issued by his Department and these authorities; if so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of each.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Annual Reports are produced by the Department, the Australian Electoral Office, the Australian Federal Police', the C~mmonwealth Accommodation and Catering Service Ltd, the Commonwealth Fire Board, the British Phosphate Commission and the Christmas Island Phosphate Commission.
(2) $6,667.
(3) Yes; details are as follows:

Production cost
1979-80

Election Statistics Australian Federal Police
Platypus Remuneration Tribunal Review
Commonwealth Grants Commission Reports Special Assistance for States Special Assistance for Northern Territory
Australia Handbook Australia in Brief Art Calendar Australia Now Commonwealth Government Directory
Service Guide . . . . . Commonwealth Record Ministerial Documents Service Ministerial Staff Directory Cumulative List of Government Publications Commonwealth Publications: Official List Monthly Catalogue of publications Placed on Sale Commonwealth of Australia Gazette
General Issues . . Public Service Issues Special Issues Periodic Issues
Index Issues

$
t
6,500 2,980
8,028 987
26,650 24,560 32,098 52,601 21,500 33,500 150,600 54,100
1,660 3,300 15,300 30,600
330,100 694,300
62,400 143,600
5,600

Under the present accounting arrangements it would be impractical to extract the distribution costs as significant costs would be incurred and staff diverted from higher priority tasks.
- not produced in 1979-80.
t The last edition was produced in respect of the 1977 elec-
tions at a cost of $19,600 and was sold through the Australian Government Publishing Service Bookshops.

Employment of Private Consultants: Department of Industry and Commerce
(Question No. 1260)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 9 April 1981.
Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by his Department in 1979-80; if so, (a) how many were employed (b) who were they (c) for what purpose was each employed and (d) what payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firm.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 481

(a) 44. (b), (c) and (d)

Consultant

Task

Payment 1979-80

Dr C. R. Weston

........ .

Australian Council for the Rehabilitation of the

Disabled

Film Australia

University of New England

MrS. Marks

..

Maroong Finance Proprietary Limited

Mr F. Pearce

Mr D. Benjamin

MrS. Thom

Satun Management Services

Implementation and Management Group Pro-

prietary Limited

Institute of Industrial Economics

Professor K. George

Canberra Liaison Proprietary Limited

Cruickshank Management Resources

W. Wrennall

Depner Tregoe A'asia Proprietary Limited

W. D. Scott-Inbucon Proprietary Limited

Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology

Queensland University . . . . .

D. McCulloch . . . . . . . .

Canberra Liaison Proprietary Limited

U nisearch Limited

W. D.Scott

McPhersons Research and Development Pro-

prietary Limited

Institute of Industrial Economics of Newcastle

University

Victorian Chamber of Manufactures

Queensland University

Permanent Part-time Work Group

J. Russell . . . . . . . .

W. Kasper

.... .

Economic Research Unit Proprietary Limited

Professor H. Rydall

A.Boulton

E. Synnot

Y. Roberts

W. Mann & B. Walsh

Economic Research Unit Proprietary Limited

Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology-Dr

Leigh-Jones & L. N. Jackson

DrG. Dixon . . . . . . . . . . . .

Professor J. Ronayne . . . . . . . . .

P .A. Consultancy Services Proprietary Limited

International Public Relations

T.Q. Consultants

Study in economic significance of tourism Pilot study on accommodation guide for disabled persons

Research for production of small business training film

Production of Small Business Profiles

Production scripts for small business training package

Production scripts for small business training package

Production scripts for small business training package

Production scripts for small business training package

Production scripts for small business training package

Production scripts for small business training package

Small firm survey of Australian companies with direct invest-

ment overseas . . . . . . . .

Report on profitability of small firms

Visiting Fellow to Bureau ofindustry Economics

Public Relations . . . . . . . .

Establish Labour Standard at G.A.F.

Industrial Engineering Training Seminar

..

Training Program, Problem Solving and Decision Making at

Ammunition Factory, Footscray

Participative Work Program at G.A.F.

Research into Technological Change in Australia

Research into Technological Change in Australia

Research into Technological Change in Australia

Research into Technological Change in Australia

Research into Technological Change in Australia

Research into Technological Change in Australia

Research into Technological Change in Australia

Research into Technological Change in Australia

Research into Technological Change in Australia Research into Technological Change in Australia Research into Technological Change in Australia
Research into Technological Change in Australia Research into Technological Change in Australia Research into Technological Change in Australia
Research into Technological Change in Australia Research into Technological Change in Australia Research into Technological Change in Australia
Research into Technological Change in Australia Research into Technological Change in Australia
Research into Technological Change in Australia Research into Technological Change in Australia

Research into Technological Change in Australia Research into Technological Change in Australia
Project AustraliaResearch and Development Project Australia-Public Relations
Project Australia-Evaluation Study

$ 8,000.00 16,400.00
15,900.00 16,500.00
400.00 200.00 200.00 200.00 200.00 400.00
5,820.00 1,080.00 1,219.00 26,000.00 21,080.00
850.00
28,700'.00 179,500.00 35,179.00 13,000.00
300.00 11,750.00 7,170.00 21,947.00 14,980.00
13,742.00
6,105.00 6,737.00 17,550.00 6,150.00 3,220.00 12,600.00 3,220.00 5,700.00 9,479.00 5,410.00 7,700.00 8,750.00
700.00
1,000.00 1,000.00 36,301.00 81,600.00 34,450.00

Employment of Private Consultants: Department Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable

of Communications

member's question is as follows:

(Question No. 1261)
Mr Dungey asked the Minister for Communi- . cations, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by his Department in 1979-80, if so (a) how many were employed, (b) who were they, (c) for what purpose was each employed and (d) what payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firm.

(1) The Department employed two consultancy firms during 1979-80.
Mr A. L. Langford of the Amalgamated Wireless Australasia (AWA) Radio Network was engaged as a consultant to advise on the contractual arrangements between Telecom and the then Postal and Telecommunications Department, for the financial and technical supervision and control of construction, maintenance and operation of the National Broadcasting Network-$6,239.00.
Comsat (USA) were engaged to provide advice in respect of the National Communications Satellite System, on

482 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

system design, content of the request for tender and an overall review of the tender documentation prior to its release on 30 October 1980~$85,OOO.00.
Employment of Private Consultants: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 1262)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by the Department of National Development and Energy in 1979-80; if so, (a) how many were employed, (/1) who were they, (c) for what purpose was each employed and (d) what payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firm.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energyhas provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Yes.
(a) 19.

(b)
R. G. Chapman MacDonald, Wagner and Priddle Dr T. Hopwood In view Pty Ltd Professor R. F. Merev South Australian Gas Company (i) Professor T. A. McMahon (ii) Dr R. G. Mein (iii) Dr F. C. Bell W. S. Atkins and Associates Pty Ltd MacDonald, Wagner and Priddle
OrO. Burger
OrO. Calame Ms D. Lammerts Van Beuren DrA.A.Opik

(c)
Enquire into and report on viability of the Northern Territory Electricity Commission. . . . . . . . . . . . . . Research minimum economic reservoir size. . . . . . . Present six day lecture course entitled "The Geological Setting of Ore Deposits". . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Determine the potential use of liquid petroleum gas as an automotive fuel. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Interpret crustal structures in south-east Australia. Produce training/advisory manuals on the conservation of energy in Australia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Review and report on viability and options under the representative basins program.
Study and report on the feasibility of fuel ethanol production from sugar or fodder beet in Tasmania. . . . . . . . . Provide structural and mechanical engineering advice and cost estimates of the various alternative proposals for modifying the Lunar Laser Ranger telescope. . . . . . . . . . . . Translate scientific German language from last century into English as part of the study of palaeol1tologicalliterature on the Irian Jaya region. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Provide information and analysis of data on studies of earth rotation including polar motion. . . . . . . . . . . . Provide on analysis of properties from a sample set of water catchment areas for use in representative basins project. (i) Produce manuscript on "Middle Cambrian Agnastids~ Systematics and Biostratigraphy". . . . . . . . . . (ii) Produce manuscript on "The Dolichometopid Tritobites of Queensland, Northern Territory and New South Wales.

(d) $
11,540.00 27,888.52
1,950.00 29,017.60
540.00 10,038.00 (i) 9,702.00 (ii) 7,275.00 (iii) 4,782.00 30,740.00
3,132.00
823.50 478.75 1,126.00 3,500.00 2,500.00

Employment of Private Consultants: Department of Industrial Relations
(Question No. 1266)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

Employment of Private Consultants: Department of Transport
(Question No. 1272)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by his Department in 1979-80; if so, (a) how many were employed, (b) who are they, (c) for what purpose was each employed and (d) what payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firm.

(I) Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by his Department in 1979-80; if so, (a) how many were employed, (b) who were they, (c) for what purpose was each employed and (d) what payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firm.

Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable

member's question is as follows:

member's question is as follows:

There were no consultants or consultancy firms employed

(I) My Department engaged the services of a number of

by my department in 1979-80.

private consultants during 1979-80, as detailed below:

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 483

Consultant

Description of ta'sk

Contract value

Payments
made during financial
year
1979-80

Dr P. Swan, ANU

Long Distance Road Haulage Study

Dr Glen Withers, Macquarie University

Alternative Third Party Insurance Schemes

Dr N. Daly

Control of Photo-Chemical Pollution (Revision of Paper)

Nicholas Clark & Associates ProReview and Development-Paper on Oil Econ-

priety Limited

omics

Dr Alan Martina, ANU

Assist in preparation of Paper on Pricing Policies for Transport Systems

Nicholas Clark & Associates ProAssist with Survey on Prices of Duty Free

prietary Limited

Goods

Stanwic, Davies, Bailey & Carter

Assist Study of Third Party Insurance

W. D. Scott & Co. Proprietary Major Airport Needs of Sydney Study Limited

Dr. J. Louviere-Implementation Assist with Analysis of International Air Travel and Management Group

Prof. M. Beesley

Economic Administration Discussions

Hassell & Associates

Beef Cattle Transport Study

Dr Keith Trace, Monash University

Preparation of background paper on Overseas Shipping of Australian Agricultural Products

Dr P. D. Cassidy, Brisbane College Preparation of background paper on Overseas

of Advanced Education

Shipping of Australian Agricultural Products

MrG. Unkles -

Assist with Organisation of National Seminar on Transportation of Dangerous Goods

Elrail Consultants Proprietary Sydney-Melbourne Railway Electrification

Limited

Study

Hughes, Trueman & Ludlow

Review of Draft Regulations-Motor Vehicles

Nicholas Clark & Associates

Ticket Data Coding

Implementation & Management Assist-Study of Sea Passenger Service of Tas-

Group

mania and Mainland

N. F. Clark Proprietary Limited

Assist-Study of Sea Passenger Service of Tasmania and Mainland

The Flinders University of South Produce a report and recommendations on the

Australia

location of tide gauges in Torres Strait

University of Melbourne

Assess levels of motorcycle rider skills in accord-
ance with recommendations of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Road Safety at paras 126 & 131 of its report
on Motorcycle & Bicycle Safety

University of Melbourne

. Provide comprehensive review of problems of braking, stability and handling in motorcycle
accidents; identify priority areas for research

Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology

Investigate crash kinematics and dynamics induced by various designs of Bull-Bars in
vehicle/pedestrian collisions to provide information on which design standards for BullBars can be based; & Assess need to restrict
fitment of Bull-Bars to some passenger cars

Em Tech Associates P/L

Supply of specialist emission testing staff and equipment to assist DoT and N.S.W. Stille
Pollution Control Commission in survey of vehicle emissions

University of Queensland

Research, analyse and advise on signal propagation of Omega facility

$ 990.00
693.00

$ 990.00
693.00

592.32

592.32

5,000.00

5,000.00

225.00

225.00

329.00

329.00

1,300.00 4,944.00

1,000.00 4,944.00

950.00

950.00

427.90 25,000.00
800.00

427.90 25,000.00
800.00

800.00

800.00

5,682.00

5,862.00

349,282.00

322,641.23

19,700.00 945.00
3,800.00

875.60 945.00 3,800.00

960.00

960.00

4,000.00

4,000.00

36,155.00 31,296.00

49,540.00 43,934.00 20,725.00 20,325.00

80,760.63 27,502.80

15,000.00

6,888.61

484 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Consultant

Description of task

Alan M. Voorhees & Partners P/L
Wilbur Smith & Associates
R. Travers Morgan P/L
P.G. Pak-Poy & Associates (SA)
Ministry for Police & Emergency Services, Vic.
P.G. Pak-Poy & Associates, Vic.
P.G. Pak-Poy & Associates, Vic.
Commonwealth Aircraft Corp Ltd
MrG.N.Rao

Preparation of creative suggestions and comments on proposed study strategy for identification of hazardous road locations
Preparation of creative suggestions and com-
ments on proposed study strategy for identification of hazardous road locations Preparation of creative suggestions and comments on proposed study strategy for iden-
tication of hazardous road locations
Preparation of creative suggestions and comments on proposed study strategy for identification of hazardous road locations
Drug screening of Drivers & Pedestrians killed in road accidents
Surface Traffic Study at Melbourne & Essendon Airports to relate traffic volumes to ve-
hicle types,loading and trip purpose
Surface Traffic Study at Melbourne & Essendon Airports to relate traffic volumes to vehicle types, loading and trip purpose
Assess the applicability of Boron Fibre Patching process in airframe structural repairs to civil
aircraft Modify an existing edit program (computer) for
crash injury data and provide a user manual

Contrac.t value

Payments
made during
financial
year 1979-80

$

$

1,200.00

1,200.00

1,200.00

1,200.00

1,200:00

1,200.00

1,200.00

1,200.00

32,553.00 12,000.00

8,000.00 12,000.00

20,000.00

Nil

10,000.00

Nil

920.00

920.00

Employment of Private Consultants: Department of Health
(Question No. 1273)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, UPQ!1JlotiQe, Q119 AQIilJ~8L
Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by his Department in 1979-80; if so, (a) how many were employed, (b) who were they, (c) for what purpose was each employed and (d) what payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firm.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes.
(a) I.
(b) Eric White Associates.
(c) To assist with the public relations aspects of the 'help yourself health promotion media trial in Adelaide, Canberra and Goulburn.
(d) $25,000.
Employment of Private Consultants: Department of Business and Consumer Affairs
(Question No. 1278)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by his Department in 1979-80; if so, (a) how many were employed, (b) who were they, (c) for what purpose was each employed and (d) what payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firm.

Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
During 1979-80 the Department of Business arid Consumer Affairs used the services of eight consultants/consultancy firms at a total cost of $8,066.
Cummins Diesel Sales and Service (Aust) Pty Ltd of Western Australia and Onan Auxiliary Power Unit Agency of Western Australia assisted in the conduct of a Customs Patrol Boat course at a_cost of $500 and $366 respectively.
ANACAPA Sciences Inc of the USA assisted in conducting a narcotics training course, the fee for the course was $2,917.
AWA (A'Asia) Ltd of NSW assisted in the training of a Nomad Observers Course for Radar equipment at a cost of $2,500.
Messrs E. Davis, E. Barbour and P. Hanford were-engaged for a Senior Management Conference at a total cost of$I,783.
Employment of Private Consultants: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 1283)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by his Department in 1979-80; ifso, (a) how many were employed, (b) who were they, (c) for what purpose was each employed and (d) what payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firm.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am advised by my Department:

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 485

(a ) Yes; three.
(b) (i) Mr D. F. Collins.
(ii) Mr H. G. Houstein.
(iii) Peat, Marwick, Mitchell Services.
(c) (i) To introduce a system of guaranteed land title to Norfolk Island to replace the old systems title.
(ii) To construct and establish an official and technically reliable index suitable for Christmas Island conditions, the purpose of which is to measure average movements in 'retail prices on the Island.
(iii) To undertake a feasibility' study of a National Sports Lottery.
(d) (i) In 1979-80 the total costs incurred for the Norfolk Island Torrens Title consultancy amounted to $4,670. Fees payable to the consultant, Mr D. F. Collins were $3,875 and other consultancy expenses, that is, fares, accommodation and incidentals were $795.
(ii) In 1979-80 the total costs incurred for the consumer price index study on Christmas Island amounted to $11,895. Fees payable to the consultant, Mr H. G. Houstein were $6,210 and other consultancy expen_ses, for example fares, accommodation and incidentals were $5,685.
(iii) In 1979-80 the total costs incurred for the Sports Lottery Feasibility Study amounted to $21,403. Fees payable to the consultancy firm Peat, Marwick, Mitchell Services were $18,644 and other consultancy expenses, for example travel, advertising and incidentals were $2,759.
Recruitment through Private Employment Agencies: Department of Communications
(Question No. 1287)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) Were any staff of his Department or statutory authorities under his aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) With the exception noted below, no staff of my Department or the statutory authorities within my portfolio were recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80.
The Overseas Telecommunications Commission recruited some computing staff through private employment agencies as follows with recruitment costs as indicated-

Positions
2 Computer Operators I Programmer I Programmer (Telecommunications) I Manager (Systems and Programming)

Cost
$ 2,266 1,387 1,872 2,536

Recruitment Through Private Employment Agencies: Department of the Treasury
(Question No. 1291
Mr Bungey asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Were any staff of his Department or statutory authorities under his aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I. The Reserve Bank of Australia used a private employment agency on one occasion in 1979-80 to recruit a security systems analyst. The fee charged was $2,962.50.
,2. The Australian Industry Development Corporation has advised that it recruited a small number of staff through private employment agencies in 1979-80. However, as the Corporation is a business enterprise operating in the competitive environment of the private sector, it would not be appropriate for commercial confidential details to be publicly divulged.
3. The Treasury, Australian Taxation Office, Australian Bureau of Statistics and the Commonwealth Banking Corporation did not engage private employment agencies in 1979-80.
Recruitment Through Private Employment Agencies: Department of Defence
(Question No. 1293)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Were any staff of his Department or statutory authorities under his aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) One staff member wasrecruited through a private employment agency in 1979-80.
(2) The position was a Typist Grade 2 and the cost involved was $570.18, that is, 6 per cent of the annual salary of a Typist Grade 2 at that time. This is the standard fee charged by the agency.
Recruitment Through Private Employment Agencies: Department of the Capital Terrihlry
(Question No. 1305)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981.
Were any staff of his Department or statutory authorities under his aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No staff employed in the Department of the Capital Territory were recruited throught private employment agencies in 1979-80. Some industrial staff are recruited through the Commonwealth Employment Service.
The A.C.T. Electricity Authority in [979-80 recruited one Steno-secretary, Grade 2 and one Steno-secretary, Grade I through private employment agencies. The cost was between $200 and $250 per person.
The Parliament House Construction Authority recruited its Executive Officer through a private agency in the same financial year at a cost of $11,500.
Female Officers and Employees: Department of Industry and Commerce
(Question No. 1338)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

486 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) How many female officers and employees are employed in his Department, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each Division are married.
(3) How many females were appointed or commenced employment in his Department during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer as provided by Mr Viner on behalf of the Prime Minister to Question No. 1336 appearing on page 3314 of the Hansard of 5 June 1981.
Female Officers and Employees: Department of the Treasury
(Question No. 1343)
Mr Bungey asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many female officers and employees are employed in his Department, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each Division are married.
(3) How many females were appointed or commenced employment in his Department during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (3) I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 1336 provided by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister. which appeared on page 3314 of the Hansard of 5 June 1981.
Female Officers and Employees: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs
(Question No. 1347)
MrBungey asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many female officers and employees are employed in his Department, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each Division are married.
(3) How many females were appointed or commenced employment in his Department during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.
Mr J. J. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister to Question No. 1336 on 5 June 1981 (Hansard, page 3314).
Female Officers and Employees: Department of Transport-
(Question No. 1350)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

(I) How many female officers and employees are employed in his Department, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each Division are married.
(3) How many females were appointed or commenced em' ployment in his Department during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister in Public Service matters to Question No. 1336 and printed in Hansard ~f 5 June 1981, page 3314.
Female Officers and Employees: Department of Health
(Question No. 1351)
Mr Bungey asked - the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many female officers and employees are employed in his Department, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each divi&ion are married.
(3) How many females were appointed or commenced employment in his Department during 1979-80 and how mariy of these were married.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Prime Minister to Question No. 1336 on 5 June 1981 (Hansard page 3314).
Female Officers and Employees: Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 1354)
Mr Bungey-asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many female officers and employees are employed in his Department, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each Division are married.
(3) How many females were appointed or commenced employment in his Department during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the response by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister to House of Representatives Question No. 1336 (Hansard, 5 June 1981, page 3314).
Female Officers and Employees: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 1361)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 487

(I) How many female officers and employees are employed in his D~partment, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.

(2) How many female officers or employees in each Division are married.

(3) How manY females were appointed or commenced em-

ployment in his Department during 1979-80 and how many of

these were married.

.

Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows: -

I refer the honourable member to the reply by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister to Q!Jestion No. 1336, Hansard. 5 June 1981 (page 3314).

Female Officers and Employees: Department of Business and Consumer Affairs

(Question No. 1356)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(I) How many female officers 'and employees are employed
in his Department, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.

(2) How many female officers or employees in each Div-

ision are married.

.

(3) How many females were appointed or commenced em-
ployment in his Department during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.

Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Prime Minister to question No. 1336. (Hansard 5 June 1981, page 3314).

Industrial Action: Department oflndustry and Commerce
(Question No. 1364)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industry and 'Commerce, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(I) How many officers or employees in his Department have been (a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions, in each of the last two years.

(2) How many man-hours were involved in these actions.

(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike; if so, on what occasions.

(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken

in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regu-

lations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what

occasions.

'

Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) (a) In the period April 1979 to March 1980 there were 44 occurrences of strike action involving a total of 9,386 officers and employees.

In the period April 1980 to March 1981 there were 46 occurrences of strike action involving a total of 2,142 officers and employees.

(b) In the period April 1979 to March 1980 764 staff engaged in go slow, work to regulations or restrictive work actions.

In the period April 1980 to March 1981 44 staff engaged in go slow, work to regulations or restrictive work actions.
(2) In the period April 1979 to March 1980 there were 147,788 man-hours lost due' to strike action. From April 1980 to March 1981 there were 30,376 man-hours lost due to strike action.
During the period April 1979 to March 1980 720 staff engaged in a work to regulations situation for one continuous period of 35.4 hours. During the period April 1979 to March 1981 44 technical staff have continued, over the full period, with a refusal to relinquish duties which management considers could be more efficiently performed by another employment category.
(3) No.
(4) No.
Note: The above information includes details in respect of the former Department of Productivity for the period April 1979 to November 1980. Information relating to the functions transferred to the Department of Industry and Commerce from the former Department of Productivity is not separately available, therefore the information provided may include details relating to staff who were transferred to other Departments upon abolition of the Department of Productivity.
Industrial Action: Department of Communications
(Question No. 1365)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many officers or employees in his Department have been (a) on strike aild (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions, in each of the last two years.
(2) How many manhours were involved in these actions.
(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strikes; if so, on what occasions.
(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken in respect of officers or employees on go-slow, work-toregulations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what occasions.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The number of officers who have been on strike over the last two years to date is 118. During the same period there have been a number of industrial actions involving some restrictive work actions. The impact of these actions have not warranted the maintenance of records [0 identify specific persons involved. Consequently, it is not possible to provide a meaningful response in terms sought.
(2) During the period in question a total of 1687, manhours were lost due to strike action or the stand down of staff.
(3) No payments were made to any of the officers for the periods in which they were engaged in strike action or were stood down.
(4) All disputes are handled in accordance with the Public Service Board guidelines and accepted industrial practice. None of the disputes in this Department have necessitated the actions suggested.

488 REPRESENTATIVES t 9 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Industrial Action: Department of Business and Consumer Affairs

(Question No. 1382)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

(I) How many officers or employees in his Department have been (a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to
regulations or other restrictive work actions, in each of the last
two years.

(2) How many manhours were involved in these actions.

(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strikes; if so, on what occasions.

(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken in respect of officers or employees on go-slow, work-to-
regulations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what
occasions.

Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

OnStrike-

(I) (a) I July 1979 to 30 June 1980 I July 1980 to date

3,362 1.922

(I) (b) Restrictive work action

I July 1979t030June 1980

18

I July 1980 to date

nil

(2)

I July 1979 to 30 June 1980

I July 1980 to date

14,059 hours.
5,112 hours.

(3) Yes. See answer to (4).

(4) 18 Officers were stood down without pay due to restrictive work action. These Officers were reimbursed follow-
ing direction from the Public Service Board.

This direction followed a successful appeal against the 'No Work as Directed' policy in the Supreme Court of New South Wales.

Industrial Action: Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No. (383)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) How many officers or employees in his Department have been (a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions in each of the last two years.
(2) How many manhours were involved in these actions.
(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike; if so, on what occasions.
(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what occasions.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) Officers or employees of this Department have been engaged in strike action on 14 occasions since April 1979. Many officers would have been engaged in more than one action but details of these members are not available. The total number of staff involved for the period, including this multiple counting, was 1783.

(b) 201.
(2) 53,490.22.
(3) No officer/employee was paid by the Commonwealth for any perioO whilst he/she was engaged in strike action.
(4) Yes, onone occasion 26 July 1979.
Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department of Defence
(Question No. 1397)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Have any officers and employees of his Department been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many.
(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment approved in each case.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2). Yes. From available records, sixty six (66) officers and employees have been granted permission to engage in outside employment as shown below.

Division
3rd 3rd 3rd
3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd
3rd
3rd
3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd
3rd
4th
4th

Salary Nature of outside employlevel ment

24.000 24,725 17.718
17,718 14,247 13,807 10,859 16,413 13,420 10,859 14,686 24,725 22,665 12,272 21,295 23,414
20,166
19,862
13,807 13,807 13,807 11,895 20,618 16,413 13,807 13,807 25.571 24,200
33,616
16,400
11,584

Tutor at Textile College
Lecturer in Electronics Lecturer in Business
Communications
Basketball Umpire
Home Sales Consultant Model Maker
Photographer Journalist
Waitress Bookmakers Clerk
Musician Teacher-Woodcarving
Tutor-Technical College Musician
Designer-Charter Boats Consultant Naval
Architect
Designer-Yachts & Small Craft
Radio Commentator (Football)
Barman
Insurance Sales Projectionist
Ceramics Sales Lecturer in Accountancy
Supermarket Assistant
Supermarket Assistant Attendant-Drive-in
Casual Musician
Lecturer-Lead lighting and Stained Glass
Technical Adviser to the Victorian Parliamentary Committee for Conservation
Lecturer-Adult Education Technical College
Artists Model

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 489

Division

Salary Nature of outside employlevel ment

Division

4th

10,880 Silk Screen Printer

4

4th

14,966 Teacher-Auto Engineering

4

4th

11,350 Teacher-Dressmaking

3

4th

9,310 Waitress

3

4th

9,861 Barmaid

4

4

4th

11,118 Barmaid

3

4th

8,949 Driveway Attendant

3

4th

11,826 Tutor

3

4th

10,854 Taxi Driver

3

3

4th

11,118 Waitress

4th

10,240 Carpenter

3

4th

9,629 Musician

3

3

4th

19,995 Consultant-Corrosion and Corrosion

3

Prevention

3

4th

15,922 Electrical Contracting

3

4th

13,084 Casual Cashier

3

4

4th

11,350 Ceramics Sales

3"

4th

11,350 Lawn mowing

4

4th

10,417 AmwaySales

3

4th

10,417 DogCatcher

4

3

4th

15,922 Keep-fit Instructor

3

4th

15,922 Actor-TV Ads

3

4th

15,922 TV Repairman

3

3

Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: 3 Department of Health

(Question No. 1403)

4

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, 4

upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

3

3

(I) Have any officers and employees of his Department been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if

4

so, how many.

3

3

(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was

4

the nature of outside employment approved in each case.

3

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

4 4

3

(I) Yes; fifty-three officers of the Department currently

have permission to engage in outside employment in accord3

ance with the procedures laid down by the Public Service Board.

3

(2)-

3

Salary Nature of outside employment

$ 13,669
13,669
18,879 28,671
9,798 13,816 23,194 27,428 32,228 13,230 13,807
15,546 22,917 15,546 15,546 19,862 15,922 15,546 13,669 29,800 12,000 24,500 11,350 19,862 17,266 19,862 )9,862 29,799 19,862 16,163 15,517
9,636 17,203 13,398 15,711 43,057 31,815 8,850 11,757 8,758 9,199 33,184
10,507 20,618 18,879 22,359

Checking and calibration of hearingaids
Checking and calibration of hearingaids
Football umpire Locum general practitioner Service station attendant Photographer Consultant Consultant Consultant Supermarket employee Correspondent to motorcycle
magazine. Barman Musician Diecast model distributor Bookmaker's clerk Lecturer Lecturer Theatre assistant Coroner Lecturer Commentator on country cricket Private audiology service Taxi-driver Lecturer Lecturer Lecturer Lecturer Lecturer Lecturer Lecturer Lecturer Lecturer Lecturer Lecturer Lecturer CoroniaI duties (pathology) Coronial duties (pathology) Taxi-driver Taxi-driver Taxi-driver -Cleaner After hours hospital out-patient
clinic Service statioriattendant Tutor Barman Bookmaker's clerk

490 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Division

Salary Nature of outside employment

Division

Salary Nature of employment

$

3

24,083 Group Leader, Health Promotion

Centre

3*

25,821 President of Chapter of Institute

of Internal Auditors

3

22,917 Dispensing Pharmacist

3

22,917 Dispensing Pharmacist

3

22,917 Dispensing Pharmacist

3

22,917 Dispensing Pharmacist

3

22,917 Lecturer

* No remuneration involved with these positions.
Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department of Education
(Question No. 1404)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) Have any officers and employees of his ,Department been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many?
(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of the outside employment approved in each case?
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) twenty-two officers currently have permission to engage in outside employment.
(2)

Division
3
3 3 3
4 3
3 3
3 3 3 3
3 3
3
3
3 4

Salary Nature of employment

$ 25,821
18,299 17,718 18,879
15,113 9,541 15,546
13,807 20,618
15,981 13,420 18,879 21,600
17,280 22,359
22,954
14,707
21,270 10,647

Part-time teacher, correspondence school
Tax agent Part-time tutor, WA
Part-time lecturer, technical college
Alderman, municipal council Barman
Steward, Adelaide Festival Theatre,
Band member
Teacher, SA Department of Education
Amway distributor Stand attendant, speedway park
-
Alderman, local council Part-time teacher, technical
college .
Lecturer, Weight Watchers' Part-time teacher, Migrant English Part-time teacher, Migrant
English Part-time teacher, technical
college Psychologist Fashion modelling

$

4

13,084 Usherette

3

17,338 Casual media work

3

20,735 Part-time tutor, CAE

Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No. 1409)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Have any officers and employees of his Department been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many.
(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment approved in each case.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes,20.
(2) Details pertaining to each are:

Division
4th 3rd 4th 4th 4th 4th 3rd 3rd 4th 3rd 4th 3rd
3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd 3rd

Salary range
$ 11,584-12,061 19,009-20,974 16,328-17,203 11,653-12,632
9,152-9,788 11,653-12,632 14,247-15,546 25,156-26,706 11,584-12,061 14,247-15,546 11,444-12,007 21,905-24,200
22,359-24,083 17,718-18,879 12,400-13,084 14,247-15,546 14,247-15,546 17,718-18,879 17,718-18,879 15,981-17,280

Nature of duties
Drive hire-car Forestry consultant Author of magazine articles Security Officer Cleaning duties Payroll guard Driveway attendant Handicrafts for sale' Drive taxi Operate as Naturopath ~ell cosmetics on party basis Supply and sell garden , preparation Programming Lecturing Cashier duties Assistant in clerical capacity Member of band Cashier/receptionist duties Management clerical duties Clerical assistance

Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of Industry and Commerce

(Question No. 1416)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) What was the ti) estimated and (b) actual expendi-
ture on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by his Department in 1979-80.

(2) What sum wa,s spent in)979-80 I)y his Department

within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect

o"(a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c)

officers of his Department, other Commonwealth and State

Departments, or representatives of Comnionwealth or State

statutoryauthoritie,s.

'

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 491

(3) What officers in his Department are permitied to authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by his Department occur outside Australia during this period, if so, what sum was expended.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The' answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member's attention to the answer provided by the Prime Minister on page 3315 of the Hansard of 5 June 198 I.
Further information relating to expenditure on official entertainment, incurred by my Department is as follows:
No expenditure was incurred on official entertainment at Commonwealth sponsored international conferences in Australia in 1979-80.
Expenditure incurred on official entertainment outside Australia in 1979-80 amounted to $4,889.

(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by his Department within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c) officers of his Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State statutory authorities.
(3) What officers in his Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by his Department occur outside Australia during this period; if so, what sum was expended.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer given on 5 June 1981 by the Prime Minister to House of Representatives Question No. 1414.

Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of the Treasury

My Department incurred no expenditure on official enter-
! tainment for a Commonwealth sponsored international con- . ference in Australia in 1979-80.

(Question No, 1421)
Mr Bungey asked the Treasurer upon notice on 9 April 1981:
(I) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by his Department in 1979-80.
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by his department within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c) officers of his Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State statutory authorities.
(3) What officers in his Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by his Department occur outside Australia during this period; if so, what sum was expended.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (3) I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Prime Minister to Question No. 1414 (Hansard, page 331 5 of 5 June 1981).
(4) I am informed that expenditure by my Department on offiCiat entertainment .and hospitality outside Australia in 1979-80 totalled $3,080.33.
Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs
(Question No, 1425)

Expenditure on official entertainment outside Australia incurred by my Department amounted to $3,444.05 in 1979-80.
Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of Transport
(Question No. 1428)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by his Department in 1979-80.
. (2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by his Department . within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect
of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c) officers of his Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments or representatives of Commonwealth or State statutory authorities.
(3) What officers in his Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by his Department occur outside Australia during this period; if so, what sum was expended.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Prime Minister to Question No. 1414 and printed in Hansard on 5 June 1981, page 3315.
(4) No expenditure on offical entertainment outside Australia was incurred by my Department in 1979:80.

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of Health
(Question No. 1429)

(1) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expendi-

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health,

ture on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by his Department in 1979-80.

upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

492 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure
on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by his Department in 1979-80.

(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by his Department

within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect

of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c)

officers of his Department, other Commonwealth and State,

Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State

statutory authorities.

'

(4) An amount of $4,920 was advanced to officers of my Department and bodies within my portfolio in 1979-80 for the purpose of extending and/or reciprocating entertainment and hospitality during the course Of official visits overseas.
Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of Housing and Construction
(Question No. 1438)

(3) What officers in his Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by his Department occur outside Australia during this period; if so, what sum was expended.
Mr MacKellar-The Minister for Health has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) to (4) I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Prime Minister to Question No. 1414 on 5 June 1981 (Hansard, page 3315).
My Department did not sponsor any international conferences in Australia in 1979-80. Expenditure on official entertainment outside Australia incurred by my Department amounted to $922.97 in 1979-80.

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by his Department in 1979-80.
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by his Department within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c) officers of his Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State statutory authorities.
(3) What officers in his Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by his Department occur outside Australia during this period; if so, what sum was expended.

Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 1433)

Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

(I) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by his Department in 1979-80.

(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by his Department

within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect

of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c)

officers of his Department, other Commonwealth and State

Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State

statutory authorities.

.

(3) What officers in his Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.

(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by his Department occur outside Australia during this period; if
so, what sum was expended.

Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (3) I refer the honourable member to an answer provided by the Prime Minister on 5 June (Hansard, House of Representatives, page 3315) on departmental expenditure on official entertainment within Australia. My Department did not incur any expenditure on official entertainment at a Commonwealth sponsored international conference in Australia during 1979-80; other such expenditure incurred in Australia in this period is contained in the amount of $104,148 funded from the appropriations of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet.

(I) to (4) See the answer provided by the Prime Minister to Question No. 1414, which appeared in Hansard of 5 June 1981,page3315.
No expenditure on official entertainment in relation to Commonwealth sponsored international conferences in Australia was incurred by the Department of Housing and Construction in 1979-80.
Expenditure on official entertainment outside Australia incurred by the Department amounted to $892 in 1979-80.
Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 1439)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by his Department in 1979-80.
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by his Department within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c) officers of his Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State statutory authorities.

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 493

(3) What officers in his Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.
. (4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by hIs Department occur outside Australia during this period; if so, what sum was expended.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (4) I refer the honourable member to the Prime Minister's reply to Question No. 1414, which appeared in Hansardof51une 1981,page 3315.
There was no expenditure by my Department in 1979-80 on official entertainment in relation to Commonwealth sponsored international conferences in Australia. '
Expenditure on official entertainment outside Australia incurred by my Department amounted to $198.23 in 1979-80.

Home Telephone Rentals: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 1543)
Mr Dungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully or (b) partially paid by his Department.
(2) What was the cost to his Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Overseas Travel: Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No. 1461)
Mr Dungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many officers and employees of his Department travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances, et cetera.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Four officers of the Canberra Development Board..
(2) $39,274.81.

(I) (a) One officer of the Department (the Permanent Head), has his home telephone rental and charges for official calls paid by the Department. The Permanent Head, however, pays for private calls made from his home telephone. This arrangement is in accordance with an approval given by the then Treasurer in 1972, which was advised to all Departments on 26 May 1972,
(b) Twenty seven officers of the Department have their home telephone rental and/or charges partially paid by the Department in accordance with Department of Finance Directions relating to official telephones in private residences.
(2) The cost to the Department of this expenditure in 1979-80 was $4,404.74.
Vehicle Conversion to LPG Usage: Departmel!t ofIndustry and Commerce
(Question No. 1546)

Overseas Travel: Department of Housing and Construction
(Question No. 1464)
Mr Dungey asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) How many officers and employees of his Department travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.

Mr Dungey asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many (a) cars (b) commercial vehicles and (c) trucks were being operated by his Department, excluding vehicles supplied by the Department of Administrative Services, as at 30 June 1980.
(2) How many of these vehicles had been (a) converted to LPG usage and (b) purchased already equipped for LPG usage.

(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares

accommodation, allowances, et cetera.

'

(3) Have plans been made to increase use of LPG in vehicles operated by his Department; if so, what are the
details.

Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honour-

member's question is as follows:

able member's questions is as follows:

(I) 81 officers and employees of the Department of Housing and Construction travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.

(I) (a) 14; (b) Nil; (c) 4. (2) (a) Nil; (b) Nil.

(2) The cost of fares, accommodation and allowances for 34 overseas visits was met by the Department and totalled
$115,000. The remaining visits were undertaken as part of the Overseas Aid Program or on behalf of other Commonwealth ag~ncies or other Governments.

(3) The vehicles concerned are used in factories handling explosives. There are no plans to increase the use of LPG in
these vehicles. This is in accordance with the recommen-
: dations of the Committee on Occupational Safety and Health in Commonwealth Government Employment that LPG not be used in vehicles carrying explosives.

494 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Tea Services: Department of HeaIth
(Question No. 1611)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) How many (a) full-time and (b) part-time staff are employed on tea making and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (ii) other offices of his Department.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in his Department in 1979-80.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) (i), (ii) Nil; (b) (i) I; (ii) 4.
(2) (a) $24,173; (b) $63,028*.
* Includes $62,130 charged by Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services Ltd for the provision of a beverage service to the Department.
See also the answer to Question 1615 (Hansard, 10 June 1981, page 3481).

No.
Airlines' Cost Recovery
(Question No. 1686)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
( 1) What was the level of cost recovery for (a) general aviation, (b) domestic airlines and (c) international airlines in 1979-80.
(2) What level is expected from each sector in I980-8Y
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I) The levels of cost recovery achieved by the various sectors of the aviation industry for 1979-80 are as follows:

Sector

Surplus (+) Deficit(-)

Recovery Rate

Tea Services: Department of Housing and Construction
(Question No. 1620)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many (a) full-time and (b) part-time staff are employed on tea making and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (ii) other offices of his Department.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in his Department in 1979-80.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The number of full-time and part-time staff employed on tea making and distribution by ihe Department of Housing and Construction is:

Full time Part time

Central Other office offices

3

2

25

International Domestic Trunk Airlines Rural Airlines General Aviation
Total

$m +26.8 -22.2
-17.0 ":76.4
-88.8

Percent 159.4 77.7 31.9 17.1 66.1

It shOltid be noted that the allocation principles were revised within the Aviation Industry Advisory Council and these 'revised' principles are being considered by the Government.
The cost recovery levels for both International and Domestic Trunk Airline sectors' were affected by abnormal items as follows:
International-$9.5m rentals for international terminal buildings which had been held in a trust fund pending resolution of matters arising from litigation in 1975, was transferred to Consolidated Revenue and credited to the cost recovery program.
$1.5m in respect of air navigation charges payable by Qantas in 1978-79 was not credited to the cost recovery program until 1979-80.

(2) (a) The cost of salaries in the provision oftea services in the Department of Housing and Construction in 1979-80 was $85,889.
(b) In some offices of the Department the beverage service is provided by the Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Services Ltd. See the answer provided by the Minister for Administrative Services to Question No. 1615
o. (Hansard 10 June 1981, page 3481 ). The total charge to the
Department for this service in 1979-80 was $122, II
Certificates Under Section 9 of the Ombudsman Act
(Question No. 1667)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Have any certificates been issued under Section 9 of the Ombudsman Act asat 8 April 1981; if so, how many.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer:

Domestic Trunk Airlines-$3.4m jn respect of air navigation charges from the two major domestic airlines for 1979-80 was not credited to the cost recovery program Until 1980-81.
If abnormal items are not taken into account then the levelof cost recovery for these two sectors was as follows:

Sector
International Domestic Trunk Airlines

Surplus (+) Deficit(-)
$m + 15.8 -18.8

Recovery Rate
Per cent 135.1 81.2

(2) In the 1980-81 Budget it was announced that 100% re-
covery was expected to be achieved in the Domestic Trunk Airline sector in that year. Estimates of recovery levels are not
normally provided, however the cost recovery levels for 1980-81, except for Domestic Trunks, should be about the same level as 1979-80 when adjusted for abnormal items.

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 495

Financial Directive to Qantas
(Question No. 1689)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) Was a financial directive issued to Qantas by the Government in 1947.
(2) If so, has it been kept secret and why.
(3) What commercial constraints does the i:lirective place on Qantas.
(4) Will he release the text of the directive; if not, why not.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's questions is as follows:
(I) to (4) The Qantas Financial Directive has not been publicly released since it was first issued in 1947. Certain provisions in the Directive are now outmoded and it is currently being revised according to the guidelines outlined by the Prime Minister in his statement to the Parliament on 30 April. This revision is aimed at enabling Qantas to conduct its operations in a more commercially competitive manner. When this revision is completed, it is anticipated that the new Directive will be tabled in Parliament.
Fire Extinguishers
(Question No. 1692)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
What action has been taken by his Department concerning the finding by the Department of Housing and Construction reported in the 1979-80 Annual Report of the Commonwealth Fire Board, that self-contained automatic halon gas fire extinguishers installed in fume cupboards where acid chemicals are used deteriorate rapidly.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
None is necessary. A check within my Department revealed no instances in which halon gas fire extinguishers are installed in fume cupboards where acid chemicals are used. Halon gas is used in the Capital Territory Health Commission's new Central Health Laboratory, but the gas is piped into the fume cupboards from cylinders IQcated outside the cupboards, in accordance with the latest Commonwealth Fire Board recommendations.
Quarantine: Rabies
(Question No. 1696)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(\.) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the Age newspaper of 24 January 1981 attributed to Mr Harry Butler that dogs with rabies were found on small boats intercepted along the northern Australian coastline.
(2) If so, will he provide details of the cases of vessels deteeted in this area carrying dogs with rabies.
Mr MacKellar-The Minister for Health has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes. The honourable member will know that Mr Harry Butler, CBE., is spearheading a major Quarantine Awareness Program launched by the Government in 1980-81 to encourage individual self regulation and responsibility among

Australians on quarantine matters. I am advised that the report followed an address by Mr Butler in Darwin which he visited as part of this Program.
Mr Butler has advised that the article in the Age has misinterpreted comments made by him at this and on many other public occasions about the rabies risk from dogs carried on small boats of overseas origin in north Australian waters. Also, he was aware that dogs are known carriers of rabies and that rabies exists in countries to Australia's north. Mr Butler advises that in the light of these considerations he drew attention during his Darwin address to the simple way in which rabies could be introduced into Australia.
(2) Rabies has not been diagnosed in relation to any dog found on a vessel detected along the northern Australian coastline. However, any rabies susceptible animal, which in past months could have been in a country where rabies occurs, must be regarded as a rabies risk.
Quarantine: Cost Recovery for Expenditure on Facilities
(Question No. 1698)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Furtherto the answer to question No. 701 (Hansard, 8 June 1978, page 3377), what action was taken in relation to capital cost recovery for expenditure on quarantine facilities.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Government decided that quarantine charges should not be imposed to achieve capital cost recovery for expenditure on quarantine facilities.
Animal Quarantine Station
(Question No. 1708)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What is planned for the new animal quarantine station at Guildford, WA.
(2) What is the proposed timetable.
(3) What animals and numbers will it be able to handle.
(4) When is it anticipated that the Bicton site will no longer be required for quarantine purposes.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) A number of new sites are now being considered for the new animal quarantine station in Perth rather than the site at Guildford as originally planned. The change in site was prompted by problems associated with the effect of the noise levels at the Guildford site on both animals and staff. Arrangements to select and acquire the site are currently under way and preliminary planning of the facility has been completed.
(2) The timetable fOr the new facility has not yet been finalised due to the change in site. It is anticipated that following finalisation of site acquisition, a period of IS to 20 months will be required to complete the new facility. On this basis completion date will beilpproximately December 1982.
(3) The station is being designed to accommodate 48 dogs and 14 cats and will include a holding facility for up to 20 horses or 2S cattle.
(4) The agreement with the cWestern Australian State Government is that the station at Bicton will be vacated by July 1982.

496 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Department of Health: Purchase of Blankets
(Question No. 1716)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) How many (a) woollen blankets and (b) blankets made of inan-made fibre have been purchased for his Department in each year since June 1976.
(2) What guidelines currently govern the purchase of blankets for his Department.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
For the sake of completeness, figures for blanket purchases in the above categories by the Capital Territory Health Commission (CTHC) have also been provided.
(1)-

Department of Health

CTHC

(a)-

1976-77

2

1977-78

0

1978-79

0

1979-80

2

1980-81

0

(b)-

1976-77

0

1977-78

0

1978-79

3

1979-80

0

1980-81 12

1,006 284
1,250 344 200
0 0 0 0 0

(2) Consideration is given to factors such as climate and lo-
cation where blankets are required. For these reasons all blankets purchased by the Northern Territory Division of my
Department prior to the take-over by the NT Government were cotton (terry towelling). Similarly, the degree of soiling is taken into account in that cotton blankets are utilised in
areas where heavy soiling is likely to occur. If Government contracts are available, blankets on contract are purchased. If contracts are not available, appropriate purchases are made
under promulgated purchasing procedures.

Cost of the Perth-Cocos Island-Christmas Island Air Route
(Question No. 1857)
Mr . Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What was the cost to the Commonwealth in 1979-80 of the Perth-Cocos Island-Christmas Island air route.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Actual expenditure in 1979-80 was $1,070,261 and receipts paid into Consolidated Revenue amounted to $1,061,272. This reflected a net cost to the Commonwealth in 1979-80 of $8,989.
Under the terms of the Government's approval for the operation of the Perth-Cocos Island-Christmas Island air charter, the operation is required to be self supporting.
However, because of the nature of the Commonwealth accounting system, it is difficult to compare results for a particular financial year. For example, recovery of debts totalling $63,372 incurred in 1979-80 occurred during 1980-81.

Residents of Christmas Island Resettled in Australia

(Question No. 1859)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April
1981:

(I) How many eligible residents of Christmas Island resettled in Australia during 1979-80 and in what States and Territories.

(2) How many residents settled elsewhere, and in which countries.

Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

I am informed by my Department that:

(I) passenger manifest and other records in Christmas Island indicate that during 1979-80 52 Island residents reset-
tled in Australia and that, with the exception of I who settled
in Victoria, all went to Western Australia;

(2) during the same period, 31 resettled elsewhere, of

whom 15 went to Singapore, 14 to Malaysia and 2 to

Indonesia.

.

Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of Industrial Relations

(Question No. 1875)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 9 April 1980:

(1) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London metropolitan police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000, or about 20
per cent by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from
which the call was made?

(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of his Department controlled, if so,
in what way?

(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in his Department; if
so, what was the outcome of the consideration?

Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Yes. I am aware of the report.

(2) Supervisors have the responsibility of ensuring that staff within the Department use trunk and STD telephone facilities
for official purposes only. STD barring has been introduced in
a number of areas.

(3) The Department conside~tsat appropriate controls

are maintained through effective i ernal supervision.

.

.

Imports of 5.5 in. Artillery Ammunition

(Question No. 1918)

Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:

(I) Is it a fact that ammunition for Australian 5.5 in. artil-

lery is being imported from Pakistan.

.

(2) Are Australian stocks of 5.5 in. ammunition sufficient , to enable sustained action should the Army be called upon to
perform a military task involving medium artillery.

(3) Does capacity exist for manufacture of 5.5 in. ammunition in Australia; if so, is that capacity being used.

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 497

(4) What quantity of ammunition has been imported into Australia.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No.
(2) No. Due to age and condition the 5.5 in. medium gun no longer has an operational role. The remaining serviceable weapons are used for training and stocks of ammunition are adequate for that purpose.
(3) Yes. Both the projectiles and propellant can be manufactured in Australia but because use has been limited it has not been economic to manufacture projectiles in Australia for many years. Propellant is currently being manufactured in Australia.
(4) The last import was of approximately 14,000 projectiles from the United Kingdom in 1970.
Financial Assistance to the New Zealand Dairy Industry
(Question No. 1934)
Mr Humphreys asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 28 April 1981 :
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the various forms of financial assistance given to the New Zealand Dairy Industry by the New Zealand Government including (a) interest rate concessions provided by the New Zealand Reserve Bank and calculated by the New Zealand Dairy Board to be worth $50 million per annum to the industry and (b) the exemption of co-operative dairy companies from the payment of income tax.
(2) Will financial concessions similar to those available to New Zealand producers be made available to Australian Dairy Producers given the present domestic shortage in but~er production and the threatened Hood of New Zealand dairy food imports.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Following the placing of the honourable member's question on the Notice Paper, I sought information on the matters raised in this part. The information indicates that New Zealand does provide assistance to the dairy industry in that country in a number of ways.
(2) This part seems to be based on the premise that the Australian dairy industry is not in receipt of assistance. That, of course is far from being the case. However, because the forms of ihis assistance differ from those which apply in New Zealand, any attempt at a quantified comparison would raise considerable practical problems. I understand that the Australian Dairy Corporation is confident, after discussions with dairy product manufacturers, that adequate butter will be produced within Australia for dome~tic requ.irements. In the circumstances, safeguards or subventions against a hypothetical threat of imports are not necessary. The Government and the Corporation will, of course, continue to monitor closely the butter supply position.
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment: Advocacy of IncomeSplitting
(Question No. 1941)
Mr Hurford asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:

(I) Has the Minister for Hom.e .Affairs and Enviro~me!1t, since being appointed to the Ministry, been advocatmg income splitting for taxation purposes; if so, does this represent Government policy.
(2) Is that Minister now responsible for this sector of taxation policy, if not, has he breached a Government rule that Ministers must not offer personal views in public, particularly in areas outside their responsibility, but must put forward only the collective Government view.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The Minister for Home Affairs ;lDd Environment, before he became a Minister, put forward views on income splitting which were widely reported. The Minister was referring to these well known views in his remarks. This was not a matter on which the Government had taken a decision, and the Minister was not therefore taking issue publicly with a Government decision. I do not regard his comments as a breach of the principles of collective government responsibility.
Film Industry
(Question No. 1946)
Mr Hurford asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the grave disquiet in the community that a Liberal-National Country Party Coalition Policy promise at the last election in relation to the film industry, whjch was said then to cost only $2 million, is now to cost $20 million.
(2) Will he now give the House an assurance that the estimated costs of all Coalition promises at election time should not be multiplied by 10 to arrive at their true cost. _ .
(3) Is he able to say whether the $20 million being made available for the Film Industry is causing extreme concern to responsible industry leaders and others, not only because of the tax avoidance possibilities but also because of the great number of indifferent films which will now be made from resources in short supply for markets which do not exist.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) There has been a very strong response to the Government's important initiative in this matter. To the end of May applications for certification as' Australian films has been made in respect of 203 films expected to cost sonie $145 million in all. It may be expected that this will place some strain on film production resources and some concern has been expressed as to the quality of films that may result.
Nevertheless it is clear that the industry has generally welcomed the Government's initiative. The generous taxation benefits conferred by the scheme, plus the, ordinary economic incentive to obtain a maximum return on investment should result in the attraction of investment moneys to quality films having the potential for significant box-office success. This incentive to quality is in fact reinforced by the second limb of the concessions, the income exemption, which in itself is a strong incentive to investment in films with potential for success. The operation of the scheme will, however, be carefully monitored over the next six to twelve months.
In addition, the attraction of the scheme to those concerned only with its exploitation has not been overlooked. Indeed, responsible film authorities have registered their concern at the intervention of these elements. Significant safeguards have accordingly been incorporated in the legislation. In particular, the availability of deductions is to be limited to expenditure for which an investor is at a real risk of economic loss and,

498 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

with effect From 28 May 1981, deductions under the scheme will become available only when a film is completed and marketed.
Identification of Beneficial Owner of Shares
(Question No. 1948)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(1) Was there a recent take-over battle For Elder Smith Goldsborough Mort Ltd and were the shares of Elders, and later Henry Jones, de-listed For some time.
(2) [F so, were these extraordinary happenings in the share market partly due to there being no laws in Australia to ensure the early and. precise identification of the beneficial owner of shares, because of the use of the nominee companies.
(3) Are there many other examples of conFusion and chaos being caused by this situation being allowed to continue.
(4) IF so, will he introduce legislation to correct this situation.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (4) On 26 May 1981, the South Australian Attorney General announced the appointment of an inspector under section 17 of the South Australian Securities Industry Act, 1979-1980, to investigate and to report in writing on matters concerning dealing in the securities of Elder Smith Goldsborough Mort Limited and Petroleum Distributors Pty Ltd. The period in respect of which the investigation is to be made is the period which commenced on the first day of January 1981 and which ended on the 25th day of May 1981. [n these circumstances, it would be inappropriate to comment on the particular issues raised in the question.
Trade Practices Commission: Mergers Division
(Question No. 1951)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(I) [s it a Fact that the Trade Practices Commission no longer has a separate mergers division.
(2) [~ it also a Fact that the Commission has Fewer than 5 project staff engaged in the investigation of merger proposals and that none of those staff are occupied Full-time on this work.
(3) [s Australia currently experiencing an exceptionally high level of merger and takeover activity; iF so, does much ()F this activity impinge on the public interest or lead to a lessening of competition.
(4) Will he give an assurance that he and his Department have suffiCient resources at their disposal to assess whether individual mergers conform with the tenets of competition policy and whether the present merger and takeover laws are working effectively.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Yes.
(3) Australia is at present experiencing a significant level of merger and takeover activity. [n some cases this activity impinges on the public interest or may lead to a lessening \IF competition.
(4) It is the function of the Trade Practices Commission to consider whether individual mergers may contravene section

50 of the Trade Practices Act, and I can assure the honourable member that the Commission perForms that function. My Department is continually monitoring the operation of the Trade Practices Act including its mergers provisions.
Radio Australia: Mail from the People's Republic of China
(Question No. 1953)
Mr Duffy asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(I) Approximately how many letters to Radio Australia arrive from the People's Republic of China each month.
(2) Approximatelyhow many of these letters are answered each month and what happens to those letters not replied to.
(3) How many staff members of his Department are employed in handling the inflow of mail from China and what are their (a) classification and (b) special qualifications in each case.
(4) [s consideration being given to increasing the staff ceilings in Radio Australia; iF so, what is the proposed increase in employees and when will appointments be made.
(5) If no increase is being contemplated, will he consider raising the staff ceiling in this area.
(6)- What Radio Australia offices have been established overseas and what are the (a) number of staff and (b) approximate number of letters handled in each office.
(7) Is consideration being given to the establishment of a Radio Australia office in Peking; iF not, will be consider this proposal.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) On an average 10,000 letters are received each month from the People's Republic of China:
(2) Approximately 3,000 letters a month are answered, 2,000 by having their requests for musical items or questions answered in Chinese language programs broadcast by Radio Australia and 1,000 by the despatch of a program guide: The contents of the remainder are noted. Some letters do not call fora reply.
(3) No members of the Department of Communications are so employed. The Chinese Section of Radio Australia employs two Program Officers, whose duties include the handling of correspondence From the People's Republic of China and S.E.Asia.
In addition, two correspondence officers are employed on a casual basis to receive and read mail From the People's Republic of China and to sort and despatch letters to producers for inclusion in Chinese language programs. The Program Officers are required to have linguistic fluency in English and Chinese; ability to type accurately and with speed. To proceed beyond a salary barrier they are also required to be capable of presenting programs-in Chinese; and of accurate and speedy translation.
(4) No increase in staff allocation to Radio Australia is contemplated within the ceiling limits currently applying to the ABC.
(5) While the Government has established a staff ceiling For the ABC it is left to the management of the Commission to allocatestaffwithin ceiling limits.
(6) The only Radio Australia office overseas is in Jakarta. Six locally employed staff there handle approximately 10,000 letters a month.
(7) Yes.

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 499

Insurance Agents and Brokers
(Question No. 1962)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(I) Will he undertake to place before Cabinet the main recommendations of the Law Reform Commission in its report entitled Insurance Agents and Brokers.
(2) Is he considering, as one of the options available to the Government, a system based only on those recommendations which were unanimous and not those like disclosure of commission, on which there was disagreement in the Commission.
(3) Can a system based on the unanimous recommendation of the Law Reform Commission be far less onerous than that originally approved by brokers and enacted in the United Kingdom.
(4) Will the main aim of such a system be to prevent and punish dishonest and reckless conduct by brokers.
(5) Will it involve minimal costs and minimal interference with the broking industry.
(6) Have losses through broker insolvency of roughly $7.5m in the last 15 months increased markedly since the data on earlier insolvencies was collected by the Commission.
(7) Are losses a cause of enormous concern, irrespective of the percentage which they form of total insurance premiums.
(8) Is he able to say whether disagreements still exist between the broker organisations; if so, in what areas; if not, do both organisations support the need for national legislation, based upon the recommendation of the Law Reform Commission.
(9) Has any organisation opposed in principle the Commission's main recommendation that premium moneys should be required to be kept separate from the broker's own funds.
(10) Is he able to say what was the general tenor of the responses of State governments and of the insurance industry to the Commission's recommendations.
(II) Were any bodies representative of the general body of policy holders asked for their views when the Government sought the views of the industry.
(12) Has he noted the introduction of similar legislation by the Western Australian State Government.
(13) Will other States be obliged to follow this lead if he fails to act.
(14) If so, will this be disruptive to the industry, wasteful of resources and give rise to a plethora of red tape for the industry throughout Australia.
(15) If the Government fails to act in this matter, will it be subject to the charge of inconsistency in seeking to control dishonesty in the social welfare field but not dishonesty in business practices.
(16) Has his attention been drawn to recent press reports in the Business Review, of 4-10 April 1981, which indicate that Australia's troubled insurance broking industry expects more broking companies to collapse in the coming months.
(17) If both industry and policy holders are to be given the protection they deserve, must Commonwealth legislation based upon the recommendations of the Law Reform Commission be introduced as quickly as possible; if so, will he give an assurance that the necessary legislation will be introduced soon.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) to (17) The honourable member has raised a number of issues of relevance to the Report of the Law Reform Commission on Insurance Agents and Brokers (tabled in Parliament on 16 September 1980) and to the question of regulation of insurance brokers. After careful study of the Commission's Report and the views put forward by many inter.ested parties the Government has decided not to introduce legislation to regulate the activities of insurance brokers operating in Australia. The factors involved in the Government's decision were outlined in thestatement I made on this matter in the House on 10 June 1981.
Commonwealth Grants Commission
(Question No,1965)
Mr McLean asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
Which States are represented through membership of the Commonwealth Grants Commission.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Commonwealth Grants Commission consists of a Chairman and two members, none of whom represents any particular State or States.
For the review of States' tax sharing relativities, a special Division of the Commission was created consisting of the Chairman, the two members referred to above, one associate member appointed on the nomination of the Premiers of New South Wales and Victoria, and two associate members appointed on the nomination of Queensland, South Australia, Western Australia and Tasmania. While the associate members were nominated by particular States, they were neither required nor expected to 'represent' those States.
Commonwealth Medical Benefit
(Question No. 1980)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 29 April 1981:
(1) What is the estimated number of operations performed during 1979-80 for which the Commonwealth paid under its National Health Insurance obligations, which will no longer. be eligible for a refund following the changes of 1 April 1981.
(2) For each category, by medical item number, what was the proportion of female patients for which payment was previously made, but will no longer be made.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Iris estimated that of the order of 21,700 operations performed during 1979-80 for which the Commonwealth paid medical benefits obligations will no longer be eligible for a refund following the I April 1981 changes to the Medical Benefits Schedule in relation to plastic surgery items.
(2) The information is nOfavailable. -
Kidney Dialysis Machines
(Question No. 1983)
Mr O'Keefe asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 29 April 1981:
(l) Is there a shortage of kidney dialysis machines in Australia.
(2) Is this shortage causing considerable concern to kidney sufferers, hospitals and the medical profession.
(3) Will he investigate this situation with a view to giving assistance to eliminate the shortage.

500 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Australian Kidney Foundation has advised that there is an adequate supply of haemodialysis machines in Australia.
(2) and (3) Under the current hospital cost-sharing arrangements between the Commonwealth and State Governments, the Commonwealth Government has undertaken to meet 50 per cent of the agreed net operating costs of each State's recognised (that is, public) hospital system. The States for their part have undertaken to ensure, to the best of their ability, that the accommodation, Facilities, staff and services needed for the care and treatment of all eligible persons are provided by recognised hospitals. It is a matter for the hospital authority in each State to determine expenditure programs within the hospital cost-sharing arrangements.
Under the new health funding arrangements announced recently, the Commonwealth Government will provide funding to the States for public hospitals, the Community Health Program and the School Dental Scheme through general revenue grants at the level of funding provided in 1980-81 plus 10 per cent, less a share of the revenue that the States could reasonably be expected to raise by the introduction of appropriate inpatient and outpatient charges in 1981-82.
There will be no requirements laid down as to the services to which the funds should be allocated. The States should have at'their disposal increased resources under the new arrangements. The future provision of dialysis machines through the public hospitals is a matter for consideration by the States in accordance with their priorities.
Qantas Airlines Ltd: Stage One Headquarters Building in Sydney
(Question No. 1999)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 29 April 1981 :
(I) What sum has Qantas Airlines Ltd written off as trading expenses or losses which were incurred as a direct result of building its Stage One Headquarter building in Sydney.
(2) Will similar expenditure be written off in future.
(3) What is the revised estimated final cost of the project, including any sums written off in profit and loss accounts.
Mr Hunt-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(I) As at 31 March 1980, Qantas has made provision for Diminution in Value of Qantas Centre of $16,660,000.
(2) This is a matter for decision by the Qantas Board of Directors.
(3) $90m.
Trans-Australia Airlines: Superannuation Scheme
(Question No. 2000)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 29 April 1981:
(I) Did the Commonwealth Government set up a working party in June 1975, to determine whether Trans-Australia Airlines suffered cost disadvantages because of changes in the Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme.
(2) Did the working party carry out its appointed task.
(3) Has the working party made its findings; ifso, to'whom were they communicated.

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The working party was set up in August 1975 to examine the superannuation difficulties being faced by TAA.
(2) Yes.
(3) The findings of the working party, along with the Actuary's'Report on TAA's superannuation liability, were used for the initial Government consideration of TAA's superannuation liability.
Trans Australia Airlines: Superannuation Scheme
(Question No. 2001)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 29 April 1981:
(I) Has Trans Australia Airlines ceased to admit new members to its superannuation scheme.
(2) Is the superannuation scheme regulated by Commonwealth Legislation.
(3) Is there any substance to the claim by the Airline's Chairman that the Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme is of such a magnitude that no enterprise could remain self sufficient in a competitive industry.environment with such a cost handicap.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as foilows:
. (I) Employees of the Australian National Airlines Commission have ceased to be admitted as new members to the Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme. However, groundstaff and flight engineers are able to join the Commission's new superannuation schemes. There has been no change to pilots' and hostesses' eligibility to join their respective schemes.
(2) The Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme is regulated by the Superannuation Act 1976. The separate superannuation schemes administered by the Commission are established under Trust Deeds.
(3) The Government is aware of th~ concern expressed by the Commission over its superannuation liability. As soon as the results of the transfers of existing Commonwealth Superannuation Scheme members of T AA to the new schemes are known, and the resultant liability to TAA, over and above that incurred by Ansett, is established the Government will move to further deal with the problem, if the situafion, as revealed then, requires it.
Employment of Disabled Persons
(Question No. 2004)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 29 April 1981:
(I) What sum (a) has been spent and (b) is proposed to be spent on (i) market research programs to determine the attituoes of employers and co-workers to the employment of disabled persons and (ii) a promotional campaign directed to employers to encdurage'a greater level of employment of disabled persons,
(2) Which advertising agencies or consultants were used or are proposed to be used in these programs of campaigns.
(3) What is the total sum paid or to be paid to each agency or consultant for each campaign.
(4) How was each agency or consultant selected.

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 501

Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) (i) (a) $16,179; (b) Nothing additional to the sum

given in (a) above.

"

(ii) (a) $41,573 January-May 1981; (b) $258,427 June-

December 1981.

(2) Monahan, Dayman, Adams, advertising agency; Marketing Frameworks, market research.

(3) Monahan, Dayman, Adams $6,877; Marketing Frameworks $16,179.

(4) Monahan, Dayman, Adams successfully tendered fora three year contract as my Department's nominated agency.
Marketing Frameworks were retained on a consultancy basis by Monahan, Dayman, Adams.

Intra-corporate Imports and Exports
(Question No. 2007)

Mr Howe asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on

29 April 1981:

'

What proportion of total Australian (a) imports and (b) exports are intra-corporate.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

The Australian Statistician has advised that, partly because details of trade between Australian companies and their over-
seas branches and subsidiaries are not available to the ABS, it is not possible fully to answer this question.

However, information is available on trade by Australian subsidiaries and branches of foreign companies with their
foreign parents and other related companies abroad; it
suggests that about 40 per cent of imports to Australia and
about 20 per cent of exports from Australia come into this category.

It must be noted that details of trade by Australian subsidiaries and branches of foreign companies with their foreign
parents and other related companies abroad are obtained
from foreign investment surveys and are not directly comparable with total trade data which are based on customs documents. The ratios mentioned above, therefore, must be taken as indicative only.

2,4-D and 2,4,5-T

(Question No. 2017)

Dr EYeringham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 30 April 1981 :

(I) Has his attention been drawn to a Swedish study linking exposure of workers to phenoxy acids including 2,4-D with a
7-fold increase in cancer and 2,4,5-T with a 17-fold increase, as reported on the ABC Radio I news at 7.45 a.m. on 9 April
1981.

(2) Has the investigating authority made copies of the Swedish report available to Vietnam veterans' representatives; if so, when.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) I have seen an article printed in the British Journal of
Industrial Medicine entitled 'soft-tissue sarcomas and exposure to chemical substances: a case-referent study'.

(2) I am not aware whether Vietnam veterans' representatives have received copies of the Swedish report. However, as the Report of the study was published in the February 1981 issue of the British Journal of Industrial Medicine (Volume

38, pages 27-33) there would be no difficulty in any person or organisation obtaining a copy.
Solar-powered Heating Systems, Commonwealth Buildings
(Question No, 2031)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 5 May 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the Daily Telegraph of 7 April 1981 in which the New South Wales Minister for Education was quoted as saying that he anticipated that Australia's first solar-powered school will save up to $5,000 a year in fuel bills.
(2) Is this figure an accurate indicator of the savings on fuel bills for the average school.
(3) How many new Commonwealth buildings have had solar-powered heating systems installed since 1975.
(4) In how many existing Commonwealth buildings have solar-powered heating systems replaced oil-powered heating systems.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable
member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. The Department of Housing and Construction is aware of the proposal by the New South Wales Government for the solar-powered Bangor public school at Menai.
(2) Fuel bills for space heating are largely determined by the climate, and in Canberra vary from $3,000 per year for primary schools to $14,000 per year for large high schools and colleges. A solar assisted heating system could be expected to contribute approximately 50 per cent of a school's heating requirements, giving potential annual savings of between $1,500 and $7,000 but at considerable additional capital cost.
A recent national study by the Schools Commission found that the major factor influencing energy consumption in existing schools, is the users. Annual savings of $1 Om in expenditure on energy for all purposes including heating were predicted if this problem of poor operational practice was addressed on a na tionallevel.
(3) No new Commonwealth buildings have been equipped with solar-powered space heating systems since 1975.
(4) No existing oil powered systems have been replaced or supplemented with solar systems.
The CSIRO Division of Building Research experimental building at Highett in Victoria is equipped with a solar assisted heating system. The Department of Housing and Construction office building in Townsville is fitted with a solar assisted air-conditioning system (without heating). Both installations are of a developmental nature and were not intended to be cost effective.
Active solar space heating systems are not yet proven to be commercially 'viable in Australia because the energy savings are not sufficient to recoup the additional capital expenditure over the life of the equipment. The capital costs of such a system are appreciably higher than conventional systems because of the relatively high cost of the solar component and the need to install alternative back-up equipment using conventional energy sources.
Attention to passive solar heating techniques in the design and siting of buildings is considered to be a worthwhile method of using solar energy to assist with space heating.

502 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Exports to Thailand
(Question No. 2038)
Mr Milton asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 5 May 1981:
(I) Do many companies involved in the scientific industry which attempt to ellport their products to Thailand face a 30 per cent duty on the products.
(2) If so, can he say whether this is a result of the Australian Government's attitude to UNESCO and the Thai customs issue.
(3) Will he provide a clear statement of Australia's attitude to UNESCO and the Thai customs issue, together with some positive plans within a set time frame for a resolution of the problems involved for potential ellports to Thailand.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) There are.lwo Australian companies which are known to have an interest in ellporting scientific equipment to Thailand. Broadly speaking scientific equipment entering Thailand faces a 30 per cent import duty.
(2) Thailand is a signatory to the UNESCO Florence Agreement and goods covered by the Agreement may be imported free of duty provided they are for use in Government research related activities and are sourced from countries signatory to the Agreement. Australia has not signed the Agreement and Thailand applies the normal duties to such goods imported from Australia.
(3) The Florence Agreement was adopted by the General Conference of UNESCO in 1950. Australia has not signed the Agreement because of conti,nuing industry assistance and tariff policy problems of a fundamental nature.

1981 ProoCCoin Sets

(Question No. 2049)

Mr Mildren asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:

(I) How many 1981 Australian Proof Coin sets have been minted.

(2) How many orders for the 1981 Proof Coin sets have been received from private collectors.

(3) How many sets of 1981 Proof Coin sets have been

allocated to private coin collectors.

.

(4) Was a quota of 1981 Proof Coin sets allocated to each private coin collector; if so, what constituted a quota.

(5) What proportion of the 1981 Proof Coin sets distributed was allocated to private coin dealers.

. (6) How many orders for the 1981 Proof Coin sets were
received from coin dealers and hoW many sets were allocated to coin dealers.

, (7) Was a quota of 1981 Proof Coin sets allocated to each coin dealer; if so, what constituted a quota.

(8) Were orders for 1981 Proof Coin sets received from
foreign or overseas collectors or dealers; if so, were these orders given equal treatment to Australian orders.

(9) How many 1981 Proof Coin sets were allocated to foreign or overseas coin collectors or dealers.

(10) What proportion of 1981 Proof Coin sets distributed w~re allocated to foreign or overseas collectors or dealers.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

The Controller of the Mint has advised me as follows:

(I) The number of 1981 Australian proof coin sets minted as at 28 May 1981 was 29,751, against a planned total of around 83,000 sets.
(2) to (7) A total of 35,120 orders for 99,216 sets of coins were received for 1981 Australian proof coin sets up to 28 May 1981. The offer of these sets has been closed for some time. Orders from whatever source are being met in the order of receipt of remittances, subject to a limit of 100 per order from private collectors and, in the case of dealers ordering more than 100 coins, a level held at or below the level of the previous year. Comprehensive statistics are not maintained separately for private collectors and dealers. However, of the 18,362 sets despatched to Australian customers up to 28 May 1981 3,300 sets have been despatched to dealers ordering more than 100 coins.
(8) to (10) Orders received from overseas were given equal treatment to Australian orders. As of 28 May 19817,000 sets have been despatched to the Mint's overseas sales agent for distribution to customers in North America and areas of Europe including the United Kingdom. This will account for the bulk of orders accepted for overseas sales.

Northern Territory Air Services
(Question No. 2050)

Mr Tambling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:

(I) How many regular (a) TAA and (b) Ansett flights out of (i) Darwin and (ii) Alice Springs, NT were cancelled during the 1981 Easter Period, 16-21 April 1981.

(2) How many of these cancellations were attributable to industrial disputes.

'(3) How many of these cancellations were daytime flights.

(4) Were special flights added to (a) TAA and (b) Ansett
Schedules out of (i) Darwin and (ii) Alice Springs, during the same period; ifso, how many.

(5) How many of the special flights were daytime flights.

(6) Were there any days on which (a) TAA and (b) Ansett

did not operate any flights out of (i) Darwin and (ii) Alice

Springs during the same period.

.

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) (a) (i) 4 jet services and IF27 service; (ii) 4 jet services (b) (i) 2 jet services; (ii) 2jet services

(2) One in the case of Ansett and two in the case ofTAAone jet service to Cairns fiom Darwin and one F27 service to
Gove/Cairns from Darwin

(3) Two in the case of Ansett and all in the case ofTAA.

(4) Yes: (a) (i) 7 jet services; (ii) 3 jet services. (b) (i) 6 jet services; (ii) I jet service.

(5) One ofTAA's special flights was a daytime flight

(6) (a) (i) Monday 20 April, however flights to Brisbane and Adelaide departed in the early hours of Tuesday 21 April; (ii) Thursday, 16 April due to industrial dispute and Saturday 18 April due to industry rationalisation
(b) (i) Sunday 19 April; (ii) Sunday 19 April.

Import oCFire-damaged KTCP
(Question No. 2062)
Mr West asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 503

(I) Have the States been alerted by his Department to the possible presence of remaining quantities of 300 tonnes of tiredamaged KTCP imported via Singaporein the early 1970s from Vietnam.
(2) If not, what is the reason.
(3) [f the States have been notitied of this presence, what steps have been taken to ensure the retrieval and disposal of all remaining quantities of this dangerous chemical.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs in reply to question No. 2061 referred to the importation over a period of about 350 tonnes of KTCP from Singapore. [ have recently advised the Western Australian and Queensland Governments of a consignment of 25 tonnes of KTCP which was claimed to be tire-damaged (not 300 tonnes as mentioned in the question). The Commonwealth Government has found no evidence that KTCP or derivative materials were obtained from Vietnam.
(3) Retrieval and disposal of chemical wastes is a responsibility of State Governments.
Government Information Unit
(Question No. 2064)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(1) How many persons were employed by the Government Information Unit (a) as full time employees and (b) on contract for each year from 1976.
, (2) What was the total expenditure of the Unit in each of the same years.
(3) What was the percentage increase in expenditure for each year over the previous year.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) The Government Information Unit was established in May 1978 with an approved staff establishment of four. The tirst position was tilled in August 1978 and the fourth in September 1979. Numbers remained unchanged to December 1980 when the establishment was increased by three. (b) Nil.
(2) and (3) Details provided by my Department are set out in the table below:

Year

Expenditure

Percentage Increase

1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

$

86,159"

155,861

80.9

170,849

9.6

- [n operation for less than the full financial year.

Government Information Unit
(Question No. 2065)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 6 May 1981 :
(I) How many requests were received by the Government Information Unit from (a) Ministers and (b) other Members of Parliament to prepare material for them (i) during 1979 and (ii) during the period I January 1980 to 18 October 1980.
(2) Were any requests received from, or directions given by, members of the Liberal Party Secretariat for information

from the Government Information Unit or any of its officers for the period I January 1980 to 5 May 1981; if so, what was the information requested and when was it requested.
(3) What were the reasons for moving the Canberra office of the Government Information Unit to an office in Parliament House near the Prime Minister's office.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) I am informed that the Government [nformation Unit does not maintain any records of requests it receives for information.
(3) The office of the Government Information Unit has not been moved to an office in Parliament House. It is located in the Hinkler Building, Kings Avenue, Barton.

Government Information Unit

(Question No. 2066)

Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:

(I) Have any members of the Government Information

Unit been endorsed candidates of any political party, during

the years 1975 to 1981.

.

(2) If so, (a) which members were or are so endorsed, (b)
what political party endorsement has been received by each and (c) what is the salary of these members.

Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) and (2) No. However, Mr L. Power, Federal In formation Director for New South Wales, has been pre-selected as the Liberal Party candidate for the New South Wales seat
of Miranda at the next State elections. His salary is in the range of $25,852-26,751 per annum plus Ministerial Staff Allowance of $5,868 per annum in lieu of overtime.

Oil Imports
(question No. 2070)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
. (I) From which countries did Australia import more than 2 per cent of its oil during 1980.
(2) What percentage of total oil imports originated in each ofthose countries.
(3) What quantity of oil was imported during the same period.
Mr AnthonyThe Minister for National Development and Energy has supplied the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I), (2) and (3) [n 1980 Australian oil imports (including both crude oil and petroleum products) came from traditional supply sources. The specitic details shown below were provided by the Australian Statistician.

Country of Origin*

Percentage

Bahrain

4.1

Indonesia

10.4

Iran

2.8

Iraq

7.2

Kuwait

12.2

Saudi Arabia

37.1

Singapore .

14.9

United Arab Emirates

6.2

504 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

ountry of Origin-

Percentage

ther

5.1

Total

100.0

Total quantity (million Iitres)-14,869. - For import statistics the 'Country of Origin' is defined as the 'Country of Production', that is, in respect of refined petroleum products, the country responsible for the last phase of the substantial manufacturing operation before the goods take their final form. This is normally the country in which the goods were loaded for export to Australia. Imports of petroleum products, however, present a special case because trans-shipment of these goods occurs at Singapore en route to Australia. It is usual practice for petroleum products to be held in common storage at Singapore, where there is comingling of the goods originating from a number of different countries. On exportation to Australia, it is not possible to differentiate where the petroleum products originated and thus Singapore is shown as 'Country of Origin '.
. Review of Commonwealth Functions: Printing and Publication Services
(Question No. 2089)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(I) How many staff and which functions are to be eliminated from Government printing and publication services as a result of the Review of Commonwealth Functions (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1841).
(2) Which private enterprise firms will be offered the work.
(3) Will preference be given to small business or Jobless Action Co-operatives when this work is given out on contract.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Following the Review of Commonwealth Functions, the Government has agreed that the Government Printing Office capacity be limited to that required for Parliament and the urgent and confidential needs of government. It has also been agreed that the AGPS bookshops be leased to the private sector. Staffing implications are being examined.
(2) Work, will be contracted out to the private sector by competitive quotation or tender.
(3) See answer to (2).

Australian Museum Project
(Question No. 2117)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(I) What sum had been spent on the Australian Museum Project as at 5 May 1981.
(2) When was' this project to have been started.
(3) What sum will be saved by cancelling this project (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1838).
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Membership of the Interim Council of the Museum of Australia was announced on 23 December 1980. The Interim Council is to report to the Government by the end of 1982 on the site, development and cost of the Museum. An amount of $9,338 was expended as at 30 April

1981 on the costs of the Interim Council. Salary costs of the

staff servicing the Interim Council to 7 May 1981 amounted to

$12,157.

.

(3) The project has not been cancelled.

Reduction of Staff and Functions: Department of Industry and Commerce
(Question No. 2121)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister 'for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
Will he provide a detailed list of (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of his Department that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions are implemented.
Sir Phillip LynchI refer the honourable member to the answer given to her by Mr Viner, on behalf of the Prime Minister, on this subject (Hansard, 5lune 1981, page 3317) .

Reduction of Staff and Functions: Department of

Foreign Affairs

.

(Question No. 2124)

Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:

Will he provide a detailed list of the:

(a) numbers of staff and

(b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of his Department that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions are implemented.

Mr Street-I refer the honourable member..w
the answer by the Minister assisting the Prime
Minister to Question No. 2119 (Hansard, of 5 June 1981 page 3317).

Reduction of Staff and Functions: Department of the Treasury
(Question No. 2126)
Mrs Kelly asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
Will he provide a detailed list of the: (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of his Department that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions are implemented.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) The decisions relatihg to Treasury functions which were among the decisions arising from the Review of Commonwealth Functions that were announced by the Prime Minister in his statement to the Parliament on 30 April 1981 will not have immediate staffing implications for the Treasury. The longer term staffing implications of those decisions cannot be assessed at this stage.
(b) The ACT Companies (Life Insurance Holding Companies) Ordinance 1968, and related amending Ordinances are to be repealed. The Ordinance was introduced to restrict the number and value of foreign shares that may be hetd in certain life insurance holding companies incorporated

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 505

in the ACT. The Ordinance has related to only two companies; upon its repeal it will no longer be necessary to monitor foreign ownership and control of those companies for the purposes of enforcing the restrictions provided for in the Ordinance. Proposed investments in those companies will, however, remain subject to the Government's foreign investment policy.
Concerning the Royal Australian Mint, it has been decided that there is to be a review of the scope for further subcontracting for coinage blanks to the private sector. It has also been decided that private sector tenders are to be invited for the sole rights to market and distribute all Australian numismatic coins within Australia.
The function of the Co-ordinator General of Public Works has been terminated.
Reduction of Staff and Functions: Department of Transport
(Question No. 2133)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Transport upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
Will he provide a detailed list of the (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of his Department that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions are implemented.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) and (b) I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister in Public Service matters to Question No. 2119, printed in Hansard, 5 June 1981, page 3317.
Reduction of Staff and Functions: Department of Health
(Question No. 2134)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
Will he provide a detailed list of the (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of his Department that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions are implemented.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Prime Minister to Question No. 2119 on 5 June 1981 (Hansard, page 3317).
Reduction of Staff and Functions: Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 2136)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
Will he provide a detailed list of the (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of his Department that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the .Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions are implemented.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

I refer the honourable member to the response of the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, Mr Viner, to Question No. 21190n5June 1981 (Hansard,5lune 1981 page3317).
Reduction c;>f Staff and Functions: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 2137)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Administrative Services upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
Will he 'provide a detailed list of the (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of his Department that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations oL the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions are implemented.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the reply by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister to Question No. 2119 which appeared in the House of Representatives Hansard for 5 June 1981, page 3117.
Reduction of Staff and Functions: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs
(Question No. 2138)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
Will he provide a detailed list of the-
(a) Numbersofstaffand
(b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of his Department that are located in the Australian Capital Terri_tory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions is implemented.
Mr N. A. Brown-The reply to the honourable member's question is contained in the answer to Question No. 2119 given by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, Mr Viner, which appeared in Hansard of 5 June 1981 on page 3317.
Reduction of Staff and Functions: Department of Business and Consumer Affairs
(Question No. 2139)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on6 May 1981:
Will he provide a detailed list of the (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of his Department that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions are implemented.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions did not include the elimination of any functions of the Department which are located in the Australian Capital Territory. However, some of the Committee's recommendations require reviews to be undertaken in a number of areas of the Department. Whether or not any staff savings might be achieved as a result of these reviews is not expected to be known for some time.

506 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Reduction ofStaff and Functions: Department of Home Affairs and Envir'onment
(Question No. 2144)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
Will he provide a detailed list of the (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of his Department that are located in the Australian Capital Territory when the recommendations of-the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions is implemented.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the reply by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister to Question No. 2119, Hansard, 5 June 1981 (page 3317).
Participation in Commonwealth Heads of . Government Meeting: Department of Defence'
(Question No. 2170)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 7 May, 1981:
(I) How many (a) 2nd Division, (b) 3rd Division and (c) 4th Division officers in his Department are engaged (i) full time or (ii) part-time in administrative, policy or other preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne.
(2) How many officers of his Department are ellpected to attend the meeting.
(3) What is the ellpected cost of their attendance at the meeting, including salaries, overtime, accommodation, travel and other ellpenses.
(4) What other ellpenses does he ellpect his Department to incur as a result of Australia's participation in, and conduct of, tb.e meeting.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable 'member's question is as follows:
( I) to (4) I refer the honourable member to the Prime Minister's answer to Question No. 2162,
Participation in Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting: Department of Business
and Consumer Affairs
(Question No. 2182)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 7 May 1981: '
(I) How many (a) 2nd Division, (b) 3rd Division and (c) 4th Division officers in his Department are engaged (i) full time or (ii) part-time in administrative, policy or other preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne,
(2) How many officers of his Department are ellpected to attend the meeting.
(3) What is the ellpected cost of their attendance at the meeting, including salaries, overtime, accommodation, travel and other ellpenses.
(4) What other ellpenses does he ellpect his Department to incur as a result of Australia's participation in, and conduct of, the nieeting.

Mr Moore-The 'answer to the honourable member's question is .as follows:
(1) to (4) I refer the honourable member to the reply made by the Prime Minister to question number 2162 asked of him on 7 May 198\.
There are currently no second, third or fourth Division officers in my Department engaged full or part-time in preparing for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in Melbourne.'
I do not ellpect any officers of my Department will be attending the meeting.
Survey of Roads to Perth Airport
(Question No. 2197)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(I) Has an origin and destination survey of roads to Perth Airport been conducted by his Department or on its behalf.
(2) If the survey has been completed, or if it is still being conducted, does the Government intend to release its findings, ifso, when.
(3) If the findings of the survey will not be released, what is the reason.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) A road traffic study is currently being carried out by consultants on behalf of my Department. The study incorporates a vehicle interview survey at the airport in early April 1981 in which information was obtained on vehicle origins and destinations.
(2) and (3) It is not my Department's normal practice to formally release the findings of isolated surveys of this k0d. The findings will be incorporated into the airport master plan:. ning activity and a summary will probably be included in the master plan document. Because of its importance to State planners it will be made readily available to those concerned. However, the findings will be in no way confidential and I will provide Mr Beazley with a copy when available if he so wishes.
Mandata System: Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 2726)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(I) Has the Mandata System been introduced in his Department and Government instrumentalities under his control; if so, what was the (a) cost of (i) the equipment, (ii) installation, (iii) site preparation, (iv) acquiring or renting sites and (v) other additional factors associated with the introduction of the system and (b) total cost of introducing the system,
(2) Were any reductions in the staff of personnel/establishment units achieved as a result of introducing this system; if so, what (a) reductions in staff and (b) cost savings were achieved in each year since its introduction.
(3) What staff (a) saving or (b) increase is expected with the termination of the Mandata System.
(4) What is the anticipated (a) elltra cost or (b) saving resulting from the termination of the Mandata System.
Mr Thompson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 507

(I) Yes, in the Patent, Trade Marks and Designs Office.
(a) (i) Nil. See also answer to PQ2209(A) (I) and (II); (ii) Nil. See also answer to PQ2209(A) ([) and (II); (iii) $50; See also answer to PQ2209(A)(III); (iv) Nil. See also answer to PQ2209(A)([V); (v) Nil.
(b) $50.
(2) Nil.
(3) Nil, but see also answer to PQ2209 Part 3 (b). (4) (a) Nil, the withdrawal, ~ill be achieved within existing resources; (b) Nil.
Mandata System: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 2234)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(I) Has the Mandata System been introduced in his Department and Government instrumentalities under his control; if so, what was the (a) cost of (i) the equipment, (ii) installation, (iii) site preparation, (iv) acquiring or renting sites and (v) other additional factors associated with the introduction of the system and (b) total cost of introduoing the system.
(2) Were any reductions in the staff of personnel/establishment units achieved as a result of introducing this system; if so, what (a) reductions in staff and (b) cost savings were achieved in each year since its introduction.
(3) What staff (a) saving or (b) increase is expected with the termination of the Mandata System.
(4) What is the anticipated (a) extra cost or (b) saving resulting from the termination of the Mandata System.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No.
(2) to (4) Not applicable.
Reserve Bank Credit Finance to Public
(Question No. 2246)
Dr Everingham asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 13 May 1981:
([) Has his attention been drawn to The Story of the Commonwealth Bank by D. J. Amos, FA[S, which suggests at page 7 that Sir Denison Miller's 1920 issue of 23 million of bank credit caused private banks to abandon in Australia their world deflationary policy.
(2) Did the issue of Reserve Bank credit to finance public works, for which resources are idle and in ample supply, occupy profitably for the community persons who would otherwise have been a financial charge and emotional debit to the community.
(3) Did the issue of money to subsidize costs of essential Consumer Price Index items, for which demand was inelastic and productive capacity was in excess of demand, create or decrease cost and wage inflation in 1943-45.
(4) [s the money supply inflationary if (a) selectively spent to avoid demand-pull inflation to stimulate production in slack economic sectors and demand by the poor and (b) restricted in volume to final prices of goods and services produced by the community using that money and Reserve Bank issues of interest free capital for profitable public works and enterprises which do not compete for resources and which take up idle resources and productive capacity.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) and (3) I do not think any good purpose would be served by attempting to make judgements called for in parts (2) and (3) of the question, which involve events of up to sixty years ago.
In relation to part (3), however, [ would point out that from 1942 until the end of the war there were extensive wage and price controls. There was also extensive rationing. [n the short term, therefore, the subsidies for Consumer Price Index items (principally clothing, some food and other commodities in short supply to the civilian economy) would have had little effect upon recorded prices. These subsidies, together with other, measures of wartime government finance, did however add to the amount of money held as idle bank deposits. The activation of these deposits, in conjunction with post-war shortages, helped to raise the price level some 30 per cent between 1945-46 and 1948-49.
(4) Excessive increases in the money supply would be inflationary in the circumstances postulated, even assuming that slack areas of the economy could be pinpointed in the manner proposed. The economy is an inter-related whole, and action taken in one area inevitably has consequences for others. For example, the resulting increases in personal incomes would give rise to demand for a wide spectrum of goods and services, including those in short supply. In addition, some of the measures referred to (selecti~e spending in slack economic sectors, issues of interest free capital) would inhibit the capacity of the economy to adjust to changing circumstances, and thus reduce its efficiency and increase its susceptibility to inflation.
Exports of Bauxite and Alumina
(Question No. 2257)
Mr Uren asked the Treasurer, upon nqtice, on 13 May 1981:
Further to his answer to question No. 176 (Hansard, 24 February 1981, page 72) can he say (a) for what reason is information on exports of bauxite and details of exports of alumina by country of consignment subject to secrecy, (b) under what provision of the law is this secrecy prescribed and enforced and (c) which departments or authorities have access to this information.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) The information referred to is not made available by the Australian Statistician because to do so would reveal the transactions of individual exporters.
(b) Section 24 of the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
(c) The Australian Bureau of Statistics compiles export statistics from export entries and periodic returns submitted to the Bureau of Customs. The Bureau of Customs also provides copies of all entries and returns to the Reserve Bank, solely in connection with its responsibilities for supervising the receipt of export proceeds under the Banking (Foreign Exchange) Regulations. In addition, it provides to the Department of Trade and Resources copies of relevant entries and returns for .the purpose of monitoring exports of commodities, including bauxite and alumina, which are subject to export control pursuant to Regulation 9 of the Customs (Prohibited Exports) Regulations. I am advised that the Department also receives information on exports of these commodities direct from exporters. Consistent with undertakings given by successive governments, information obtained

508 REPRESENTATIVES 19 'August 1981

Answers to Questions

through the exercise .of exp.ort c.ontrols, including exp.ort stat-
istics, is treated as strictly c.onfidential by the Department .of Trade and Res.ources.

Kalg.o.orlie, WA, if s.o, will lie c.onsider splitting the signal at Kalg.o.orlie t.o provide FM .s~rvice t.o the Western Australian
g.oldfields.

With the ab.ove excepti.ons .other departments and auth.ori-

(2) C.ould this service use, the existing studi.o facilities and

ties d.o n.ot have access t.o th.ose returns .or entries sh.owing staff?

exp.orts .of bauxite .or c.ountry .of c.onsignment details .of alumina exp.orts. M.ore.over, n.o departments .or auth.orities have access t.o the relevant aggregate exp.ort statistics c.om-

(3) What w.ould be the estimated c.ost .of c.ommissi.oning an FM transmitter in that area ,OF Western Australia?

piled by the Statistician. I am n.ot in a p.ositi.on t.o say what in-

Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable

'I

f.ormati.on is supplied directly t.o State g.overnments by exp.orters.

member's question is as .follows:

(I) Yes. An FM stati.on t.o serve Kalg.o.orlie is already in-

Brisbane Airport: Consultancy Services
(Question No. 2283)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(I) What was the specific nature .of the c.onsultancy services relating t.o domestic wide-b.odied jets at Brisbane Airp.ort perf.ormed at a c.ost .of $101,396.50 referred t.o .on page 76 .of C.omm.onwealth .of Australia Gazette G 18 .of 5 May 1981, reference G FD 134.

cluded in my Department's current three year plan and subject t.o the availability.of financial and manp.ower res.ources, is scheduled f.or c.ompleti.on during the peri.od 1982-83.
(2) N.o.
(3) $120,000.
Television and Radio Reception, Wittenoom, Western Australia
(Question No. 2287)

(2) Wh.o were the unsuccessful tenderers and what is the

Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Communi-

name and address.of the successful tenderer.

cations, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:

(3) Why were the services n.ot perf.ormed by his

Is the t.own .of Witten.o.om, Western Australia t.o receive-

Department.

televisi.on and radi.o recepti.on through the nati.onal satellite

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable system; if n.ot, why n.ot?

member's question is as follows:

Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable

(I) The c.onsultant was engaged t.o c.ollect, tabulate, anamember's question is as follows:

lyse and rep.ort.on vari.ous aspects.of airp.ort activity including:

The planned d.omestic c.ommunicati.ons satellite system,

aircraft traffic aircraft apron .occupancy vehicular road traffic car park .occupancy empl.oyee p.opulati.on terminal.occupancy passenger baggage m.ovements freight m.ovements and st.orage .origin-destinati.on .of airp.ort travellers (b.oth .on and .off the airp.ort) c1assificati.on.of airp.ort traffic.
(2) The unsuccessful tenderers were: AUSDA Pty Ltd., 60 Albert R.oad, Melb.ourne, Vic.

which is planned t.o be .operati.onal by the mid-eighties, sh.ould provide televisi.on and radi.o c.overage t.o Witten.o.om.
Answers to Questions on Notice
(Question No. 2292)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
When may I expect t.o receive an answer t.o my questi.on N.o. 570 which first appeared .on the n.otice paper .on 24 February 1981.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable

Beca Carter H.ollings & Perner Ltd., 582 St. Kilda R.oad, Melb.ourne, Vic.
Airp.ort C.onsulting & C.onstructi.on Aust. Pty Ltd., 100 Miller Street, Nth Sydney, N.S.W.

member's question is as follows:
I refer the h.on.ourable member t.o my answer t.o Questi.on N.o. 570 published.on 10 June 1981 (Hansard, page 3477-8).

P. G. Pak-P.oy & Ass.ociates Pty Ltd., 445 Upper Edward Street, Brisbane, Qld.

Uranium: Safeguards Agreements

GHD-Pars.ons Brincherh.off Pty Ltd., 87 Wickham Terrace, Brisbane, Qld.
The successful tenderer was: Ove Arup Transp.ortati.on Planning, 406 C.ollins Street,

(Question No. 2312)
Mr Humphreys asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 26 May 1981 :

Melb.ourne, Vic.

(I) Is he able t.o say whether the uranium mining c.ompany

(3) The c.ollecti.on .of {he data inv.olved in this study
required the empl.oyment .of 120 survey pers.onnel .on a casual basis. The specialised staff required t.o perf.orm such a task are

MINATOME is a subsidiary .of a c.ompany which the President-elect t.o France, M. Franc.ois Mitterrand, has
declared will be nati.onalised.

n.ot retained by my Department.

(2) Is he able t.o give an assurance that the recently signed

FM Radio: Western Australia

safeguards agreements between the Australian G.overnment and the f.ormer Giscard D'Estaing G.overnment .on the

(Question No. 2286)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(I) D.oes the present FM radi.o/service t.o Perth and surrounding areas use a signal which .originates in Adelaide and is transmitted t.o Perth via the micr.owave link passing through

reprocessing .of Australian-supplied uranium will c.ontinue t.o be h.on.oured.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Minat.ome Australia Pty Ltd is a wh.olly-.owned subsidiary .of Minat.ome Sk.of France which is in turn .owned by

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 509

Pechiney Ugine Kuhlman (PlJK) (50 per cent), and Compagnie Francaise Des Petroles (TOTAL) (50 per cent). PUK
is a privately owned company and TOTAL is 35 per cent
Government-owned.

things, pending the passage of appropriate legislation, ASTEC had been established by Executive action.
(3) As above.

During his compaign Mr Mitterrand announced that a

Uniteli States and Japan Alliance

number of companies, including PUK but not TOTAL, would Qe nationalised.
(2) Australia and France signed a bilateral nuclear safeguards agreement on 7 January 1981, and negotiations on the

(Question No. 2320)
Mr Fry asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 26 May 1981:

text of a safeguards agreement between Australia and the

European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM)

concluded in March 1981. The Australia/EURATOM agree-

ment will be signed as soon as the necessary formal procedures

on both sides have been completed.

.

Both these agreements have to be brought into force before the parties are legally bound by the obligations specified in
them.

The Government is confident that the new French Govern-

(I) Does the recently announced alliance between "the United States of America and Japan have any impact on Australian foreign policy and defence planning.
(2) If the alliance leads to a re-arming of Japan, what implications will this have For Australia and what would be the effect on Australian foreign affairs and defence policy.
(3) Did the United States Government consult with the Australian Government beFore announcing this alliance.

ment will honour the results of the negotiations concluded - (4) Has the USA any obligation, either legal or moral, to

during the term of office of its predecessor.

consult with Australia on such a matter.

Communication Between Rival Powers
(Question No. 2313)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs upon notice, on 26 May 1981:
(I) Does the Government recognise the increasing risk of world war involved in the arms race and in failures of communication betweenrival powers.
(2) Has the Government supported moves to increase discussion of matters in dispute between the super-powers.
(3) Will the Government acknowledge that traditional responses to increased tension between countries, including reduction of diplomatic exchanges, (a) accelerate and exacerbate escalation of that tension, (b) are a virtually universal factor in war and (c) are put into reverse when peace is sought with an enemy.
(4) Will the Government reconsider its measures seen as being imposed against the Soviet Union but in fact imposed against human survival as referred to in part (5) of his reply to my question on notice No. 1923 (Hansard, 14 May 1981, page 2505).

(5) If the Australian Government was consulted, what response did it give.
(6) If the Australian Government was not consulted on this matter, (a) is this a cause of concern for the Australian Government and (b) what guarantee is there that the USA will consult Australia on any Future foreign policy initiative involving countries in the area.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) An alliance between the United States and Japan has not been announced recently. In the joint communique issued by Prime Minister Zenko Suzuki and President Ronald Reagan on 8 May, it was stated that "the Prime Minister and the President, recognising that the alliance between Japan and the United States is built upon their shared values of democracy and liberty, reaffirmed their solidarity, Friendship and mutual trust". Although there has been debate in Japan about the interpretation of the word 'alliance' in this sentence, in particular as to whether it committed Japan to a new or altered security relationship with the United States, the Government of Japan has made it clear that its relationship with the United States remains as it has been.

Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Yes.
(3) Yes, in certain circumstances.
(4) No.
Australian Science and Technology Council
(Question No. 2315)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 26 May 1981:
(I) Does the Science and Technology Statement 1980-81 state at page 65 that the Government established the Australian Science and Technology Council (ASTEC) in 1977.
(2) Can he give an assurance that this statement is accurate.
(3) When was the announcement first made on the establishment of ASTEC.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is:
(I) Yes.

(2) The joint communique further states that "the Prime Minister and the President reaffirmed their belief that the Japan-United States Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security is the foundation of peace and stability in the Far East and the defence of Japan. In insuring peace and stability in the region and the defence of Japan, they acknowledged the desirability of an appropriate division of roles between Japan and the United States. The Prime Minister stated that Japan, on its own initiative and in accordance with its constitution and basic defence policy, will seek to make even greater efforts For improving its defence capabilities in Japanese territories and in its surrounding sea and air space, and for further alleviating the financial burden of US. forces in Japan. The President expressed his understanding of the statement by the Prime Minister."
These positions outlined in the communique do not alter our perception of Japan's defence and security policies nor of Japan's relations with the United States. The Government sees cooperation under the Japan-United States Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security as a vital part of the defence of the Asia/Pacific region, as are the separate arrangements under ANZUS. It is in Australia's interest that the defence relationship between Japan and the United States remain a harmonious one.

(2) Yes. There was a Prime Ministerial Statement made in (3), (4), (5) and (6) As suggested in answer to questions (I) - Parliament on the 19 April 1977 stating that, amongst other and (2), no event as suggested by those questions took place

510 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers 10 Questions

which required specific consultations with Australia by any
other government. In both formal and informal consultations
with the United States on security issues in the Pacific area, discussion would include, as appropriate from time to time,
subjects related to Japan. Similarly, established patterns of consultations with Japan on matters of common international concern include subjects such as Japan's, and our own, re-
lations with the United States.

Ban on Soviet Trade Union Officials
(Question No. 2329)
Mr Fry asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 29 May 1981:
(I) Why are Soviet trade union officials banned from visiting Australia in view of Australia's extensive trade with the USSR.
(2) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that representatives of several Australian trade unions have been permitted by the Soviet authorities to send delegations to the USSR.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's questions is as follows:
(I) The Australian Government's policies towards the Soviet Union following the invasion of Afghanistan are a matter of public record.
(2) Yes.

Ravna Gora Chetniks

(Question No. 2332)

Mr Fry asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 27 May 1981:

Is the Attorney-General able to provide any information on

an Australian-based organisation calling themselves the

Ravna Gora Chetniks?

.

Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

I am informed that Ravna Gora is a range of mountains in Yugoslavia where,- during World War II, the Chetniks or Serbian Royalist troops, fought against Ustashi and German
troops.

I understand that there reside in Australia as well as in sev-
eral other Western countries some former Chetniks who are anti-communists, royalist and oppose the Yugoslav Govern-
ment. However, I am informed that the membership of the Ravna Gora Chetniks in Australia is quite small.

Foreign Registered Ships: Permits to Operate to Western Australia
(Question No. 2334)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 27 May 1981:
(I) How many foreign-registered ships sailing to or from Western Australian ports or from or to (a) Cocos (Keeling) Islands and (b) Christmas Island were granted permits to operate during the last 12 months.
(2) Were any foreign vessels permitted to operate over the routes without permits during the same period; if so, (a), why, (b) how many were given permission, (c) where were they registered and (d) what were the names of those vessels.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) None.
(2) (a) to (d) Permits are not required for foreignregistered ships to carry traffic between Western Australian ports and the Cocos (Keeling) Islands because the Cocos (Keeling) Islands are exempted from the coasting trade provisions of the Navigation Act. No permits were granted in respect of Christmas Island which is included in the Australian coasting trade. Ships carrying traffic between Western Australian por-ts and the Cocos (Keeling) Islands have been the Singapore registered generaL cargo vessels 'Wild Rover' and 'Tropic Star'; and between Western Australian ports and Christmas Island have been the British registered bulk carriers 'Baron Murray', 'Cape Hawke' and 'Cape Otway" which are authorised to operate by virtue of their being licensed under the Navigation Act for the Australian coasting trade.
Adelaide Airport
(Question No. 2337)
Mr Jacobi asked the. Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 27 May 1981:
(I) In what year was land purchased for Tullamarine airport in Melbourne.
(2) How many passengers passed through Melbourne in that year.
(3) How many passengers passed through Adelaide airport in 1980.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The site for Tullamarine airport was purchased in 1961 by the Department of the Interior, as it was then known on behalf of the then Department of Civil Aviation. The acquisition was promulgated in Commonwealth Gazette No. 70 dated 7 September 1961.
(2) During 1961, 21,661 international passenger movements and 1,145,704 domestic passenger movements, a total of 1,167,365 passenger movements, were recorded at Melbourne (Essendon) airport.
(3) During 1980, 1,962,311 domestic passenger movements were recorded at Adelaide airport, with a further estimated 71,200 passenger movements on third level (commuter) airlines.
Comprehensive Statement on Taxation
(Question No. 2338)
Dr Klugman asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on27 May 1981:
Will value added tax or other kinds of indirect taxes instead of high income taxes enable Australian manufacturers to compete better on the export market; if so, why did he not mention this in his comprehensive statement to the House on taxation on 12 March 1981 (Hansard, pages 760-70).
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
.Many factors have to be taken into account in any consideration of major changes to a taxation system, including the possible implications for exporters of any such changes. Not all factors would carry the same weight in such consideration.
My statement to the House on 12 March 1981 was not intended as an exhaustive primer of taxation principles and practices-nor, indeed would I seek to strain the patience of the House in that way. However, since the matter has been raised, I note that under the present sales tax (an important element in our present taxation system) exports are exempt,

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 511

and similar exemption could be expected to apply with a value-added tax (VAT).
I add that, unless exemption were provided for export sales, a VAT could not, in itself, be expected to enable manufacturers to compete better on export markets. [ understand that many countries that impose VAT do indeed grant exemptions of this kind. At the same time, they impose VAT on imports without granting credit for tax paid in the country of production. Where trade takes place solely between countries that impose VAT on this basis and at the same rate, the ultimate effect would be neutral on imports and exports, each country's VAT amounting to a tax on the consumption of its residents only. [n the interests of fiscal harmonisation, and the avoidance of double taxation, the member countries of the EEC have moved towards a uniform practice of this kind.
Traffic Accidents
(Question No. 2339)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 27 May 1981 :
(I) Were traffic accidents responsible for approximately 3508 deaths and for over 91 ,600 injuries in Australia in 1979.
(2) Did they also account for-3 per cent of total deaths in Australia and more than 50 per cent of all deaths in the 15-25 years age group..
(3) [n what proportion of these accidents was at least one participant affected by alcohol.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes to both parts.
(3) The exact proportion of casualty accidents in which at least one participant was affected by alcohol is not known. Research suggests that alcohol is a factor in 50 per cent of road accidents involving a fatality and in 34 per cent of personal injury road ac<;idents. Since not all drivers, riders and pedestrians involved In casualty accidents are tested for blood alcohol content, these figures necessarily understate the proportion of such accidents in which at least one participant was affected by alcohol.
Report on Aboriginal Health Programs
(Question No. 2342)
DrJenkins asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 27 May 1981:
(I) Did he commission a committee to produce a report entitled The Program Effectiveness Review on Aboriginal Health Programs; if so, will this report be made public.
(2) [f the report will not be made public, what recommendations contained in the report have been implemented.
(3) Did the review state how many Aborigines were treated by (a) the Victorian Health Commission and (b) community-based health services such as the Victorian Aboriginal Health Service; if so, what were the numbers and what was the cost in each case..
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) I refer the honourable member to the Minister for Health's response to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Aboriginal Affairs Report on Aboriginal Health (House of Representatives Hansard of 26 May 1981, page 2546).

[n his statement the Minister indicated that the Government had considered that Report together with the Report of the National Trachoma and Eye Health Program and a report by officialson the effectiveness of Aboriginal health programs. The Minister's statement therefore covered the Government's response to each of the reports.
It is not proposed to publish the report of the officials' review.
Dumping of Radioactive Waste
(Question No. 2348)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 27 May 1981 :
(I) [s it a fact that from 1946 to 1970 the United States of America authorised dumping of more than 50,000 drums of radioactive waste in the Pacific Ocean, some in the Farallon [slands fishing grounds off San Francisco, where up to 8,000 times normal radioactivity from cesium and strontium isotopes and plutonium have been found from waste described by the US Environmental Protection Agency as-low level, and some at sites never made public.
(2) [fso, does the Government support recent USA Government estimates that Pacific radioactive waste could total up to 300,000 curies, 10 times previous estimates.
(3) Has the USA Atomic Energy Commission disclosed to Australia, that it knew 20 years ago that drums holding nuclear waste when dumped were broken open by water pressure at great depths; if so, when.
(4) Did the United States Navy recently agree that 23 nuclear submarines homeported at Pearl Harbour from 1964 to 1973 dislodged 4.8 million gallons of radioactive waste there; if so, did Hawaii recently establish State monitoring of the effects on marine life.
(5) Are any results of this monitoring available.
(6) [s he able to state whether Japan has a program to dump initially 5,000 to 10,000 drums of radioactive waste less than 600 miles north of the Marianas.
(7) What offers has Australia made to Japan to develop alternative waste disposal techniques and with what result.
(8) Will the Government promptly publish all details of any use of Australian inventions for nuclear waste disposal including dump sites and all known information on military and industrial nuclear contamination and dumping plans in the Pacific Ocean.
(9) Will Australia support moves for extension of the Antarctic nuclear-free zone; ifso, in what regions; if not, why not.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The locations of all sites where radioactive waste has been dumped by the United States of America were made public in 1971 a.t which time 41 sites were identified. Subsequent searching of records has added several more sites, and all site locations have been published. About ninety per cent of all activity dumped by the US has been at four main sites:

Site
Atlantic Atlantic Farallon Farallon

Co-ordinate

Number of drums

38.30N/72.06W 14,301 37.50N /70.35W 14,500
37.38N/123.08W 3,500 37.30N/123.18W 44,000

Curies (correct to 10 per cent)
74,400 2,100 1,100
13,400

512 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

The United States Environmental Protection Agency has advised that the number of drums of radioactive waste dumped by the United States of America from 1946-70 at the above Atlantic and Pacific Ocean sites was 76,301. The number of drums dumped in the Pacific (at the Farallon Island sites) was 47,500. No strontium release was detected by monitoring at either of the Atlantic or Farallon Island sites. Plutonium 239/240 was detected at the Farallon Island sites (not at the Atlantic sites) at concentrations 2 to 25 times greater than would be expected from background attributable to fall-out from nuclear weapons testing. Cesium was not detected at the Farallon Island sites. It was, however, detected at Atlantic sites at concentrations 3 to 70 times greater than background.
(2) According to the United States Environmental Protection Agency, present activity at the Farallon sites is estimated to amount to 14,500 curies, not 300,000 curies as suggested.
(3) The United States authorities have advised that their experience is that drums holding nuclear waste actually remain intact when dumped and that any release takes place over a long period of time. The US Atomic Energy Commission has always taken the position, however, that it needs to be assumed for the purpose of analysis that drums holding nuclear waste would .fracture on impact when dumped, and that activity would be released..
(4) United States official sources have confirmed that releases of low-level r!ldioactive liquid wastes from US nuclear submarines in Pearl Harbour from 1964-78 totalled 4,843,000 gallons, containing about 1.0 curie of activity. Most of this release (0.98 curie) occurred in 1964 in a volume of 405,000 ga,lions.
The State of Hawaii established an environmental monitoring program for Pearl Harbor by granting a one-year contract to the Gamma Corporation. This commenced in June 1980.
(5) The Gamma Corporation has reported that three quarterly samplings have been made in the course of the monitoring program. The first quarter sampling in September 1980 showed the highest cobalt-60 activity of about 0.25 picocurie per gram. The seconl;! quarter sampling in December 1980 showed the same general pattern of cobalt-60 activity as in the first quarter. Crab and seawe,ed samples showed only normal activity. Sampling of air activity showed a continuing rise in fallout activity, presumably from a recent nuclear test in the atmosphere by China. Third quarter sampling in February 1981 showed about the same distribution pattern as obtained in'the previous quarter sampling, except for sample station no. 6 which recorded an activity of 0.488 picocurie per gram, about three times the average of previous activity recorded by that station.
Further sampling is required for a greater period to determine whether these samples are indicative of an increasing activity level in Pearl Harbour.
, (6) Japan has announced that it is proposing to conduct a trial dumping of about 10,000 drums of cement-solidified lowlevel waste, comprising less than 500 curies of radioactivity in the North Pacific. The dump site, 300 N 147E, is approximately 510 nautical miles (945 kilometres) south-east of Tokyo, and 290 nautical miles (540 kilometres) from the nearest island, which is a Japanese possession. The nearest island of the Mariana group is about 590 nautical miles (1,090 kilometres) from the proposed dump site.
(7) Australia and Japan participate in international studies on nuclear waste disposal in the Nuclear Energy Agency of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and in the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Bilaterally, there has been an exchange of correspondence between scientists in the Australian Atomic Energy Commission and the Japan Atomic Energy Institute concerning

papers relating to the SYNROC technique for the immobi!isation of high-level nuclear waste developed at the Australian National University.
Apart from the exchanges between scientists on the SYNROC technique, Australia and Japan have not had bilateral discussions on alternative waste disposal techniques and Australia is not in a position to offer other alternative techniques on radioactive waste disposal to Japan.
(8) Details of the SYNROC research and development program have been published widel.y in. scienl!fic journals ~nd elsewhere. This is the only Australian Invenllon for handling nuclear waste disposal in the form of high-level waste.
The Government has said that there is no ,intention of Australia's storing other. countries' nuclear wastes. Information on atomic test sites and related details of nuclear contamination within Australia has been published in reports by the Australian Ionising and Radiation Advisory Council and the Department of National Development and Energy. These reports are available to the public.
Australia has made clear its opposition to the Pacific region becoming a dumping ground for the indiscriminate and uricontrolled disposal of nuclear wastes. Consistent with that position the Government will continue to monitor closely all developments related to the dumping of nuclear waste in the Pacific.
Japan's announcement that it proposes to dump low level radioactive waste in the North Pacific is the only case known to the Government of a country which has plans to dump radioactive waste in the Pacific Ocean.
(9) Australia supports the Antarctic Treaty, Article 5 of which prohibits the nuclearisation of the whole of the area south of the 600 S parallel. The question of extending the region to cover a wider area has not been raised in the regular consultations which take place underthe Treaty.
The Government does not conSider that calls for nuclearfree~zones, which try to encompass the totality of nuclear issues affecting regions, are likely to be effective in meeting the security and environmental concerns of countries in the areas where such calls have been made. These concerns and interests are more likely to be taken into account if attention is focused on particular problems which are raised by particular issues.
Export Expansion Grants Scheme
(Question No. 2351)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice~ on 28 May 1981:
(I) What evaluation of the Export Expansion Grants Scheme was undertaken prior to the decision of the Government being taken to extend its operation beyond 30 June 1982 (Hansard,30AprilI981,page 1848).
(2) Did this evaluation conclude that the level of grant payable under the Scheme should be 50 per cent of the rates presently payable; if not, on what basis was the decision to reduce the rate of grant taken.
(3) Will the extension Of the period during which export expansion grants are payable affect Australia's position in relation to the GATT Subsidies and Countervailing Measures Code.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Before coming to a decision to extend the operation of the Export Expansion Grants Scheme for one more grant year beyond 30 June 1982, the Government thoroughly reviewed the experience to date with the operation of the scheme including, in particular, the rising cost of the scheme.

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 513

(2) Yes.
(3) No.
Business and Industry Statistical Information
(Question No. 2353)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 2 July 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the numerous complaints made by business people and industry organisations regarding the paucity of statistical inFormation relevant to business and industry in Australia.
(2) Did .he consult with business representatives before determining which data collections, including those listed in his press statement of20 May 1981, should be terminated.
(3) If not, will he now consult with business to determine whether these data collections should be re-established or supplemented with new data series.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am unaware of any significant volume of complaints of the kind alluded to. Indeed, I am more aware of complaints about the excessive costs and inconvenience to business resulting from Government intervention, of which the statistical collections are sometimes a part.

(2) and (3) The Committee on the Review of Commonwealth Functions did not seek submissions from the public. Statistical-priorities in data collections are kept under continuing review.
Regional Development Program
(Question No. 2358)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 28 May 1981:
(I) What projects have been approved for funding under the Regional Development Program in 1980-81.
(2) What projects were under consideration by the Decentralisation Advisory Board as at 30 April 1981.
(3) What was the value of each of the projects referred to in parts (1) and (2).
(4) What was the level of employment associated with each of the projects.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I), (2) and (4) The projects approved for funding under the Commonwealth Regional Development Program in 1980-81 and the estimates of the employment associated with the projects are listed below:

Project
Canobolas Wool Topmaking Pty Ltd Omya~Minerals Pty Ltd
Galvanising Services (Coifs Harbour) Pty Ltd
Trily Plastics Manufacturing Pty Ltd
Viscount Holdings Pty Ltd
New South Wales Sugar Milling Co-operative Ltd
Laminex Customwood Pty Ltd -
Ardmona Fruit Products Co-operative Co. Ltd
The Warrnambool Cheese and Butter Factory Co. Ltd
K. W. & J.C. HydeandC. A. & J.A. Wood
Mackay Seafoods Pty Ltd
Townsville Harbour Board
Over-nite Properties Pty Ltd
The Council of the Shire of Proserpine
O. R. Beddison Pty Ltd
Wharnclilfe Pty Ltd
Pilbara Fitness Centre Pty Ltd
Osborne Metal Industries (Karratha) Pty Ltd

Description
Expansion of a wool scouring and topmaking plant
Construction of a calcite grinding plant
-Galvanising plant expansion
Establishment of a plastic bag manufacturing plant
Expansion of a commercial laundry
Upgrading and expansion of boiler and associated facilities
Fibre board plant construction
Upgrading of existing plant and installation of additional food processing equipment
Construction of a cheese cutting and packaging factory
Construction of modular factory units
Construction of a seafood processing facility
Expansion of berthage and associated facilities for commercial fishing lIeet
Expansion of a trade waste disposal and trade waste bin manufacturing business
Upgrading and development of harbour facilities
Construction of a veneer and plywood factory
Establishment of a softwood sawmill
Construction of a squash and fitness centre
Establishment of a factory manufacturing sheet metal products

Location

Employment

Orange, New South Wales
Bathurst, New South Wales
Coifs Harbour, New South Wales
Nowra, New SOllth Wales
Wagga Wagga, New South Wales
Harwood, New South Wales
Wagga Wagga, New South Wales
Shepparton, Victoria

4 26 27
7 36
ISO
210 over 200

Warrnambool,

150

Victoria

Gladstone,

25

Queensland

Mackay, Queensland

8

Townsville,

20

Queensland

Townsville,

12

Queensland

Shute Harbour,

6

Queensland

Nangwarry, near

62

Mount Gambier,

South Australia

Bunbury, Western

148

Australia

Port Hedland Western

2

Australia

Karratha, Western

15

Australia

514 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Project

Description

Location

Employment

Neptune Property Holdings Pty Ltd

Establishment of a seaFood processing

Launceston, Tasmania

12

retailing and wholesale complex

Supavinyl Products Pty Ltd

Expansion of exterior wall cladding

Bell Bay, Tasmania

15

manufacturing Facilities

At 30 April 1981, the following projects were being evaluated by my Department as a preliminary to consideration by the Board:

Australian Opal Distributors Pty Ltd

Construction of accommodation and

Lightning Ridge, New

n.a.

tourist facilities

South Wales

Griffith Producers' Co-operative Pty

Establishment of an onion and garlic

Griffith, New South

n.a.

Ltd

dehydration plant

Wales

Acton Frozen Foods

Construction of a cold store

Wagga Wagga, New

n.a.

South Wales

Old Ballarat Travel Inn

Expansion of conFerence facilities

Ballarat, ViCtoria

n.a.

Amcast Pty Ltd

Found~y expansion

Ballarat, Victoria

n.a.

LR & ND Petterwood Pty Ltd

Expansion ofT-shirt manufacturing

Townsville,

n.a.

facility

Queensland

Poefinger Family Trust Pty Ltd

Construction of accommodation and

Townsville;

n.a.

tourist facilities

Queensland

Northern Industries Pty Ltd

Expansion of a laundry and dry-cleaning Townsville,

n.a.

facilities

Queensland

E.J.Ramsay

Construction of food processing plant

Charters Towers,

n.a.

Queensland

Hayles Magnetic Island Pty Ltd

Expansion of Tourist facilities

Cairns, Queensland

n.a.

Hart ManuFacturing Co. Pty Ltd

Establishment of food processing plant Murray Bridge, South

n.a.

Australia

Delhy Pty Ltd

Establishment of hydraulic hoist

Devonport, Tasmania

n.a.

manufacturing facility

McLaine Stainless Pty Ltd

Expansion of stainless steel fabrication

Launceston, Tasmania

n.a.

plant

Milatos Investments Pty Ltd

Construction of an international

Alice Springs,

n.a.

standard motel

Northern Territory

Note: (i) Employment associated with each of the projects assisted in 1980-81 has been defined as direct long term employment. For three projects, Ardmona Fruit Products CoOperative Co. Ltd, New South Wales Sugar Milling CoOperative Ltd and Laminex Customwood Pty Ltd the employment estimates also include other employment in the region in the provision of raw materials which is an integral part of the expansion/establishment of the project.
(ii) There are no accurate employment estimates available in respect of the projects under evaluation as the detailed evaluations were not completed.
(3) For commercial reasons, the value of individual projects is not published. However, the value of all projects approved in 1980-81 is estimated at $66.4m.
Zinc Prices
(Question No. 2359)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 28 May 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that, for a number of years, the Trade Practices Commission has been monitoring zinc prices in Australia.
(2) Is it also a fact that, after more detailed investigation by the Commission of pricing practices of zinc suppliers, the Commission was not convinced there was no collusion between suppliers in the setting of zinc prices.
(3) Was it a consideration in the Commission's decision not to proceed in the courts against the zinc suppliers, but instead maintain a surveillance of prices, that the Commission did \lot have sufficient staff or financial resources to proceed with the matter at the time.

(4) Will he give an undertaking that the acceptance by the Government of the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions will not lead to a further reduction of the Commission's resources and an abandoning of the Commission's investigative work 'in the area of zinc pricing.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Trade Practices Commission did monitor zinc prices in Australia for several years.
(2) and (3) After making extensive enquiries the Trade Practices Commission concluded that a price agreement between zinc sijj2pliers could not be proved. As stated in the Commission's Annual Report for 1979-80, the Commission found that price uniformity in recent years appeared to be consistent with non-collusive price leadership.
(4) The Commission has stated that it will keep the matter under general review as circumstances and any future relevant evidence may require.
Changes to Tariff Levels
(Question No. 2360)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 28 May 1981:
(I) Has he or his Department received complaints From State Governments or others alleging that changes are made to tariff levels without adequate consideration being given to the effect of such changes on the economies of individual States and regions.
(2) Are these criticisms justified; if not, what is the reason.

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 515

(3) What constraints will the Government's adoption of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions' recommendations concerning the Industries Assistance Commission (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1841) have on the capacity of that body to give greater consideration to the special problems of individual regions when it is formulating proposals on industry protection.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Most industries assistance decisions necessarily involve the granting or withdrawal of some benefit to industries located in particular States or regions. Therefore representation of various points of view are expected and welcomed by Government to assist it to make a balanced decision which takes into account all relevant viewpoints.
(2) It is Government policy that tariffs and other assistance to particular industries are not changed before advice is received from either of the government's advisory bodies" on industry assistance, the lAC or the TAA. The public inquiry process provides all bodies, including State Governments and regional authorities, with ample opportunity to put their point of view. The draft report procedure allows comment on the lAC's draft recommendations before a final lAC report is submitted to the Government.
Under Section 23A of the Industries Assistance Commission Act 1973, the Commission is required to report on the probable economic and social consequences of implementing its recommendations, as well as the likely employment consequences, both generally and in particular regions.
Before taking a decision on assistance levels for an industry, the Government fully considers the views of all interested parties as well as the likely implications of its decisions. In these circumstances it is not reasonable to criticise changes on the grounds cited.
(.l) Following the adoption of the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions, the workload of the lAC will be examined. Any changes to the staffing levels in the lAC will only occur as a result of reductions in the general workload. There are no plans to make reductions that would limit in any way the lAC's capacity to meet its obligations to provide the Government with full and detailed information on matters pertinent to industries assistance.
Australian Conservation Foundation
(Question No. 2361)
Dr Klugman asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 28 May 1981:
(I) What has been the total contribution of public funds, including grants from the Commonwealth and States and tax" foregone for donations, to the Australian Conservation Foundation for the last year for which figures are available.
(2) What other political organisations receive similar public funding.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I understand that, in 1979-80, the Australian Conservation Foundation received $1the Commonwealth and $12,750 by way of grants from State Governments. There would also have been some cost to Commonwealth revenue in that year in respect of deductible gifts to the Foundation but data are not available on which to base an estimate of that cost.
(2) The phrase 'other political organisations' could be construed in a number of ways and, in the circumstances. I do not feel able to provide a response to this part of the honourable

member's question. If he will let me know which particular bodies he is interested in, I shall endeavour to provide him with the information he is seeking.

State Peak Load Electrical Engineering Capacities

(Question No. 2364)

Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 28 May 1981:

(I) What is the peak load electrical generating capacity for each Australian State.

(2) What is the per capita consumption of electricity for each Australian State, in order from highest to lowest.

(3) What is the cost per kilowatt hour for domestic consumers in each State.

(4) Is the Minister able to say what is the per capita con-
sumption of electricity for (a) the United States of America, (b) Canada, (c) Norway, (d) the Federal Republic of Germany, and (e) France.

Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) At 30 June 1980 State electricity authorities reported electricity generating capacity in Megawatts (MW) as
follows:

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory

10418MW 5211MW 3040MW
1899MW 1565MW 1782MW 228MW

Reported capacity for New South Wales and Victoria in-
cludes their entitlements to the capacity of the Snowy Mountains Scheme (which totals 3740 MW). New South Wales entitlement includes the Australian Capital Territory share of
the capacity of the Snowy Mountains Scheme. Excluding entitlements to the capacity of the Snowy Mountains Scheme
electricity generating capacities for New South Wales and Victoria are 7763 MW and 4126 MW respectively.

(2) In 1979-80, per capita consumption levels of electricity by State in kilowatt hours (kWh) in oider from highest to lowest were as follows:

Tasmania . . . . . . Australian Capital Territory. New South Wales Victoria . . . " South Australia Queensland Northern Territory Western Australia

17992 kWh 6153 kWh 5480 kWh 4586 kWh 4483 kWh 4329 kWh 3805 kWh 3557 kWh

(3) As at June 1981, comparative charges to households in
cents per kilowatt hour (cents /kWh) for average annual domestic consumption (levels indicated in brackets) for Statewide distribution systems or capital cities, were as indicated
below:

Sydney
Victoria Brisbane SA WA
Tas. ACT NT

3.82 cents/kWh(6380 kWh)
4.78 cents/kWh (55 I I kWh) 4.86 cents/kWh(5600 kWh) 4.06 cents/kWh(5072 kWh) 5.89 cents/kWh(4234 kWh) 3.53 cents/kWh (10115 kWh) 3.21 cents/kWh(10415 kWh) 5.21 cents/kWh(6377 kWh)

516 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

(4) Average annual per capita consumption of electricity in 1978 in kilowatt hours (kWh)

(a) United States of America (b) Canada (c) Norway (d) West Germany (e) France

9363 kWh 11935 kWh 17107 kWh 5240 kWh 3845 kWh

Menindee Lakes Storage, New South Wales
(Question No. 2367)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 2 June 1981:
(I) Is the Menindee Lakes Storage, New South Wales, controlled by the River Murray Commission or by the New South Wales Water Resources Commission.
(2) Do special arrangements exist for the allocation of water from the storage to New South Wales and to South Australia; if so, what are the details.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National pevelopment and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The Menindee Lakes Storage was constructed and is owned by New South Wales which operates and controls this storage through the New South Wales Water Resources Commission in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Menindee Lakes Storage Agreement between the Commonwealth, New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia.
(2) The Menindee Lakes Storage Agreement lays down the arrangements for the allocation of water from the storage to the States. The River Murray Commission may not call for the release of water from the lakes over the period from when the quantity of water stored in the lakes becomes less than 480,000 megalitres until the-next time the quantity of water so stored exceeds 640,000 megalitres; but during this time New South Wales may use the water stored in the lakes as it requires. At other times' water stored in the lakes in excess of 480,000 megalitres is available to the River Murray Commission to allocate for sharing between New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia, in accordance with the provisions of the River Murray Waters Agreement. However, in addition to any share it may receive under that Agreement, New South Wales is entitled to use 125,000 megalitres in any year commencing on the 1st May. There are no special arrangements for the allocation of Menindee water to South Australia. South Australia's entitlement under the River Murray Waters Agreement may be provided from any of the sources of supply available to the River Murray Commission, including the Menindee Lakes.

River Murray Waters Agreement
(Question No. 2368)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 2 June 1981:
(I) What is the allocation of water to (a)-New South Wales, (b) Victoria and (c) South Australia under the River Murray Waters Agreement for (i) normal flows and (ii) very low flows.
: (2) Was at least 85 per cent of River Murray system water used by New South Wales and Victoria under the Agreement diverted via the (a) Mulwala Canal and the Wakool District and (b) Yarrawonga Canal and the Torrumbarry System in 1979-80; if not, what was the percentage.

(3) Was water used by New South Wales and Victoria approximately nine-fold less polluted in the Mulwala/ Yarrawonga Canals and four-fold less polluted in the Wakool/Torrumbarry System in respect of sodium than Murray River water flowingto South Australia in 1979-80; if not, what are the figures for the relevant proportions.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) (i) Under normal flows, South Australia is entitled to 1,850,000 megalitres per annum in specified monthly quantities. Having provided South Au-stralia's entitlement, New South Wales and Victoria are entitled to an equal share of the flow of the River Murray at Albury, plus any contribution from their own tributaries below Albury.
(ii) During periods of very low flow and after a formal period of restriction has been declared by the River Murray Commission, special arrangements apply. An assessment is made of the water resources available to the Commission taking account of estimated evaporation and transmission losses. Allowance is made for a base flow of 58,000 megalitres per month to South Australia or such other quantity as may be determined by the Commission. The balance of water available is then divided equally between New South Wales, Victoria and South Australia. In these circumstances, New South Wales and Victoria also retain their entitlement to the additional amounts of flow contribu'ted by their respective tributaries below Albury.
(2) No; from information avail~ble in the River Murray Commission's 1980 Annual Report, the percentage was about 81 percent.
(3) Information contained in the 1980 Annual Report of the River Murray Commission shows that the median values for sodium concentrations during the year at the following locations were:
Yarrawonga-6 milligrams per litre Torrumbarry-14 milligrams per litre Euston-32 milligrams per litre Wentworth-51 milligrams per litre Tailem Bend-93 milligrams per litre
If the figures for Wentworth are taken as indicative of the sodium concentration in the water entering South Australia, the concentration of sodium in water diverted by New South Wales and Victoria from Yarrawonga Weir was about oneeighth of that at Wentworth and for the water diverted by Victoria at Torrumbarry the proportion was about one-quarter.
Department of Transport Housing at Wyndham, Western Australia
(Question No. 2375)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 2 June 1981:
(I) Will his Department repair the 3 houses that it .-seotly has vacant.in Wyndham, Western Australia, and make them available at commercial rents to help alleviate a chronic housing shortage in the town.
(2) If his Department prefers not to become involved in house letting, will it make the properties available to other Departments or local Government to be utilised in a manner beneficial to the community.
Mr Hunt-,--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) There are two residences 'currently vacant on Wyndham Airport which are surplus to the requirements of

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 517

the Department of Transport. These residences are approximately 5 km from the nearest housing settlement and efforts made in the past to find a tenant have not been successful. Both residences are in poor condition and action is in hand to declare them surplus to requirements to the Department of Administrative Services for disposal by removal from the Airport.
Australian Taxation System
(Question No. 2376)
Mr Hurford asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 2 June 1981:
(I) Has the Confederation of Australian Industry written to him expressing substantial misgivings about the Australian taxation system and calling for a Green Paper on tax.
(2) If so, was he surprised to read the comments of this industry body, in view of his statement to the Parliament on 12 March 1981 on taxation policy (Hansard pages 760-70).
(3) Has Australian industry been critical of the Government for not having made, after 5t years in power, a clearer and more definitive statement on taxation matters as they' affect industry; if so, is there justification for this criticism.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Director-General of the Confederation of Australian Industry wrote to me recently, setting out, inter alia, the Confederation's views on the Australian taxation structure and suggesting that a Green Paper should be prepared to enable informed public discussion of taxation questions.
(2) and (3) Judgments about the tax system differ not only on points of emphasis and detail but also, and more importantly, concerning such weightier issues as the constraints which the effects of possible changes upon the budgetary aggregates must impose, and the relative importance attached to effects on particular sectors or on the structure of the taxation system as a whole.
It should not be surprising that different views on these matters are possible, given the different basic stances from which people start out. I do not think that the existence of such differences of view is open to the kind of black-and-white interpretation implied in the question.
In his letter, the Director-General reiterated the Confederation's request for urgent consideration of several substantial amendments of the income tax law. A point I wish to make in regard to those suggestions is that their immediate implementation would have consequences for the revenue on a scale that would put at risk the Government's budgetary strategy and jeopardise the economic progress achieved since 1976.
Economic Relations with New Zealand
(Question No. 2377)
Mr Burr asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 2 June 1981:
(I) Are negotiations under way for closer economic relations with New Zealand; if so, will he provide details.
(2) Has any agreement' been reached that will allow a greater import of raw and processed vegetables from New Zealand.
(3) If so, will any protection be given to Australian producers to prevent undermining the domestic Australian market by heavily subsidised New Zealand products.
(4) Will any measures be taken to prevent a flooding of the Australian potato market.

Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member'& question is as follows:
(I) I refer the honourable member to the statement to the Parliament by the Prime Minister on 25 March 1980 in which he outlined proposals agreed with the Prime Minister of New Zealand for a possible closer economic relationship between Australia and New Zealand.
(2) and (3) No agreement has been reached on any aspect of the proposed closer economic relationship. In his statement the Prime Minister emphasised that "no commitment to any specific proposal has been entered into at this stage, nor will any decisions be taken until the studies have been completed and there has been full consboth countries". However the central trade objective of the proposed closer economic relationship is the gradual and progressive elimination of all barriers to trans-Tasman trade on all goods produced in either country.
(4) There are no imports of fresh potatoes from New Zealand due to quarantine restrictions and any concerns the industry may have can only relate to processed potato products, imports of which have been minimal in recent years and well below Australian shipments to New Zealand.
Implicit in the Prime Minister's statement of 25 March 1980 is the principle that trade between Australia and New Zealand within a closer economic relationship could only take place under conditions of fair competition. This means that any movement towards trade liberalisation would only occur on the basis of fair and equitable trading opportunities. The honourable member can be assured that the concerns expressed by Australian potato growers relating to the prospect of unfair New Zealand competition in potato products are being carefully assessed in the light of the central trade objective of the proposed closer economic relationship.
Australian Qantas Flights by Ministers and Members of Parliament
(Question No. 2378)
Mr Dawkins asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 2 June 1981:
( I) On how many occasions was approval given for (a) Ministers and (b) other members of parliament to travel on Qantas flights between Perth and the eastern States during the last 3 years.
(2) In how many cases was travel app~oved because of the disruption to domestic flights as a result of industrial action.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) 8, (b) Nil.
(2) Up until general approval was given on 27 April 1981 to allow international carriers to uplift domestic passengers as a result of the effects of the flight attendant's dispute, only 4 authorisations were made to Ministers for travel between Perth and the eastern States. -
West Irian and East Timor: Self-determination
(Question No. 2386)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(J) Has Australia an observer at the South Pacific Human Rights Tribunal hearing evidence in Port Moresby, PNG, for referral to the United Nations, alleging atrocities by Indonesian troops against West Irian dissidents; if not, why not.

518 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) Will Australia unequivocally reiterate its support for (a) the original undertakings of Indonesia to ,ensure self determination for, West Irian and j':ast'Timor and (b) the United States of America human rights policy to be applied to USA and Australian relations with Indonesia as clearly as it is applied to Vietnam.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Australia did not receive an invitation to observe the proceedings of the 'South Pacific Human Rights Tribunal';
(2) (a) Australia regards Irian Jaya and East Timor as being provinces of Indonesia;
(b) It is for the United States Government to determine its own policies in relation to Indonesia and Vietnam.
Apple and Pear Promotion
(Question No. 2389)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(I) Are wholesale fruit agents required to deduct a levy of 7c per bushel from growers' returns to be diverted to the Apple and Pear Corporation for promotion in Australia and overseas.
(2) If so, what regulations under the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act require this to be done.
(3) Are proceeds from the Apple and Pear Export Charge also diverted to promotion.
(4) What proportion of the total sum spent on promotion was spent (a) overseas and (b) in Australia from grower and government funds during (i) 1979 and(ii) 1980.
(5) What amount of grower funds earmarked for promotion and publicity in (a) 1979 and (b) 1980 was spent on general Corporation overheads.
(6) Of the amount of grower funds spent in (a) 1979 and (b) 1980 what sum was spent on promotion and publicity in (i) each State and (ii) each overseas country.
(7) Are any attempts made locally and overseas to monitor the effects of expenditure on promotion and publicity on consumption.
(8) Is detailed information available to growers and agents on local and overseas promotion campaigns.
(9) As apple and pear growing is regional, have there been any demands from the industry for promotion to emphasise district attributes, for example, the Huon Valley, Adelaide Hills, Bilpin, Orange, Stanthorpe and so on.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Sections 5 and 6 of the Apple and Pear Levy 'Act 1976 provide for a levy to be imposed on apples and pears produced and sold or used in Australia. The levy is payable by the grower. In respect of apples and pears which are not used for juicing or processing, sub-regulation 3(c) of the Apple and Pear Levy Regulations provides that the rate of levy shall be 5c per box. Sub-section 6 (2) of the Apple and Pear Levy Collection Act 1976 enables wholesale fruit agents to deduct the amount of the levy from the proceeds of the sal!: of the fruit they handle on behalf of the grower. Section 29 of the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973 provil;!es that all moneys received under the Apple and Pear LevylA5l1ection Act 1976 and the Apple and Pear Export Charge Collection Act 1976 (see (3) below) shall be paid to the Corporation. Section 6 of the Australian Apple and Pear C;orporation Act 1973 provides that the promotion of apples and pears in Australia and overseas is one of the functions of

the Corporation. Finally, section 32 of the same Act enables the moneys of the Corporation to be applied in payment or discharge of the expenses, charges, obligations and liabilities incurred or undertaken by the Corporation in the performance of its functions under the Act.

(3) Yes, in the same manner as the payment of the levy.
Pursuant to sub-section 7(1) of the Apple and Pear Export Charge Act 1976 and Regulation 3 of the Apple and Pear Export Charge Regulations the rate of charge applied is 5
cents per box of fruit exported from Australia.

(4) The amounts spent on publicity and promotion during 1979 and 1980 were:

(a) Overseas (b) in Australia

(i) 1979 (ii) 1980 $117,216 $126,177 $371,302 $274,898

in respect of which the Overseas Trade Publicity Committee's (OTPC) contributions in 1978-79 and 1979-80 respectively were $68,764 and $90,233.

(5) No specified amounts of the proceeds of the levy and
export charge accumulations are earmarked for publicity/ promotion and general Apple and Pear Corporation over-
heads, but the amounts expended in 1979 and 19&0 on general
Corporation overheads were:

Members of the Corporation, Fees, Allowances and Expenses
Administration-Salaries Other

(a) 1979 ($)
92,995 158,869 170,140

(b) 1980 ($)
96,340 18i,005 176,681

Totals

422,004 454,026

(6) The amounts spent on promotion and publicity in each State and in each overseas country were:

(i) States
Common expenses i.e. Production of posters, TV commercials, industry communications, apples for schools and public relations
New South Wales Victoria . . . South Australia Western Australia Queensland Tasmania

(a) 1979 ($)
82,895 116,233 69,596
18,572 35,382 42,992
5,632

(b) 1980 ($)
70,804 117,575
ll,784 24,671 37,515 10,514
2,035

371,302 (ii) Overseas Financial year to 30 June 1979 and 1980.

274,898

Singapore Britain Hong Kong France Germany Sweden Denmark Indonesia Middle East Malaysia
USA

(a) 1979

(b) 1980

Corp-

Corp-

oration OTPC oration OTPC

$ 32,068 19,378 13,134 9,240 8,682 7,834
3,262 3,168
1,320

$ 20,844 12,596
8,537 6,006 5,643 5,092
2,120 2,059
858

$ 41,032 18,014 27,315 9,108 10,531 15,129
6,048
4,635 5,157

$ 26,671 11,709 17,755 5,920 6,845 9,834
3,931
3,013 3,352

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 519

(- a) 1-979- - (b) 1980

Corp-

Corp-

oration OTPC oration OTPC

Misc (buyers guides, press feed, et cetera) Total Grand Total

$

$

$

$

7,706 5,009 1,851 1,203

105,792+

90,233

174,556

229,053

+ there is a variation between the above figures (financial
years) compared with annual report figures (calendar years) due to overlap of periods of accounting.
(7) Yes. Gal,lup Poll research in Australia. Assessment by Corporation, Trade Commissioners and importers in overseas countries.
(8) Yes. Details of campaigns and reports are available and. are published in industry magazine Apple and Pear World plus convened meetings.
(9) There have been requests from Stanthorpe and Bilpin for specific advertising and special campaigns have been conducted stressing 'early' fruit, but this is considered desirable only in eastern seaboard markets which are regarded as one market. In isolated markets, i.e. Western Australia and South Australia, a regional aspect arises but material used e.g. TV and posters, recipes, et cetera, promotes 'apples' and 'pears' and does not specify State or region. There is consultation all along the line at State grower organisation level.

Australian Wool Testing Authority: Sale
(Question No. 2390)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:
(I) Have Hill-Samuel Australia Limited undertaken a study of the various options available to the Government with regard to the sale of the Australian Wool Testing Authority; if so, do the results of this study indicate that whatever option is adopted will result in an increase in charges to growers by between 10 per cent and 20 per ce\tt.
(2) How will he reconcile this finding with an undertaking given by the Prime Minister to Mr Ian McLachlan, President of the Wool Council of Australia, that charges would not increase.
(3) Did he state in a Primary Industry Media Release on 15 May 1981, that the fundamental aim is to ensure that the AWTA continues to operate in precisely the same way as it does today; if so, does this mean that the only result of the sale of the AWTA will be that growers will have to pay more for the same service.
(4) What will be the anticipated reduction in Government spending resulting from the sale of the AWTA to private enterprise.
(5) Will the Government make the Hill-Samuel Australia Limited study public so that all sections of the wool industry can examine its findings and consider the full implications of any change; if not, why not.
(6) What are the requirements of the International Wool Testing Organisations with regard to the operation of wool testing houses.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Australian Wool Corporation has inforrned me that Hill-Samuel Ltd undertook two feasibility studies during May 1981 at the request of the Australian Wool Corporation

to canvass possible options for the sale of AWTA to the private sector. I have been informed that Hill-Samuel forecast various levels of costs from no significant increase up to a 25 per cent increase but could not be definite because the levels of some critical parameters were not known at the time of those studi~. A third and more detailed study commissioned by the Wool Corporation is at present in train.
(2) The Prime Minister gave an undertaking to the Chairmen of the Wool Council of Australia and the International Wool Textile Organisation that the AWTA would not be sold until the Minister for Primary Industry is satisfied that the terms and conditions surrounding such a sale are satisfactory to the Industry. The Government has charged the Corporation to recommend suggested terms and conditions for the sale of AWTA and the preferred form of the commercial entity to continue its wool testing activities. No final recommendations have been formulated, and consequently the future cost structure cannot be accurately assessed at this time.
(3) The Government's decision to sell the AWTA is based on the belief that activities of a commercial kind are generally better performed in the private sector. AWTA in recent years ha.s been operating as a commercial entity.
(4) There should be no increase or decrease in Government spending as a result of the sale of the AWTA.
(5) The'Government did not commission the Hill-Samuel reports; in the circumstances outlined above, they are commercially confidenti~ to the Wool Corporation. However, in due course a synopsis of the reports, or at least their main thrust, will no doubt be communicated by the Corporation to industry representatives to permit the development of a consensus recommeridation on the sale arrangements for AWTA.
(6) In accordance with IWTO requirements the operations of a test house must be independent of tbe sales transactions in connection with which certificates will be issued or used.
Sydney Airport
(Question No. 2396)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
What would be the expected lead time for the establishment of a new large airport in the Sydney area?
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
In the MANS Study it was forecast that it would take a minimum of 12 years to develop a second international airport to operational standard. The forecast lead time included provision for detailed engineering design, environmental analyses, land acquisition and construction.
On the other hand, QANTAS, with some support from other airlines, has indicated in a public submission to the MANS Committee that in its experience the actual lead time could well be closer to 20 years.
In addition, I should perhaps draw attention to the difficulties likely to be incurred in attracting traffic to a new major airport. These difficulties have been well documented in respect of a number of overseas cities.
Australian Broadcasting Commission: Consumer Affairs Programs
(Question No. 2397)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(I) Further to his answer to my question No. 1184 (Hansard, 26 May 1981, page 2605), what is the nature and production details of the consumer affairs programs which are

520 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

to be developed by the ABC to replace To Market To Market and Bon appetit.
(2) What proportion of the replacement programs referred to in part (5) of his answer to question No. 1184 will be Australian-made.
(3) Which programs will not be Australian-made.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Details have not yet been finalised but programs under the broad title of Consumer Reports are planned. These will deal with such matters as supermarket prices, food prices, the motor industry, electrical goods, furniture, discount stores, finance and home building. The production of these programs will depend on the availability of resources.
(2) This will vary from time to time.
(3) As for (2).

Brisbane Airport: Curfew

(Question No. 2402)

Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:

(I) Further to his answer to Question No. 1191 (Hansard, 5 May 1981, page 2014) will a curfew in any form apply to runways on the redeveloped Brisbane Airport.

(2) How many take-off's and landings outside the conditions of the curfew were approved in (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) the period I July 1980 to 2 June 1981.

(3) Will he consider imposing penalties for unapproved operations if explanations provided by the operator are unsatisfactory.

(4) For what reasons are breaches of the curfew approved.

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) No.

(2) There are four situations in which turbo jet aircraft may operate during the curfew, they are-

(i) Operations approved by me or a delegate appointed byrne;

(ii) Operations within the operational provisions of the curfew;

(iii) Operations by quiet aircraft approved by me or a delegate appointed by me;- .

(iv) Operations outside the_provisions of the curfew.

The following answers refer to operations in the situations described in (i) and (iv) above. Part 7 of the answer to Question 1191 (Hansard, 5 May 1981, page 2014) referred to the situation described in (iv) above.

(a) There are no records of flights for the period I July 1976 to 30 June 1977

(b) 10 flights are recorded for the period I July 1977 to 30 June 1978

(c) There were 34 flights for the period I July 1978 to 30 June 1979

(d) There were 23 flights for the period I July 1979 to 30

June 1980

.

(e) There were 28 flights for the period I July 1980 to 2 June 1981.

(3) If an occasion arises when an aircraft operator deliberately operates without approval (that is the situation

described in (2) (iv) above), I will consider imposing a penalty.
(4) Flights may be approved to operate (see 2 (i) above) in the following circumstances:
(i) when exceptional passenger hardship is involved
(ii) for humanitarian reasons
(iii) for delayed flights by visiting Heads of State.
Flights approved to operate in these circumstances do not breach the curfew. Flights that operate outside the provisions of the curfew (that is, without approval) breach the curfew.
Manufacture of Australian Coins
(Question No, 2410)
Mrs Kelly asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(I) Have there been any proposals made or decisions taken to allow a Canadian firm to manufacture Australian coins; if so, what are the details.
(2) Do any plans exist for a new mint to be built at Mitchell, ACT; if so, what are the details.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) As a consequence of the interruption to the Mint's production of circulating currency due to the Australian Society of Engineers dispute, the Government has cOlitracted for the supply of 220 million pieces of Australian circulating currency (approximately 15 weeks' production of the Mint) from overseas sources. Information regarding those sources has not been released.
(2) A proposal to build a coin blanking annex at Mitchell, ACT, was considered some years ago as one option for a possible expansion of the facilities of the Royal Australian Mint. However the option was not pursued.
Grain Storages: Sri Lanka
(Question No. 2413)
Mr Fisher asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(I) Did Australia supply 32 horizontal grain storages to Sri Lanka through the Australian Development Assistance Bureau in 1979; if so, have the storages been erected and completed under the terms of the agreement.
(2) Have the completed storages been inspected by Bureau officers.
(3) Who received the tender to construct the storages and what was the cost of the program.
(4) Are further storages to be supplied to the Paddy Marketing Board of Sri Lanka under similar arrangements.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) In 1979 the Sri Lankan Government called public tenders in Australia for the supply of 32 prefabricated grain storage sheds and subsequently entered into a contract with the successful tenderer for their supply and shipment to Sri Lanka. Funds for the purchase of these sheds were made available by the Australian Government as part of its development assistance program to Sri Lanka. The agreement between the two governments related to the provision of funds. Erection and inspection of the sheds was the responsibility of the Sri Lankan Government.
(2) The storage sheds have not been inspected by Bureau officers. Consultations between the Australian and recipient

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 521

governments are held from time to time to ensure effective implementation of particular projects but it is neither feasible, and nor would it be appropriate, for Bureau officers to inspect all aspects of all projects.
(3) The successful tenderer was Osborne Metal Industries Pty Ltd, Osborne Park, Western Australia. The cost of the sheds including freight was $753,784.
(4) I am unaware of any further requirement for grain storage sheds to be provided as part of Australia's aid program to Sri Lanka.
Aluminium Pricing
(Question No. 2414)
Mr Howe asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to claims by AIusuisse that it has provided subsidies to the Icelandic Aluminium Company (ISAL) and its Australian affiliates producing alumina at Gove, NT, and that these subsidies may explain the difference between the invoice price and the costs incurred bylSAL.
(2)' Is he able to say whether subsidies are being paid to affiliates of Alusuisse in Australia; if so, do the subsidies have the effect of reducing taxable income paid in Australia, for example, on the production of alumina at Gove.
(3) Will he provide the House with evidence that transnational corporations trading internationally in bauxite, alumina.and aluminium are trading on an 'arm's length' basis as opposed to engaging in transfer pricing practices.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I understand that Alusuisse did release a statement on 18 December 1980 about the difference between prices appearing from statistics of Australian alumina exports to Iceland and the import price to the Icelandic Aluminium Company.
(2) and (3) I am not able to provide this information. The secrecy provisions of the income tax law of course prevent the Commissioner of Taxation from providing me with information he has obtained about the affairs of particular companies.
National Representative Basins Program
(Question No. 2415)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(I) Was the National Representative Basins Program established as part of Australia's contribution to the International Hydrological Decade.
(2) If so, what State and Commonwealth Departments were involved in the program.
(3) Did this program involve the hydrological investigation of approximately 100 medium to small river basins throughout Australia.
(4) What was the aim of the program and when was it commenced.
(5) Was it anticipated that if the program was successful the data collected from the catchments referred to in part (3) could be used to solve water problems arising with the many other catchments where either no data exists or cannot be quickly collected.

(6) Can the Minister say whether the Bureau of Meteorology consistently failed to undertake its commitment to rainfall collection data; if so, was this because the Bureau was never funded or manned at the appropriate level by the Commonwealth Government, in spite of repeated calls by the Australian Water Resources Council.
(7) Can the -Minister also say whether the CSIRO spent much effort in setting up a mathematical hydrological model of the catchment processes, which could not be effectively directed or improved because of the lack of sufficient coordinated rainfall and stream flow data.
(8) What is to be the fate of the program.
(9) What sum has been spent on the program and has this money been well spent.
Mr Antbony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Although the Australian Representative Basins Program (ARBP) was not part of Australia's formal contribution to the program of the International Hydrological Decade, it was established in the spirit of the objectives of that international endeavourin 1965.
(2) The Department of National Development and Energy (as well as earlier departments with responsibility for the interests of the Commonwealth in water resource matters), CSIRO, the Bureau of Meteorology and all State government water agencies have been involved in the ARBP.
(3) Yes.
(4) The primary objective of the ARBP was to improve understanding of the relationships between catchment characteristcs, climate and run-off by studying data obtained from matching meteorological and hydrological installations in catchments representative, in the main, of all Australian environments.
(5) Yes, but mainly in respect of run-off management requirements including regulatory structures, culverts, bridges, etc.
(6) Within the general resources available to the Bureau of Meteorology, considerable progress was made in meteorological instrumentation early in the program. Twenty-nine of the eighty-five basins established have been fully instrumented with the minimum meteorological instruments, and fortyeight basins are partially instrumented (of which about half have sufficient data for analytical purposes). Most of the data in the ARBP data bank have been provided by the Bureau, involving approximately 1050 station years of average basin rainfall, 950 years of pluviograph data and 400 years of evaporation data. The remainder of the basins/sites require automatic equipment which has development, manpower and funding problems not yet fully resolved.
(7) CSIRO has devoted considerable resources to the development of the Australian Representative Basins model, partly using data obtained from the ARBP. Sufficient co-ordinated data has been available for the CSIRO research program to proceed, but not within the broader scope of the program as originally envisaged.
(8) The future of the ARBP is at present under consideration in the Australian Water Resources Council.
(9) A reliable estimate of the cost of the program to date cannot be provided owing to problems in identifying costs incremental to the normal expenditures of the numerous agencies involved. However, the success of the program will depend on the extcnt to which analyses of data from the selected gauged catchments meet the objectives of the program, as indicated in (4) and (5) above. It will be some time before this becomes clear.

522 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Interference by Soviet Radar
(Question No. 2416)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
What steps has the Government taken to reduce interference by Soviet Union over-the-horizon radar to short wave bands vital for emergency communications in Australia.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Those authorities responsible for safety communications in Australia have not observed any circumstances of significant interference on any of the internationally recognised radio distress channels. However, there has been some observation recently of over-the-horizon radar signals occurring on the Australian safety frequency 27.880 MHz, though the extent has not been serious. On the basis of these observations, my Department has initiated communication with the USSR seeking their co-operation in avoiding interference to the 27.880 MHz safety channel.
Control of Seabed Resources
(Question No. 2417)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(I) Has he recently switched from support of the Canadian and consensus position on the law of the sea to support the United States of America and multinational mining position which opposes controlled development of seabed resources.
(2) Is he able to say whether the USA legislated unilaterally to allow seabed mining.
(3) Is he also able to say whether the rule of law between nations will be disregarded to the disadvantage of developing nations if the USA policy is implemented.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I) The Government's position on this matter has been explained to Parliament on several recent occasions.I refer the honourable member to my reply to a question without notice on 30 April 1981, to my statement to the House on 26 May 1981, to the answer to Senate Question No. 579 (Hansard, 27 May 1981, pages 2224-2225) and to my reply to a question without notice on 5 June 1981.
(2) The United States 'Deep Seabed Hard Minerals Act' (Public Law 96-283) entered into force on 28 June 1980. The Act is expressly interim in nature. It places a moratorium on commercial recovery of seabed minerals until I January 1988. It is the intention of the legislation that, if and when a Law of the Sea Convention enters into force with respect to the United States, that Convention will automatically supersede the Act.
(3) The United States Government is currently reviewing its policy on the Law of the Sea Conference. Accordingly, it is not possible to give any useful answer to the honourable member's question at this stage.
Gladstone Aluminium Smelter, Queensland
(Question No. 2419)
Dr Everingham asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on ~ June 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the contract study of Comalco Ltd, dated April 1981, on [he national economic benefits of the Gladstone Aluminium Smelter, Queensland.

(2) If so, does the report calculate a certain \0 per cent and probable 12 per cent return to the nation on resources used for the Boyne Island smelter.
(3) How does the return referred to in part (2) compare with the rate paid by the public for funds raised to provide infrastructure for the project, considering (a) extra electricity loan interest, (b) extra overseas borrowings as predicted to be affected by exchange rate fluctuations and (c) estimated reduction in alternative investment for more long-term, stable, labour-intensive or socially constructive projects.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The study referred to states that, under a set of what are described as 'most likely' conditions, both the two and the four potline smelters are estimated to have a real rate of return in excess of 12 per cent. Under what ~re claimed to be 'relatively pessimistic' assumptions, it is stated that the smelters would yield a \0 per cent real rate ofreturn.
(3) Apart from the inherent difficulties of providing any meaningful answer to this question, the information is not available on which even to attempt to do so.
Department of Housing and Construction: Reduction ofActivities-
(Question No. 2426)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(I) Did his Department on 30 April 1981 issue a circular to all employees indicating that there would be a reduction by around SO per cent in in-house activities over a period of time.
(2) If so, what is the length of this period of time.
(3) How many persons will be retrenched as a result of this policy.
(4) What are the Government's plans to provide alternative employment for the retrenched employees.
(5) What reduction in expenditure will result from this policy.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows: .
(I) Yes. Staff and employees were advised of the principal decisions affecting the Department of Housing and Construction, taken by the Government following the Review of Commonwealth Functions. That advice included the decision to reduce by around SO per cent the Department's present inhouse activities on repairs and maintenance and minor new works.
(2) No specific time-frame has been determined for achieving this reduction. However, the provisional employment ceiling allocated to the Department for 30 June 1982 assumes progress towards effecting this reduction, as well as implementation of other decisions following the Review of Commonwealth Functions.
(3) At present there are no plans to retrench personnel.
The Department has taken initiatives to obviate or at least minimise the prospect of any salaried staff or wages employees being declared surplus to Departmental requirements.
(4) As an initial step in securing alternative employment opportunities fot personnel affected by this particular decision, the Department is seeking the agreement of other Commonwealth agencies to advertising job vacancies throughout the Department's establishments, to giving preference to the Department's personnel who apply for these

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 523

vacancies, and to facilitating the access of Departmental personnel to any retraining opportunities.
(5) As the department reduces in size, there will be a reduction in expenditure on salaries and wages, and a consequential reduction in Departmental overheads.
However, work on repairs and maintenance and minor new works must still be undertaken and expenditure on these activities will be determined each year in the Budget context.

the observation that these have increased concurrently. Ana-
lyses of this kind are highly liable to errors of interpretation and I am arranging for the honourable member to be sent a
1976 British Medical Journal leading article which reviews the technique under the heading 'Misleading Statistics'. Until the
associations suggested by Mr Robinson's work have been tested by further studies of the nature described in this article,
it would be premature to come to any conclusions on his
findings.

United States Sonar Base, Christmas Island
(Question No. 2427)
Mr Fry asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:
( I) Is the existence of a Uniled States of America sonar base on Christmas Island now public knowledge.
(2) If so, how long has the base been there.
(3).Is it considered to be a strategic target.
(4) Who commands the base.
(5) Are any Australian personnel, either service or civilian, ell1ployed on the base; if so, what number.
(6) How much information collected by the base is passed on to his Department.
(7) Do any of the Australian Services have installations similar to that on Christmas Island.
(8) What sources can his Department call on for information about shipping movements in the Indian Ocean, including submarine traffic.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (7) I refer the honourable member to my answer to "'question upon notice No. 506 (Hansard page 2004) in which I
stated 'there is no underwater sensor system at Christmas Island'.
(8) The Department of Defence obtains information about surface and submarine shipping movements in the Indian Ocean from observers' reports, announced port calls, shipping notices and other items published in the press, and classified sources.
Heart Disease
(Question No. 2432)
Mr Good luck asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:
Have any studies been undertaken between the relationship of miles driven in a motor vehicle to the incidence of heart disease; if so, what are the details; if not, why not.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Papers on this subject have been published by Mr Athol A. Robinson of 16 Quayle Street, Sandy Bay, Hobart, Tasmania, viz:
A. A. Robinson and W. F. Navin, 'Your Heart and the Motor Vehicle, December 1974'.
A. A. Robinson, 'Heart Disease, Cancer and Vehicle Travel', in Medical Hypotheses, 5, 3,1979, pages 323-8.
A. A.Robinson, 'Male, Female Heart DiseaseRelationship with Vehicle Travei', in Medical Hypotheses, 5,12,1979, pages 1337-1346.
Mr Robinson's conclusions that there is a relationship between miles driven and incidence of heart disease are based on

Nuclear Power in Australia
(Question No. 2433)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:
What is the basis for the projection made by the Australian Atomic Energy Commission, published in Atomic Energy in Australia, July 1980, that by the year 2000, there will be 900 megawatts of nuclear power installed in Australia.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The figure quoted represented the AAEC's 'best estimate' of future nuclear power capacity based on information publicly available at the time. The possible location of a reactor was not specified, and the projected capacity of 900 MWe took account of the typical size of nuclear reactors being sold on the international market.
In reaching its estimate the Commission noted a Western Australian Government publication, An Energy Policy for Western Australia, which stated that the WA Government had 'taken positive action in establishing firm plans for the introduction of nuclear generation in the 1990s . . .' (page 3) and that 'Planning and siting studies will be carried out so that Western Australia can proceed to the installation of a nuclear power station by 1995' (page II).
The Commission's projections also included a 'low estimate' of zero, to cover the possibility that no reactor might be installed in Australia by the year 2000, and a 'high estimate' of 1500 MWe in case reactors are installed by more than one State.
Riverside Canteen, Barton, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 2447)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:
Is the Riverside Canteen in Barton, Australian Capital Territory, to be closed; if so, what steps is he taking to ensure that the rights of the lessees, Jim and Stella Tzafan are preserved, and that they will not be evicted from the premises after more than 10 years service to people in the Barton area.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No. The Commonwealth does not intend closing the Riverside Canteen.
Agricultural Research Stations, Victoria
(Question No. 2449)
Mr Milton asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 6 June 1981:

524 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) Are any Agricultural Research Stations in Victoria funded in any way by the Commonwealth Government; if so, how many.
(2) How many of these stations are involved in producing new varieties of food-producing seeds.
(3) What sum will be cut from this funding in 1981-82.
(4) How many persons is it anticipated will lose their jobs in this research area because of these cuts.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Most of the agricultural research stations in Victoria are operated by the Victorian Department of Agriculture. There are also research centres run by tertiary institutions and, in addition, several CSIRO centres involved in research directly related to rural industries.
Many of these research centres would be undertaking research with support from the Commonwealth through the various statutory and non-statutory research funding arrangements which come within my portfolio.
It should be appreciated, however, that the organisation, not the individual research station, is normally the actual recipient of outside research funds.
Allocations to Victoria in 1980-81 from the various rural industry research funds were:
State Departments of Agriculture-$I,848,516 Universities-$I,O 18,658 CSIRO-$592,423.
Allocations to projects are not collated on a research centre basis and I would be reluctant to authorise the release of the resources required to identify the amounts involved.
(2) See (I).
(3) Within the limits of normal year to year variations resulting from the conclusion_of some individual projects and the funding of new ones, no major change in the level of funding under the various Commonwealth/industry rural research schemes is anticipated. Provision has been made under Commonwealth/States tax sharing arrangements to compensate the States for loss of revenue previously provided for applied rural research and extension under the Commonwealth Extension Services Grant which was terminated following the Review of Commonwealth Functions. Funding of CSIRO operations from non-rural industry research fund sources is a matter for that organisation.
(4) See (3).
Infant Mortality
(Question No. 2460)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:
(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to (a) the claims of the Infant Formula Action Coalition (INFACT) that more than one million infants die each year in Third World countries due, amongst other reasons, to the use of polluted water in the preparation of infant milk formulas and

(b) the fact that Australia voted in favour of a world-wide advertising ban on the marketing of infant milk formulas.

(2) Can the high rate of infant mortality amongst Australian Aboriginals be attributed to (a) contaminated water
supplies on Aboriginal reserves and the use of contaminated water in the preparation of infant formulas or (b) excessive
dilution of infant formula.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) (a) Yes.

(b) Yes. Australia voted in favour of the draft International Code of Marketing of Breastmilk Substitutes which was adopted by the World Health Assembly, Geneva on 21 May
1981.

(2) (a) and (b) No. The high infant mortality rate among
Aboriginals as compared to the non-Aboriginal infant mortality rate is due to a variety of factors not least of which are
the adverse environmental and living conditions prevailing in
many Aboriginal communities which place infants at risk from respiratory, gastrointestinal and other communicable disease. To attribute this entirely to the use of contaminated
water or excessive dilution of infant formula, in the preparation of infant feeds, as has been reputed to occur in Third World countries, would be incorrect.

Sporadic incidents and occasional epidemics of gastrointestinal infections do still occur, but the presence of Aboriginal
health workers, (chosen by their communities), who are trained in preventive measures and capable of administering prompt and effective treatment, has resulted in a decline in
both mortality and morbidity. Breast feeding is also encouraged and where formula feeding is necessary, health workers can assist and train mothers in hygiene and other measures necessary in preparation of feeds.

The Government recognises that while there has been some improvement in Aboriginal health status in recent years, it is still unacceptably low and, among measures necessary to
achieve further improvement, priority is being given to the
provision of appropriate housing, clean and adequate water supplies and sanitation.

Apprentice Tradesmen: Defence Force

(Question No. 2464)

Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:

(I) How many apprentice tradesmen, and in what categories, have been recruited to the Defence Force in each of the last \0 years;

(2) How many applications were received for these

apprenticeships;

.

(3) How many tradesmen in each of these categories were members of the Defence Force in each of those years.

Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is contained in the following table.

CATEGORIES OF APPRENTICE TRADESMEN RECRUITED TO THE DEFENCE FORCE 1971-80

Year
1971 1972

RadiO/Electronic _E_n-,gI_'n_ee_r_in~g_tr_ad_e_s _ _ trades

Other trades

Total

Apprentice Apprentices Number of Apprentices Number of Apprentices Number of Apprentices Number of applications recruited tradesmen recruited tradesmen recruited tradesmen recruited tradesmen

3,212 3,504

604

10,269

686

10,391

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 525

Engineering trades

Radio/Electronic trades

Other trades

Total

Year

Apprentice Apprentices Number of Apprentices Number of Apprentices Number of Apprentices Number of applications recruited tradesmen recruited tradesmen recruited tradesmen recruited tradesmen

19n

4,229

1974

4,029

1975

4,642

756

10,169

444

10,100

591

10,186

1976

5,915

447

7,490

187

2,177

71

532

705

10,199

1977

6,185

419

7,392

179

2,261

69

535

667

10,188

1978

5,888

432

7,200

178

2,314

79

541

689

10,055

1979

6,263

422

7,233

202

2,313

74

543

698

10,089

1980

5,871

449

7,139

211

2,322

52

513

712

9,974

- Breakdown into categories not available for years prior to 1976.

Foreign-Controlled Mining Enterprises
(Question No.2469)
Mr Uren asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:
What proportion of total mining industry value added was attributable to foreign-controlled enterprises for each State in (a) 1978-79 and (b) 1979-80.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The information sought by the honourable member is unavailable for 1978-79 and 1979-80. Australian Bureau of Statistics data show that in 1976-77, 59 per cent of value added in the Australian mining industry was attributable to foreign controlled enterprises.
Foreign Investment in Australia
(Question No. 2472)
Mr Uren asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:
What has been the net effect on the balance of payments of foreign investment in enterprises in Australia in each year since 1970-71.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The inflow of foreign investment in enterprises in Australia, depending upon the uses to which it is put, can have several effects on the capital and current accounts of the balance of payments. In addition to its direct and immediate effect of providing Australia with financial resources from the rest of the world, the investments undertaken with foreign capital may reduce Australia's reliance upon imports or develop exports and also affect the current account through servicing payments.
While it is not possible to trace through all the effects of foreign investment inflows on the capital and current accounts of the balance of payments, it is clear that Australia

has been able to sustain a deficit on current account, and thus have command over a greater pool of goods and services than are able to be produced domestically, because of the contribution of foreign capital.

The relative importance of foreign investment in enterprises in Australia can be gauged from a comparison of
such inflow with an indicator of aggregate economic activity in Australia. The table below shows inflow of foreign invest-
ment in enterprises in Australia as a proportion of gross nonfarm product, for each year since 1970-71:

%

1970-71

4.9

1971-72

4.1

1972-73

1.2

1973-74

1.0

1974-75

1.6

1975-76

1.2

1976-77

2.0

1977-78

1.5

1978-79

2.2

1979-80

2.8

Employment
(Question No. 2475)
Mr Uren asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:
What proportion of the net increase in the age group 15 to 64 years have been classified as (a) not in the labour force, (b) unemployed, (c) employed full-time and (d) employed part-time in each yearfrom February 1971 to February 1981.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable m~mber's question is as follows:
In the table below the Australian Statistician has provided the information requested for the period February 1978 to February 1981. Corresponding information for earlier years, which is available only for August each year, has been included. The estimates are derived from the labour force survey and are subject to sampling variability as explained in the ABS publication 'The Labour Force' (6203.0).

PROPORTION OF ANNUAL INCREASE IN CIVILIAN POPULATION AGED 15-64 YEARS, BY EMPLOYMENT STATUS, 1971 TO 1981 (per cent)

Notin the labour force

Unemployed

Employed ,Employed

full-time

part-time

Total

August 1971 August 1972 August 1973 August 1974

37.6

6.9

54.3

1.3

100.0

11.7

31.1

28.1

29,0

100.0

11.8

-23.4

72.7

39.0 100.0

35.3

19.7

23.2

21.9 100.0

526 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Not in the labour force

Unemployed

Employed full-time

Employed part-time

Total

August 1975
August 1976 Augustl977 February 1978
February 1979 February 1980 February 1981

6.8
35.3 -12.1
58.1
48.3 1.4
24.2

98.2
11.2 45.7
74.9 -15.3
-6.3
-13.0

-53.9
1.4 37.7 -41.5 55.5 72.9 66.2

48.8

100.0

52.2

100.0

28.8

100.0

8.6

100.0

11.5

100.0

31.9

100.0

22.6

100.0

NotesMinus sign (-) denotes decrease. All figures have been rounded, and discrepancies may occur between sums of the component items and totals.

Homeless Persons

(Question No. 2476)

Mr Uren asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:

Will he provide an estimate of the number of persons who
are homeless in the (a) capital cities and (b) nonmetropolitan regions in each State by (i) age group, (ii) sex, (iii) marital status and (iv) occupation.

Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable

member's question is as follows:

.

There are no official statistics available on the number of persons who are homeless in Australia.

Mobile Homes
(Question No. 2477)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:
(I) What is the nature and extent of work being carried out within his Department in relation to the design and development of mobile homes or transportable homes.
(2) Which company or companies are involved in the design or development of a prototype mobile home or transportable home.
(3) What other Commonwealth and State authorities are involved, or have been involved, in consideration of proposals for the design, development, marketing, sale or rental of mobile homes aQdmobile homes' parks.
(4) Which locations have been considered for the placement of mobile homes and transportable homes.
(5) What measures are available for the transportation of mobile homes.
(6) What planning codes in each State and Territory would require amendment to allow for the sale or rental of mobile or transportable homes for dwelling purposes.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Department of Housing and Construction has been undertaking work on a type of manufactured housing, commonly called mobile homes, which has been very successful in the USA.
The Commonwealth-State Ministerial Council on Housing Costs has been considering the potential of manufactured/ mobile homes to offer lower cost housing in Australia.
The Department undertook a review of mobile homes in Australia and overseas for the Council. It is assisting the Council to develop model guidelines for the construction and siting of manufactured homes. The construction guidelines are being dev'llloped within the principles implicit in the Australian Mddell,Jniform Building Code to maintain acceptable

health and safety standards without the emphasis on conventional site building techniques.

The Department is acquiring a prototype manufactured house based on North American design principles featuring a lightweight stressed skin construction box beam design on an integrated steel chassis with its own running gear and suitable for replacement on low cost foundations. Tbe prototype will help governments, industry, and consumers to assess the quality and potential of this type of dwelling.

(2) Neilsen Design Associates Pty Limited were engaged

by the Department to assist with the preparatory design work

for the prototype as the basis for tenders.

.

The contract to construct the prototype manufactured house has been let to Yarrawonga Housing Industries Pty
Limited.

(3) I am not aware of any other Commonwealth authority being involved in the design or development of mobile homes and mobile home parks.

State and Territory Governments are participating with the
Commonwealth in the Ministerial Council on Housing Costs in reviewing the potential of maf!ufactured housing and
developing model guidelines. The Council has informed the Planning Ministers Conference and the Local Government
Ministers Conference.

While I understand from meetings of the Council that some
States are interested in giving more detailed consideration to manufactured housing, I have no information on specific pro-
posals they may be considering.

The Age newspaper of 5 June 1981 reported that the Victorian Housing Minister was reviewing proposals for a pilot scheme in Victoria.

The New South Wales Parliamentary Inquiry into Caravan and Mobile Home Parks recommended that mobile homes be studied as a form of alternative housing and consideration be given to a pilot scheme of mobile homes in a mobile home park. I am informed that following the Inquiry a committee of officials on mobile homes was set up to pursue this recommendation.

(4) The Department of Housing and Construction is not involved in the placement of mobile homes other than the prototype manufactured house, for which consideration is being given to various locations for display in the eastern
States.

I have no specific information on locations being considered by the States for the placement of mobile homes.

Transportable houses have been used by Commonwealth authorities and others in various parts of Australia, especially rural and remote areas, over a long period and usually where
they are a more practical option to site building.

(5) Transportation of a mobile home in North America usually consists of running gear which is attached to the integrated steel chassis. The running gear can be subsequently

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 527

removed and re-used or leFt on the house. It is also possible to place the home on a low loader.
The Australian Transport Advisory Council and the National Association of State Roads Authorities are considering appropriate policies and regulation For the movement of manuFactured housing. It will be up to the market place to develop the most appropriate cost-effective means of transportation.
(6) I understand that the sale or rental of mobile or transportable homes For dwelling purposes is not generally subject to planning codes.
Welfare Housing
(Question No. 2478)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:
In view of the statement made during his second reading speech on the Housing Assistance Bill 1981 that a total sum of $630m was made available for welfare housing in 1979-80 (Hansard, 14 May 1981, page 2440), (a) what sum was provided by (i) the Commonwealth and (ii) each State and Territory, (b) for what purposes was it provided and (c) what was the equivalent sum provided by the Commonwealth and each State and Territory for these purposes in each year from 1974-75.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) and (b) The information in respect of the six States is shown at Table 2 (pages 6 and 7) of the Annual Report on the operations of the Housing Assistance Act 1978 during 1979-80, which was tabled in the Parliament on 6 May 1981.
Appendix VI of the Report contains information for the Northern Territory.
(c) The Annual Report to Parliament on the operations of the Housing Assistance Act 1978 for the 1978-79 financial year, at Table 2 (pages 6 and 7) shows the information for the six States. Details are not available for the Northern Territory for 1978-79.
For years prior to 1978-79, a similar analysis of sources of funds is not available.
Future Dwelling Stock Requirements
(Question No. 2482)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:
On the basis of the projections contained in the Review of Australia's Demographic Trends prepared by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs in February 1981 and on the basfs of the most recent and reliable assumptions of the growth in household headship ratios, what are the (a) projected total dwelling stock requirements to the year 2001 and (b) average annual dwelling cOnlpletion requirements to the year 2001 for (i) each State and Territory and (ii) Australia as a whole.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) and (b) Projections of the type requested, especially over such a long period, are subject to considerable uncertainty at the national level and even greater uncertainty at the State and Territory level, where interstate migration is an important factor to be considered. Whilst it is possible to produce a single set of figures as requested, this would imply a degree of precision in Forecasting methodologies which does not pertain.

That is why a range of projections of annual additional dwelling requirements for each State were presented in Chapter 5 of the 1981 Report of the Indicative Planning Council for the Housing Industry which I tabled in the Parliament on 10 June 1981. The demographic projections on which the demand estimates in that Report are based' are generally consistent with the sets of assumptions suggested in the Review of Australia's Demographic Trends although this Review did not produce population estimates below the national level.
Projections of total dwelling stock requirements can be derived from these estimates, after allowing for replacement for stock losses, and the 1976 Census count of dwellings.
I therefore refer the honourable member for Reid to the 1981 Report of the Indicative Planning Council for the Housing Industry.
Service Personnel: Discharge for Use of Marijuana
(Question No. 2489)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:
(I) Were a number of Service personnel discharged, for the use of marijuana whilst not on duty, in the Wagga area, NSW,
(2) If so, were they prosecuted for a breach of the law and were they convicted.
(3) Are Service personnel who have been charged and convicted in connection with the use of alcohol discharged from the Services.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Twelve airmen and airwomen of RAAF Base Wagga were discharged during May 1981 as a result of their involvement in the non-medical use of drugs.
(2) Disciplinary action was not taken. However, the members involved were discharged from the RAAF according to prescribed administrative procedures.
(3) Each case is considered on its merits. Servicemen are not normally discharged as the result of a civilian or military conviction in connection with the use of alcohol.
Medical Benefits: Transcendental Meditation
(Question No. 2492)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:
(1) Are medical benefits paid for professional attendances consisting of exercises in Transcendental Meditation (TM).
(2) If so, on what basis did his Department decide that TM is a medical service.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) No. However, if transcendental meditation was prescribed as a relaxation technique by a medical practitioner during the course of a professional attendance, benefits would be payable for that attendance under the appropriate consultation item. In this situation the benefits are payable on the grounds that there is a physical attendance, by a legally qualified medical practitioner upon the patient.
The fact that benefits are payable for an attendance at which transcendental meditation is prescribed ,should not be construed as an indication of support for the practice. As medical benefits are attracted for consultations by legally qualified medical practitioners, it would be neither Plactical

528 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

nor desirable to attempt to restrict the way in which doctors choose to conduct their consultations~ I might also mention that a request for a specific Medical Benefits Schedule item for transcendental meditation was rejected.
New Zealand/Australia Free Trade Agreement
(Question No. 2495)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a submission of 20 May 1981 by the Queensland Commercial Fishermen's Organis. ation to the Queensland Premier and others protesting at imports of sea perch fish and fillets from New Zealand produced on giant Soviet trawlers in the Tasman Sea built, owned and manned by Soviet citizens, with crews trained by their Government, using fuel exempt from OPEC price agreements and engaged in joint ventures with New Zealand partners, with a 20 per cent New Zealand export subsidy and no right to sell in New Zealand under New Zealand law.
(2) If so, has this product rivalled reef fish in appeal.
(3) Does this product cost wholesale, as alleged, approxi. mately $3. \0 per kilogram at the Queensland Fish Board compared to $4. \0 per kilogram for Queensland mackerel.
(4) Has the Government received a request for anti-dumping action under Article 10 of the New Zealand/Aus. tralia Free Trade Agreement; if not, will he consult urgently with the State authorities on this matter.
(5) Has there been months-long delays in providing the promised extension of Rural Reconstruction Funds to the fishing industry; if so, have the deliberations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions been responsible for the delays.
(6) Is he able to say whether the Queensland Fish Board has blamed, over-ridden and reduced payments to fishermen consistently as a means of attacking marketing problems despite long dissatisfaction of fishermen with the management with the Board's promotion, marketing efficiency, communication with them and buy-in prices.
(7) Will he assist fishermen planning regional co.operatives to overcome these problems and liaise with the Queensland Government to achieveindustrial democracy in industries protecting Australia from unfair competition from .nationalised big business which is free of the bureaucratic inefficiencies and restraints suffered by Queensland fishermen on.their fuel prices and orderly marketing.
(8) Will he (a) inquire whether the Soviet fishermen get better conditions and more prompt replies to their organisation's correspondence from their marketing managers thah the Queensland Commercial Fishermen's Organisation gets from'the Queensland Fish Board, or (b) sponsor cultural exchanges between the fishermen and marketing managers of Australia and those of the Soviet Union and other efficient fishing nations to prevent international tensions such as those which led to the ruinous cod war between Britain and Iceland.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I have been advised that the Queensland Commercial Fishermen's organisation has expressed concern about imported New Zealand fish although my attention has not been drawn to that particular submission.
(2) and (3) While prices of both types of fish vary, I understand that the imported sea perch does rival reef fish in appeal and is cheaper.
(4) The Government has not received any specific request for anti-dumping action on New Zealand sea perch, although

complaints have been made that imports of fish from New Zealand and elsewhere are causing difficulties for Australian fishermen. I have already been in touch with the Queensland Minister for Primary Industries concerning the matter.
(5) The question of structural adjustment for the fishing industry was discussed at a meeting on 26 June 1981 between Federal, State and Northern Territory Ministers responsible for the administration of the Rural Adjustment Scheme.
Ministers reached agreement on the framework of a scheme for the fishing industry but a decision to prqceed with its implementation was deferred pending resolution of some issues relating to funding.
The deliberations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions have not delayed consideration of this matter.
(6) and (7) These are matters which should be addressed to the Queensland Government.
(8) (a) and (b) No.
Opinion Polls: Publication before Elections
(Question No. 2499)
Mrs Darling asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:
(I) Is he able to say whether the French Government disallows the publication of results of opinion polls for a number of days before the beginning of their Presidential elections.
(2) Is it a fact that some controversy surrounded the effects of opinion polls on the National election held in Australia on 18 October 1980.
(3) Did he express the view, during the course of the election campaign, that opinion could have a distorting influence on the outcome of the election.
(4) Will he consider adopting a similar policy to that adopted in France toward the publication of results of opinion polls prior to Australian elections.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) to (4) Any effect that opinion polls mayor may not have on the outcome of elections is a matter for debate.
The most important elements in determining the outcome of elections are the policies and performance of the parties involved.
Interstate Migration Flow
(Question No. 2509)
Mr Uren asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:
What has been the net interstate migration flow in each year since 1971 and cumulatively since 1976.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The following table shows the net interstate migration for each State and Territory for the period from 1970-71 to 1975-76 and for each of the years 1976-77 to 1979-80 together with the cumulative total for the latter period. The figures for the earliest period shown are based on the results of the 1976 Census of PopUlation and Housing. The Census is considered to be a more reliable source than the records of Family Allowance and Electoral Roll interstate transfers and data from the annual Internal Migration Survey which, until the results from the 1981 CenslIs become available, necessarily form the basis for the figures shown for the later years.

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 529

ESTIMATED INTERSTATE MIGRATION: 1970-71 TO 1979-80 Number ('000)

1970-71
to 1975-76(a)

1976-77 (b)

1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

(b)

(b)

(b)

1975-76
to 1979-80(b)

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern TerritoryT Austraian Capital Territory

-74.0 -38.7
65.4 6.2
19.6 - 4.0
- 0.9 26.4

-13.0 - 7.4
4.7
3.9 9.3 - 0.6 1.8
1.3

- 6.2 -10.6
5.2 - 0.6
5.5 - 0.7
3.7 3.7

- 0.2 -10.3
5.7 - 3.2
3.8
0.1 0.8
3.3

- 4.9 -16.8
21.9 - 6.9
2.5 1.2 2.8
0.2

-24.3 -45.1
37.5 - 6.8
21.1
9.1 8.5

(a) Source: 1976 Population Census. (b) Source: Recorded Family Allowance and Electoral Roll interstate transfers and data from the annual Internal
Migration Survey.

Oil Pollution
(Question No. 2523)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:
( I) Has his attention been drawn to research designed to deal with the problems of oil slicks being undertaken by British Petroleum (BP) at the research centre at Sunbury on Thames, United Kingdom.
(2) Will he investigate this new process, to see whether as is alleged it does solidify oil into a substance which is cleaner to handle and can be readily collected.
(3) If so, and if the process is seen to be successful, will he seek the introduction of this new process without delay in the fight to prevent the oil pollution of Australian waters.
(4) If the Government is of the view that the proceSs is not suitable, will he provide full details of the reasons for its decision.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. Details of this research have been advised by the United Kingdom Government authorities and by BP Australia Ltd.

Radar Equipment used by Air Traffic Contr~lIers
(Question No. 2605)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) What was the year of installation of the principal radar equipment used by Air Traffic Controllers at (a) Sydney, (b) Melbourne, (c) Brisbane, (d) Adelaide, (e) Perth, (f) Hobart and (g) Darwin airports.
(2) What proposals are planned for updating the equipment at each of the airports referred to in part (1 ) and what is the estimated (a) cost and (b) installation date in each case.
Mr Hunt-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(I) A radar system comprises one or more sensors, which supply radar information to display systems used by Air Traffic Controllers. Three types of sensors are used by the Department of Transport; Route Surveillance Radar (RSR), Terminal Area Radar (TAR) and Secondary Surveillance Radar (SSR). In addition to radar sensors installed at the airports listed, a remote installation at The Round Mountain (NSW) supplies radar data to Air Traffic Controllers at Sydney and Brisbane. Likewise, the installation at Canberra supplies radar data to Air Traffic Controllers at Canberra, Melbourne and Sydney.
The year of installation in each case is as follows:

(2) The research is a continuation of laboratory work that has been in progress for two and a half years. Basically the treatment involves the preparation of a synthetic compound which, when applied to spilled oil at the rate of approximately one part of compound to five parts of oil, solidifies the oil into rubber like lumps. These lumps are apparently clean to handle and may be physically lifted from the water surface.

It is expected that sea tests will be conducted during July

1981. The results of these tests will be passed onto my Depart-

ment by the United Kingdom Government authority

involved.

.

Location
(a) Sydney . (b) Melbourne (c) Brisbane (d) Adelaide (e) Perth (f) Hobart

(3) If the solidification process is seen as successful and its

application feasible consideration will be given to its incorpor-

ation in the National Plan to Combat Pollution of the Sea by

Oil.

.

(g) Darwin The Round Mountain Canberra

Year of commissioning

RSR

TAR

SSR

1963

1971

1972

1965

1972

1974

1965

1974

1963

1975

1968

1975

No radar facilities installed or

planned

RAAFFacility

1970

1974

1969

1976

(4) The process has not yet been field tested so the information on which to base a decision is not yet available.

(2) Proposals for updating:

530 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Location
(a) Sydney (Il) Melbourne (c) Brisbane (d) Adelaide (c) Perth Canberra

Estimated (A) cost and (B) year of installation

TAR new facility (A) $3.5m (B) 1985

SSR Additional new facility
(A) $600,000 (B) 1984 (A) $600,000 (B) 1982

(A) $3.5m (B) 1986

New display system
(A) $4m (B) 1986 (A) $3m (B) 1984 (A) $3.6m (B) 1987 (A) $2m (B) 1983 (A) $2.6m (B) 1985 (A) $0.8m (B) 1986

It should be noted that these forward estimates are of necessity only approximate, being heavily dependent on future Budgetary allocations and availability of manpower resources.
Conference System of Shipping
(Question No. 2606)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
What specific action is he proposing in respect of the liner restrictive practices of the Conference System of shipping used to transport Australia's general cargo overseas trade given the Government's stated policy of supporting competition and free enterprise.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member'squestion is as follows:
The framework for commercial negotiations under the shil>ping provisions of the Trade Practices Act 1974 is consistent with the Government's free enterprise policies. The Government recognises the benefits to Australian exporters which a well managed conference system can provide in terms of frequency, reliability and regularity of services. However, it also -welcomes the competitive element provided by alternative commercial services as long as they do not adversely affect. the adequacy of shipping services for Australian trading interests.
The proposals for changes to Australia's overseas cargo shipping legislation which were foreshadowed in the last Parliament are currently under examination in the light of f\lrther advice from industry.
Household Earnings: Disposition
(Question No. 2618)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
What was the percentage of average household earnings devoted to (a) food and drink purchased (i) for domestic preparation and consumption and (it) in a hotel, restaurant, fast food outlet (i.e. ready for consumption), (b) motor vehicles in

the (i) purchase or leasing of the vehicles (capital cost) and (ii) running costs (fuel and maintenance), (c) housing in (i) purchase or rental costs and (ii) repair and maintenance, rates and taxes, (d) gambling, (e) tourism divided into (i) domestic and (ii) overseas tourism, (f) recreation and (g) electrical appliances such as television, washing machines, radios, etc., for each year from 1966 to 1981.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Annual estimates of the percentage of average household earnings devoted to categories of personal consumption expenditure as requested in the honourable member's question are not available. The following tables provide estimates of the percentages of both household income (Table I) and household disposable income (Table 2) devoted to those categories of private final consumption that most closely correspond to the items requested. These estimates are based on national accounts data released in 'Quarterly Estimates of National Income and Expenditure, March Quarter 1981' (5206.0). Estimates for the year 1980-81 will not be available until about March 1982.
Separate details are not available for (a) (i) food and drink purchased for domestic preparation and consumption and (a) (ii) food and drink purchased in a hotel, restaurant, or fast food outlet. The national accounts item 'operation of motor vehicles' has been used for (b) (ii) motor vehicle running costs. Operation of motor vehicles includes some household expenditure (e.g. parking fees and insurance service charges) which are not generally regarded as running costs. Housing costs have been represented by gross housing rent which includes imputed rent for owner occupied dwellings. Item (c) (ii) repairs and maintenance, rates and taxes can be considered as an expenditure paid out of gross rent. In the case of tenanted dwellings such expenditures are paid directly by the landlord and, as for owner occupied dwellings, they are one of the deductions made from gross rent to derive gross operating surplus in respect of the ownership of dwellings. Estimates for expenditure on tourism are not available from the national accounts since this expenditure is included in a number of categories of private final consumption expenditure e.g. 'fares', 'meals and accommodation' (which is part of 'other services') and is not separately identified within each relevant category.

Table 1 SELECTED ITEMS OF PRIVATE FINAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURE EXPRESSED AS A
_PERCENTAGE OF HOUSEHOLD INCOME(a) YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE

(a) Food and alcoholic drinks

1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 22.4 21.6 22.0 20.6 20.1 19.3 18.5 17.8 17.0 15.9 15.8 15.8 16.2 16.5

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REP~ESENTATIVES 531

1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980

(b) (i) Purchase of motor vehicles (ii) Operation of motor"
vehicles (c) Gross housing rent-of which:
(ii) Repairs, maintenance and
rates(b) (d) Gambling (legal only)
(f) Recreation (g) Household appliances

4.0 3;7 4.2 3.9 4.1 3.9 3.7 3.5 3.4 3.2 3.0 2.9 2.9 2.8 2.7 4.0 4.1 4.5 4.7 4.7 4.8 4.8 4.5 4.3 4.3 4.6 4.6 4.6 4.9 5.6 9.0 9.1 9.6 9.5 9.8 10.1 10.2 10.1 9.6 9.5 10.1 10.7 11.4 11.7 11.8 3.1 3.0 3.1 3.0 3.0 3.0 3.0 2.9 2.7 2.7 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 2.9 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.2 1.3 1.2 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 2.5 2.3 2.4 2.4 2.4 2.3 2.4 2.4 2.5 2.8 3.1 3.0 2.6 2.4 2.3

(a) Derived from estimates shown in 'Quarterly Estimates of National Income and Expenditure, March qua'rter1981'
(5206.0). (b) Not final consumption expenditure. (See answer for explanation.)
Australian Bureau ofSiiltistics Canberra ACT luly 1981

Tllble2
SELECTED ITEMS OF PRIVATE FINAL CONSUMPTION EXPENDITURE EXPRESSED AS A PERCENTAGE OF HOUSEHOLD DISPOSABLE(a) INCOME(b) YEARENDED 30 JI,JNE

1966 1967 1968 1969 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980

(a) Food and alcoholic drinks
(b) (i) Purchase of motor vehicles
(ii) Operation of motor vehicles
(c) Gross housing rent-of which:
(ii) Repairs, maintenance and rates(c)
(d) Gambling (legal only) (f) Recreation

25.8 24.9 25.6 23.9 23.6 22.7 21.9 20.8 20.2 19.2 19.2 19.4 19.8 19.9 20.3 4.6 4.3 4.9 4.6 4.8 4.6 4.4 4.1 4.0 3.9 3.7 3.6 3.5 3.4 3.3 4.6 4.8 5.2 5.4 5.5 5.7 5.6 5.3 5.1 5.2 5.6 5,6 5.6 . 5.9 6.8 10.4 10.4 11.2 11.0 11.5 11.8 12.0 11.9 11.4 11.5 12.2 13.1 13.9 14.1 14.3 3.5 3.4 3.6 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.3 3.2 3.2 3.5 3.6 - 3.6 3.5 3.6 1.4 1.4 1.5 1.4 1.5 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.4 1.5 1.4 1.4 1.5 1.4 1.5 1.5 1.6 1.6 1.6 1.7 1.8 1.8 1.9 1.9 1.9

(g) Household appliances

2.9 2.6 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.7 2.8 2.8 3.0 3.4 3.7 3.6 3.2 2.9 2.8

(a) Household income less income tax, other direct taxes etc., consumer debt interest, and transfers overseas. (b) (Derived from estimates shown in 'Quarterly Estimates of National Income and Expenditure, March quarter 1981'
(5206.0). (c) Not final consumption expenditure. (See answer for explanation.)
Australian Bureall of Statistics Canberta ACT
July 1981

Statistical Wind Data
(Question No. 2622)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
( I) Do published International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) standards require the use of statistical wind data within the 95 per cent probability when designing locator patterns if this wind data is available.
(2) Has statistical wind data from the nearest official bureau of meteorology weather measuring station been utilised when calculating the locator pattern boundary at Ripley.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable ~ember's question is as fO.llows:
(I) No. ICAO has not published Standards and Recommended Practices relating to the design of holding patterns. The ICAO procedures which have been published are statements of operation practices with respect to which a measure of international uniformity is desirable. It is important to note that, where statistical wind data are available, the published ICAO material recommends the use of maximum wind speed

within the 95 per cent probability calculated on an omnidirectional basis.

(2) No. Because statistical wind data are not always avail- .

able, the Australian practice is to !Ise an alternative, ICAO for'

mula for calculating wind velocities. This then allows standar-

dised holding patterns to be used in all cases and produces a

result which is less restrictive, in most cases, then the use of

statistical data.

-

Avalon Aerodrome, Victoria
(Question No, 2623)
Mr Innes asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) What has been the number of movements at Avalon aerodrome, Victoria, for each of the last 15 years.
(2) Does he expect a decrease in aircraft movements at Avalon aerodrome as a result of the use of aircraft simulators by the major airlines.
(3) In what year was the Ripley Locator commissioned at its present site.

532 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

(4) Is it intended that the Ripley Locator will remain at its present site; if not, what is the cost of repositioning the
Locator.

(5) Has the repositioning of the Ripley Locator ever been included on the Airways Engineering Facilities Implementation Program; if so, (a) on what date was it entered and (b) on what date was ministerial approval given.

(6) Is there a change of circumstances other than aircraft movements that might require a change in the position of the Ripley Locator; if so, what are these circumstances.

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) 1980 1979
1978
1977 1976
1975 1974
1973

.55,376

1972

.51,414

1971

.57,914

1970

.52,243

1969

.51,087

1968

.57,017

1967

.65,521

1966

.43,182

.32,502
.25,562
.35,930 .38,918 .44,417
.43,808 .34,360

(2) The use by the major airlines of Avalon aerodrome, Victoria, is expected to decrease as a result of their use of aircraft simulators. However, it is not known what effect this decrease will have on the total number of aircraft movements at Avalon. A significant use of this aerodrome is made by aircraft other than airline aircraft.

(3) 1959.

(4) The future position of the Ripley Locator is still under study within my Department.

(5) No.

(6) Yes. For traffic separation purposes the Avalon ILS procedure has been re-designed to provide for holding at 3000 feet at a point approximately 9.4 NM from the threshold of Runway 18. A locator beacon is normally used to define this point.

Rapid Intervention Fire Fighting Vehicles
(Question No. 2626)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
{1) What is the number, specific nature, purpose and itemised cost of the rapid intervention fire fighting vehicles being purchased at a total cost of $3,009,500 under contract reference C2/78/156 referred to on page 44 of the Commonwealth of Australia Gazette No. GI60f21 April 1981.
(2) What value component of the vehicles is of Australian origin.
(3) Who were the (a) successful and (b) unsuccessful tenderers for the vehicles.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) Thirteen vehicles; (b) These high performance allwheel-drive vehicles will carry water, foam, other-fire extinguishing agents and rescue equipment for quick response to the site of an aircraft fire or emergency on or near selected airports within Australia; (c) The cost of each vehicle is $231,500.
(2) 59 per cent Australian content per vehicle.
(3) (a) Domino Industries Group Pty Ltd, Northgate, Queensland.
(b) (i) Leyland Australia, Footscray, Victoria; (ii) Schmidt & Muller (Sales) Pty Ltd, Waterloo, NSW; (iii) Walter Motor Truck Co., VoorheesviJIe, New York; (iv) Konrad

Rosenbauer K.G. Post Fach 176, Austria; (v) Carmichael Fire and Bulk Ltd., Worcester WR3 8BE, England; (vi) Gloster Saro Ltd, Gloucester, CL34AD, England.

Noise Monitoring System

(Question No. 2627)

Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:

(I) What is the specific nature and purpose of the noise
monitoring system being purchased from Datatel Pty Ltd., at a cost of $160,462 under contract reference C180/35 referred to on page 44 of the Commonwealth of Australia Gazette No. GI60f21 April, 1981.

(2) Where is the system to be located.

(3) Is the system to replace existing facilities; if so, how are they presently provided; ifno, why are they being provided.

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Purchase of 19 Radar Receiver Noise Figure Meters,

AILTECH Type 7320; the purpose of the equipment is to

continuously monitor the receiver noise figures at air traffic

control radar transmitter-receiver stations.

.

(2) Brisbane (2); Round Mountain (2); Perth (2); Sydney (4); Canberra (3); Melbourne (4); Adelaide (2).

(3) Replaces existing obsolescent vacuum tube based in-

struments originally installed during the first half of the 1960

decade.

.

.

Consultancy Services
(Question No. 2632)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) What is the precise purpose and nature of the consultancy services being provided under contract reference ORS60 by N. F. Clark and Associates Pty Ltd, at a cost of $63,900 referred to in the Commonwealth of Australia GazetteG21 of26 May 1981.
(2) Who were the unsuccessful tenderers for the contract.
Mi Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The purpose of the project is to assess the road safety effectiveness of a wide range of low cost traffic engineering projects that are directed to improving sites with poor accident records. The consultant was engaged to collect data in South Australia and Western Australia (where sufficient information is available), analyse, evaluate and report on the safety effectiveness of such projects.
(2) A. M. Voorhees and Partners Pty Ltd, P. G. Pak-Poy and Associates Pty Ltdand R. Travers Morgan Pty Ltd.

National Health Scheme Prescriptions
(Question No. 2646)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) Is the definition of an urgent prescription left to the discretion of the prescriber when determining to request dispensing by telephone or other means of National Health Scheme (NHS) items before receipt of written prescription by the dispenser.
(2) What categories of persons are (a) recognised and permitted and (b) forbidden to communicate the contents of such a prescription from prescriber to dispenser.

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 533

(3) If no third party arrangements are allowed in such cases will this mean the NHS dispensing fee will be increased to allow for two trips by pharmacists (a) to collect prescriptions from hospitals and clinics and (b) to deliver the items prescribed, instead of as frequently at present one trip where the prescription and item are checked by each party before being exchanged.
(4) When an agreement exists for one pharmacist to relieve another fOl: after-hours dispensing, what restrictions are there on the rights of the dispenser to collect the patient moiety from the pharmacist with whom the patient has a continuing account.
(5) If 5 litres of intravenous fluid are prescribed on NHS and only 21itres used by the patient, what must the hospital do with the remaining 3 litres.
(6) Will intravenous NHS items be placed on the same basis for hospitals and doctors as doctors' bag supplies so that no patient moiety is charged, at least where a responsible hospital officer acknowledges receipt of those items.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Under the National Health legislation it is the prescriber, that is a medical practitioner or participating dental practitioner who determines whether or not a prescription is required to be dispensed urgently and who is required to communicate the prescription to the dispenser in order that the pharmaceutical benefit can be supplied before the prescription is surrendered to the dispenser.
(3) (a) and (b) The medical practitioner or participating dental practitioner who has comdispenser shall reduce the communicated prescription to writing within 24 hours of the communication and despatch the prescription to the dispenser.
Only one professional fee is payable for each supply of a pharmaceutical benefit. However, the approved chemist supplying the benefit is entitled to charge the patient the cost of delivery when supply is made other than at the premises in respect of which he is approved.
(4) It is the responsibility of the approved person supplying the pharmaceutical benefit from the particular premises in respect of which he is approved, to charge the patient contribution for each supply of a pharmaceutical benefit except where supply is made to eligible pensioners or sickness beneficiaries in which case no patient contribution is payable.
(5) Under the terms of the National Health legislation when a pharmaceutical benefit is supplied to the patient it becomes the property of that patient for whom it is prescribed. Section 103 (4) of the NaTIonal Health Act states:
'A person for whom a prescription for a pharmaceutical benefit is written or to whom a pharmaceutical benefit is supplied shall not use, dispose of or otherwise deal with the pharmaceutical benefit in a way other than that for which the prescription was written or the pharmaceutical benefit supplied.
(6) It is the function of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee, an independant statutory body, to make recommendations to me, as Minister for Health, on matters concerning the availability of items listed as pharmaceutical benefits. Such matters would include any recommendation that intravenous fluids be made available as benefits in a similar arrangement to that which applies to those items available as Emergency Drug (Doctor's.Bag) Supplies.
Australian Broadcasting Commission: Australian Labor Party Campaign
Mr Sinclair-On 9 April 1981 (Hansard, page 1519) Mr Ian Robinson asked me, as Minister for

Communications, the following question without notice:
Is it a fact that a senior reporter with the Australian Broadcasting Commission maintained a virtual open line contact with a senior Australian Labor Party campaign official throughout the 1980 Federal election campaign and that the Australian Labor Party used this link to try to apply pressure on ABC producers? It is further a fact that the Australian Labor Party was being given advance information about the content of ABC current affairs programs and that the Australian Labor Party through this contact attempted to influence the coverage given to the Government side? Were program producers threatened by the Australian Labor Party? Did they find it necessary to complain to the management? Finally, can the Minister inform the House whether at the end of the election campaign the reporter concerned was a guest at a 'thank you' party put on by the Australian Labor Party?
The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The General Manager of the ABC has advised me that it is normal practice, during an election campaign, for reporters to have daily contact with officers of all political parties. There is no evidence to suggest any untoward contact existed between an ABC reporter and an ALP official during the last Federal election campaign.
The General Manager further points out that had advance information about the content of ABC public affairs programs been given to such an official by a reporter, that information could not have been used to influence the content of the programs, professional responsibility Jor which rests not with the reporter but with an executive producer.
It is a fact that on one occasion during the election campaign an executive producer answered a persistently-ringing telephone while a reporter was otherwise engaged and spoke to a person who identified herself as being a press officer with the ALP. It is also true that this perJion spoke forcefully to the executive producer who asked if she was attempting to bring political pressure to bear. At that point the caller terminated the conversation and apologised.
The incident caused concern and was brought to the attention of a member of the ABC's senior management.
It is not unusual fQr reporters to attend parties given by all -contenders in an election. As the honourable member does not name a particular reporter whether or not this reporter attended an ALP party, and if so, in what capacity, is not known.
Education: Special Arrangements for Disabled Persons
(Question No. 475)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) In view of the fact that 1981 is designated as the International Year of Disabled Persons, what special arrangements has his Department made to assist disabled persons.
(2) Do any special arrangements made include:
(a) increased employment of disabled persons; and (b) improved access for disabled persons to any building
or other facility occupied by his Department; if so, what are the details. .
(3) What budgetary allocations were made in 1980-81 to facilitate any special arrangements for disabled persons in his Department.

534 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 458 (Weekly Hansard, 10 June 1981) provided by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister.
The principles followed by my Department in relation to the employment of disabled persons are consistent with those enunciated in the answer to question 458.
The honourable member will have noted from that answer that my Department took a substantial number of special placements of disabled persons during 1980. In fact, my Department had the second highest placement rate of any Department when compared to overall Departmental staffing numbers. This level of commitment is indicative of our efforts in the employment of disabled persons.
As indicated in the answer to question 458 the Commonwealth has provided substantial funds as part of its commitment to the International Year of Disabled Persons. However, there were no special budgetary allocations made for my Department in 1980-81 to facilitate arrangements for disabled persons.
Female Officers and Employees: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 1340)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
( I) How many female officers and employees are employed in the Department of National Development and Energy in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each Division are married.
(3) How many females were appointed, or commence4 employment in the Department of National Development and Energy during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the reply provided by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, to Question No. 1336 which appeared in the House of Representatives Hansard for 5 June 1981 (page 3314).
Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 1418)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What was the (a) estimated and (bJ actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by the Department of National Development and Energy in 1979-80.
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by the Department within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c) officers of the Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State statutory authorities.
(3) What officers in the Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.

(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by the Department occur outside Austrlliia during' this period; if so, what sum was expended.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
, (I) to (3) I refer the honourable member to the Prime Minister's reply to Question No. 1414 which appeared in the House of Representatives Hansard for 5 June 1981 (page 3315).
(4) Yes. Approximately $4,000.
Air Travel in Australia: Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No. 1487)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9April 1981:
What sum was paid by his Department, or by Departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by his Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The sum paid for air travel within Australia during 1979-80 was:
Ansett-$33,775; TAA-$45,619.
No other airlines were used.
Head Office, Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No. 1513)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Are any sections of the Head Office of his Department not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many staff are in each.
(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so, when.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Department maintains small units of the City Parks Administration, Conservation and Agriculture Section and Management Services Division at Jervis Bay. The numbers of staff in each unit are 6, 31 and 5 respectively.
(2) No.

Home Telephone Rentals: Department of the Capital Territory

(Question No, 1539)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(I) How many officers and employees of his Department have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully or --(b) partially paid by his Department.

(2) What was the cost to his Department of this expendi- .

ture in 1979-80.

'

Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 535

(I) (a) Nil; (b) 107.
(2) $11,406.
Tea Services: Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No. 1617)
Mr Bl!ngey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(I) How many (a) fUll-time and (b) part-time staff are employed on tea making and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (ii) other offices of his Department.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services' in his Department in 1979-80
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) 9; (b) Nil. Part-time attendants only employed when a full-time employee is on leave.
(2) (a) $72,560; (b) Nil.

Australian Capital Territory Fire Brigade
(Question No. 1786)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What costs were incurred by the Commonwealth Government in 1979-80 in respect of officers of the Australian Capital Territory Fire Brigade attending national or international conferences.
(2) What conferences were attended and by whom.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) $2,276.95.
(2) No international conferences were attended by officers of the Australian Capital Territory Fire Brigade, however the following national conferences, seminars and training courses were attended by the Fire Commissioner, Superintendent and District Officers:

Conference/Course
Fire Safety Course . . . . . . . . . Australian Institute of Petroleum Conference Seminar on Emergency Evacuation Lighting Proposed Australian National Command Senior Seminar on LP Gas . . . . . . . . .

Location
Jolimont Sydney Sydney
Melbourne Canberra

Date
12-23.11.79 12-13.12.79
23.4.80 11.4.80 8.5.80

Attended by
D. Williamson, Superintendent R. Towns, District Officer G. McDonald, District Officer J. K. Mundy, Fire Commissioner W. Dunkley, District Officer

Canberra Development Board
(Question No. 1824)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(I) How many staff of his Department are involved in support services for the Canberra Development Board such as purchasing, payment of accounts and personnel matters.
(2) What were the costs of providing these support services in 1979-80 and what is the estimated cost for 1980-81.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The equivalent of one full time employee.
(2) 1979-80 $13,824; 1980-81 $15,546.
Canberra Development Board
(Question No. 1825)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
Is staff of the Canberra Development Board, including officers seconded from his Department and the National Capital Development Commission, paid from the Budget appropriation for the Board; if not, from what source are the salaries, allowances, etc. paid.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the h(;mourable member's question is as follows:
The staff of the Canberra Development Board are paid from the Budget allocation for the Board.

Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 1868)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London Metropoli~ tan Police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000 or about 20 per cent by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of his Department controlled; if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in his Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the. honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No.
(2) Yes. Limited STD barring is in operation at the Department's Melbourne Regional Office. Departmental instructionsildvise staff that telephones are provided for official purposes. Personal trunk calls may be booked through the switchboard with the approval of supervisors and the cost of the call recovered from the officer.
(3) Yes. Wider use of access-barring has been considered but rejected as impracticable for a variety of reasons. The need for regular contact between the Department's Central and Regional Offices and with the export sector of the business community at all levels makes the provision of STD facilities to many officers necessary as an integral part of their duties. Selective access-barring is constrained by a combination of the open-planned nature of the Department's offices and the cost of barring individual telephone extensions.

536 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 1892)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for. Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London Metropolitan Police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000, or about 20 per cent by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of his Department controlled; if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in his Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) All telephones in the Department of Home Affairs and Environment are STD barred except for those used by approved senior officers. Staff may make personal trunk calls only with the approval of their Branch Head. These calls are recorded by the switchboard operator who advises the officer concerned of the cost of the call. Payment is to be made for the call within 24 hours. The switchboard operator also provides a monthly list of personal trunk calls to the Finance Section and any outstanding accounts are pursued until payment is made.
(3) Consideration has been given to the installation of monitoring devices. However, as trunk and STD calls are controlled, the Department has considered that the estimated cost saving on local unofficial calls would not warrant the costs involved in the installation of this equipment.
Australian Capital Territory Controller of Prices
(Question No. 2093)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(I) Why was action taken to abolish the Australian Capital Territory Controller of Prices.
(2) What will be the cost to Australian Capital Territory consumers of this action in the next 12 months.
(3) Is it a fact that the Australian Capital Territory with its relatively small population is now to be treated as a free market economy.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The decision to abolish the Australian Capital Territory Controller of Prices was made as part of the Review of Commonwealth Functions. Milk is the only good now declared pursuant to the Prices Regulation Ordinance 1949 under which the Controller of Prices operates.
(2) and (3) Milk will continue to be price controlled by the Milk Authority of the. Australian Capital Territory.
Reviews of Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No. 2101)
Mrs Kelly askea the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:

Will he provide a list of (a) all the reviews to be undertaken in his Department, (b) the staff and resources to be allocated to these tasks and (c) the estimated times for these reviews, resulting from the Review of Commonwealth Functions.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) The Ministerial Statement on the Review of Commonwealth Functions provided details of all major reviews.
(b) and (c) Some activities may be undertaken as part of the Department's ongoing review program and it is not possible to provide an estimate of resources and timing prior to their scheduling into that program.
Abolition of Rent Control in Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 2108)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(I) How will the abolition of rent control in the Australian Capital Territory (Hansard, 30 April 1981, pages 1831 and 1842) (a) streamline Commonwealth operations and (b) establish the conditions under which there can be better care for those in need.
- (2) What sum will the Government save as a result of this action.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Compulsory Rent Control was abolished in the Australian Capital Territory on 16 December 1976 and was replaced by a voluntary fair renting scheme whereby lessors, owners or lessees could make application to the Rent Controller for a Fair Rent to be determined. However, very few' lessors/lessees have taken advantage of the provisions of this scheme, with only 23 determinations being made in the 12 months to 30 April 1981. This is despite the fact that it is estimated that there are currently at least 10,000 privately let residential premises in the Australian Capital Territory.
The Government's recent decision will do away with all forms of Rent Control in the Territory and thus reduce the cost of bureaucracy and leave rent levels subject to competitive forces.
Emergency housing for those in need is available.
(2) The potential administrative savings, based on the level. of activity over the past 2 years, would be in the order of $8,000 in a full year.
Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme
(Question No. 2115)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
What will be the effects of the recent changes to Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme allowances, Public Service study leave and the introduction of tertiary fees on (a) the number of students attending (i) the Canberra College of Advanced Education and (ii) the Australian National University, (b) the employment of academic and non-academic staff at the two institutions and (c) the Australian Capital Territory economy as a result of the lower student and academic population.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the-honourable member's question is as follows: -

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 537

I would suggest that my colleague, the Minister for Education, would be better placed to provide answers to parts (a) and (b) of your question.
In regard to part (c) it is not possible to assess the effects on the Australian Capital Territory economy of changes in the student and academic population until the size of that change, and whether it is of a positive or negative nature, has been verified.
Housing Loans Scheme, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 2118)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(I) Is it proposed that the housing loans scheme in the Australian Capital Territory will be administered by banks or building societies; if so, will concessional rates or market rates of interest be applied.
(2) Will the Government continue to make funds available for Commissioner for Housing Loans for low income families.
(3) Are the lending criteria applied by the Commissioner for Housing loans scheme the same as those applied by commercial institutions; if not, how do they differ.
(4) Will commercial institutions be subsidised by the Government to administer the housing loans scheme or will they cover their costs by making appropriate charges.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) & (4) Whether, and in what way, the housing loans scheme would be operated through banks or building societies is currently the subject of examination and no advice can be given until that examination is completed and reported on.
(3) Commissioner for Housing Loans currently being granted with interest rates commencing at 5f per cent effective are aimed at providing housing finance to those unable to obtain first mortgage finance from commercial sources. Commercial institutions do not apply this welfare oriented criterion.
Reduction of Staff and Functions: Department of National Development and Energy
(Question No. 2123)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister representing the Minister for National 'Development and Energy, upon notice, on 6 May, 1981:
Will the Minister provide a detailed list of the (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of the Department of National Development and Energy that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions are implemented.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the reply provided by ~he Minister a~isting the Prime Minister to Question No. 2119 which appeared in the House of Representatives Hansard for 5 June, 1981 (page 3317).

Belconnen Mall, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 2151)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(I) What was the initial Government investment in Belconnen Mall, Australian Capital Territory.
(2) What is the current value of the Mall.
(3) Has the Government added to its initial funding; if so, when and by what sum.
(4) Did the operation of the Belconnen Mall result in a profit in 1979-80; if so, by what amount.
'(5) Will funds derived from the sale of the Belconnen Mall be used for community services, that would otherwise have been provided from the Mall's operating profits.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) $Im.
(2) It would be premature to anticipate a value which the Government would wish to place on the Belconnen Mall complex. While estimates have been made, I would wish to seek further advice on this matter as part of the sale process which is now being initiated.
(3) No.
(4) The Canberra Commercial Development Authority accounts for 1979-80 are with the Auditor-General and a profit or loss figure is not yet available.
(5) Funds received by the Commonwealth from the sale of Belconnen Mall will be used in the first instance to discharge the Mall's debts and any surplus funds will be credited to Consolidated Revenue.

Deregulation of Professional and Related Bodies
(Question No. 2153)

Mr Scholes asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:

Will the Government introduce legislation to establish the framework for self-regulation of professional and related bodies in the Australian Capital Territory that are to be
deregulated as announced in the Prime Minister's speech on the Review of Commonwealth Functions (Hansard, 30 April 1981,page 1842).

Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

The Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill
1981 provides for the repeal of the Architects Ordinance 1959, Surveyors Ordinance 1967 and the Agents Ordinance
1968.

The provisions of the Bill dealing with the deregulation of the occupations covered by the above three Ordinances will not be brought into force by proclamation until the various
professional organisations concerned have had sufficient time to set up adequate self regulating mechanisms.

I will consider the need for legislation once specific pro-

posals have been developed.

.

Canberra Milk Supply
(Question No. 2159)
Mr Lloyd asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:

538 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) What has been the tendered price and percentage of the Canberra whole milk market gained by each of the successful tenderers for each of the last three tender periods.
(2) Have each of the tenderers been able to actually supply the agreed quantity of milk and at the agreed price; if not, what has been the actual position.
(3) What is the present situation and what will it be after I July 1981 with each of the tenderers.
(4) When will the new tender period commence.

(5) Which milk companies supplying the Canberra market have negotiated long-term agreements, for what perio<l does each agreement apply and what percentage of the total supply does each agreement represent.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Details of the tendered price and the market shares of each supplier of bulk milk have been as follows for each of the last three tender periods:

Supplier
Bega Co-op Society Ltd Murray Goulburn Co-op Co. Ltd Kraft Foods Ltd Haberfields Milk P/L Goldenholm Dairy (ACT) Dairy Farmers Co-op Ltd Ibis Milk Products Ltd

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

Tender Market Tender Market Tender Market

price

share

price

share

price

share

cents per litre 16.80 16.75
16.70
16.80 16.75

per cent 34 37.5
2.5
16 10

cents per
litre 19.26
19.26 18.50 19.65
19.70

percent
48 37.5
6 6 2.5

cents per litre
20.72
20.72 21.00
21.90 21.60

percent 48
37.5 6 6
2.5

(2) All suppliers of milk have met their supply obligations. The only variation to the agreed price arose in April 1981 when the Bega Co-operative was granted an interim indexation adjustment in its supply price for cost increases for the nine month period ended 31 December 1980. A similar adjustment was made to the Murray Goulburn Co-operative's supply price.
(3) The present situation is that 85.5 per cent of bulk milk supply for the Canberra Market isprovided under long term contracts between the Milk Authority of the ACT and the Bega and Murray Goulburn Co-operatives. The remaining 14.5 per cent is sought annually by competitive tender. This situation will be unchanged after I July 1981.
(4) I July 1981 for annual contracts and I July 1984 for long term contracts.
(5) The Bega Co-operative has a five year contract for 48 per cent of the Canberra Market from I July 1979 to 30 June 1984. The Murray Goulburn Co-operative has a four year contract for 37.5 per cent of the Canberra market from I July 1980 to 30 June 1984. .

, Participation in Commonwealtb Heads of Government Meeting: Department ofHealtb

(Question No. 2177)

Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Health,

upon notice, on 7 May 1981:

.

(I) How many (a) 2nd Division, (b) 3rd Division and (c)
4th Division officers in his Department are engaged (i) full time or (ii) part-time in administrative, policy and other preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne.

(2) How many officers of his Department are expected to attend the meeting.

(3) What is the expected cost of their attendance at the meeting, including salaries, overtime, accommodation, travel and other expenses.

(4) What other expenses does he expect his Department to incur as a result of Australia's participation in, and conduct of, the meeting.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) One Third Division Officer of my Department is presently on secondment to the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet until late October 1981 and is engaged full-time in administrative aspects of preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne.
(2) No officers of my Department will be attending the meeting. However the Victorian Division of my Department will be co-ordinating a medical coverage for all delegations for this period. Departmental staff will be providing services as follows:
A doctor and nurse will be in attendance at the venue at all times the meeting is in session. As well, a medical officer will be available at each of 3 hotels 24 hours per day for the duration of the meeting. This will involve 8 medical officers on a rotational basis and one nurse. All are full time officers. No additional staff will be employed.
(3) Estimated cost for the salaries of staff providing the service mentioned in (2) is $5077. No overtime or travelling expenses are involved. Accommodation for medical officers at the hotels (working quarters) will be provided by the CHOGM Task Force.
(4) It is estimated that it will cost my Department $500 for the provision of drugs and dressings, during the period of the Conference.
Other information concerning the meeting has been given by the Prime Minister in his answer to Question 2162 (Hansard,IOJune 1981).
Belconnen Mall, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 2333)
Mr Fry asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 27 May 1981:
(I) What was the cost of construction of the Belconnen Mall, Australian Capital Territory.
,(2) How was this sum raised and, in particular, what amount did the Commonwealth Government contribute.

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 539

(3) Has the Belconnen Mall earned any income for the Commonwealth Government to date; if so, what sum.
(4) What is the retail value of the Mall and how was this valuation arrived at.
(5) What sum does the Government anticipate receiving from the sale orthe Mall.
(6) For what purpose will this sum be used.
(7) Can the Belconnen Mall be considered a long-term financial asset to the Commonwealth Government; if not, what is the reason.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) $38.2m.
(2) The Commonwealth Government contributed $1 million. The Canberra Commercial Development Authority has borrowed $20.25m through public loans and $19.15m has been obtained from private lending sources.
(3) No. The Authority is still negotiating with the Auditor General's Office about the accounting treatment of the Mall and profit or loss figures are still to be established. No payments have been made to the Commonwealth.
(4) It would be premature to anticipate a value which the Government would wish to place on the Belconnen Mall complex. While estimates have been made, I would wish to seek further advice on this matter as part of the sale process which is now being initiated.
(5) See answer to part (4).
(6) In the first instance, the proceeds of the sale of the Belconnen Mall will be used to discharge the Authority's debts. Any surplus funds will be credited to Consolidated Revenue.
(1) No. The Belconnen Mall is to be sold. This decision accords with the Government's philosophy to minimise public intervention in commercial activities normally conducted by private enterprise.
Post-graduate Engineering Students
(Question No. 2382)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 2 June 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the assertion of Professor Lance Endersbee, Dean of Engineering at Monash University, Victoria, that only 20 per cent of post-graduate engineering students at Monash University are Australian residents.
, (2) Is there any substance to this claim; if so, can he say what is the major reason for the small numbers of Australian engineers proceeding with post-graduate studies.
(3) Does the Government endeavour to encourage more Australians to continue these studies in this field.
(4) Is the high drop-out rate in Australian post-graduate studies largely attributable to low levels of tertiary assistance compared to salaries offered by businesses to young graduates in some disciplines.
(5) If so, will the imposition of fees for second degrees exacerbate this tendency.
(6) Will he undertake to reconsider the future national implications of the reimposition of fees for second degrees.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.

(2) Information provided to the Universities Council orthe C0l!'mo~wealth Tertiary Education CommissipE by Monash Umverslty shows that, out of a total of 239 students enrolled for higher degree courses in the Engineering Faculty in 1980, approximately 50 were identified as being overseas students. Even allowing for some discrepancies arising from various definitions of overseas students, it would appear that a substantial majority of students undertaking post-graduate engineering courses at Monash University are Australian residents.
(3) Under the Commonwealth Post Graduate award scheme it has been the policy since the scheme began not to earmark awards for particular fields of study. The scheme is seen to be one of general support across the whole range of higher degree studies.
(4) The stipend under Post Graduate Awards has always been significantly lower than the salaries available to graduates in employment. It is for the individual to assess whether the pursuit of higher degree studies under award conditions is preferable to the immediate financial advantages of employment. Acceptance of the award reflects the view that it is in the Award holder's long term interest to pursue a higher level of research and study at that stage rather than embark upon or continue in employment.
(5) and (6) A significant number of higher degree students, including full-time academic staff in tertiary institutions and holders of Commonwealth Government awards will be exempt from tuition fees. Higher degree students holding awards of $3500 per annum or more from State governments, universities and colleges of advanced education will also be exempt from tuition fees.
, The Government acknowledges the importance of tertiary education to the economy and to the community generally but it believes that there are substantial benefits which flow to individuals from tertiary education and the community as a whole should not be expected to meet all of the costs. The Government is proceeding with arrangements for the reintroduction of fees in 1982. It will monitor the experience in that year.
Tuition Fees: Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education
(Question No. 2441)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:
(I) Are tuition fees to be introduced in universities and colleges of advanced education for students undertaking degrees and diplomas subsequent to an initial tertiary qualification, except for recognised double degree or diploma combinations; if so, what is the definition of an initial tertiary qualification and will diplomas or associate diplomas gained in technical and further education institutions be classified as an initial tertiary qualification.
(2) What are recognised double degree or diploma combinations.
(3) Are fees to apply to new enrolments from 1982; if so, (a) what will be the definition of a new enrolment, (b) will students who have deferred their higher degree enrolment be liable for fees and (c) will only students cl~ssified by the institutions as cOntinuing students be eligible for exemption from the payment of fees.
(4) Will postgraduate students who receive Commonwealth postgraduate awards and university or college scholarships be exempt from the payment of fees; if so, will students who extend their enrolment beyond the length of their award become liable for the payment of fees.
(5) Will students on private scholarships be liable to pay fees.

540 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

(6) Will overseas students currently (a) exempted from the payment of the Overseas Student Charge under Statutory Rules No. 290, section 4, and (b) required to pay the Overseas Student Charge, be required to pay the new tuition fee.
(7) Will students who fail to complete their first qualification and enrol in another course be required to pay tuition fees for the second course; if so, for what proportion of the second course will they be required to pay fees.
(8) What will be the level of fees set and will it be different for universities and colleges of advanced education.
(9) Will a separate rate be levied for (a) part-time students and (b) external students; if so, what will be the levels in each case.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Tuition fees will be introduced for students undertaking degrees and diplomas subsequent to an initial qualification be it a degree or diploma or recognised combined course. Students will not be required to pay tuition fees if they are upgrading a diploma to a degree, or an associate diploma (or other equivalent course) to a diploma or degree in the same field as the initial qualification.
(2) [ will be announcing details of recognised combined courses as soon as possible..
(3) (a) The new arrangements for the payment of tuition fees will apply to students enrolling to commence second or higher qualifications in 1982. (b) Students who have deferred their higher degree enrolment will be liable for tuition fees if they have not commenced the higher degree course before 1982. (c) No. See answer to (a) above.
(4) Higher degree students in receipt of Commonwealth Government awards will be exempt from tuition fees as will higher degree students in receipt of awards of at least $3500 per annum from universities, colleges of advanced education and State Governments. Higher degree students who extend their enrolment beyond the length of these awards will be exempt from tuition fees for the remainder of the course.
(5) Yes.
(6) (a) and (b) No.
(7) No.
(8) An annual tuition fee of $\000 will apply fof full-time students in universities and colleges of advanced education.
(9) Tuition fees for internal and external part-time students will be calculated by individual tertiary instituti'ons on a pro rata basis.
Nuclear Power Stations in Japan
(Question No. 2466)
Mr Uren asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:
(I) Further to the Minister's answer to Question No. 702 (Hansard, 26 March 1981, page 1070) is the Minister able to say how many nuclear power stations were authorised for planning and construction in Japan in each year since 1972.
(2) Can the Minister also say for how many of these proposed nuclear power stations specific sites subsequently have been designated and how many of these designations occurred in each year since 1972.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) and (2) The development of nuclear power stations in Japan requires approval at each of three stages: site designation and planning; final design; and construction. The table below provides details of approvals at each of these stages since 1972.

Year

Site and planning
approval

Final

design Construction

approval

approval

1972 1973 1974
1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981

3

7

4

0

I

4

2

I

0

2

0

I

I

II

I

I

3

I

6

I

2

0

0

I

0

5

4

3

O-

I

- 3 additional plants have been submitted for this approval as of June 1981, with a submission being prepared for a fourth
plant.

Regulation and Control of Nuclear Activities
(Question No. 2505)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:
(I) Further to the Prime Minister's statement to the Parliament on 30 April 1981, as part of the Review of Commonwealth Functions, that responsibilities for the regulation and control of nuclear activities are to be implemented as far as possible by the States and Northern Territory, with the Commonwealth maintaining a co-ordinating role (Hansard, page 1837), which responsibilities for the regulation and control of nuclear activities within his portfolio will no longer be implemented by the Commonwealth.
(2) Have assurances been sought from the States that they will now implement these responsibilities; if so, what replies have been forthcoming.
(3) What arrangements exist or are proposed for the Cominonwealth to playa co-ordinating role.
Mr .Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) As Minister of State for Trade and Resources, I have certain responsiblities for the regulation and control of nuclear activities under the Atomic Energy Act as set out for my portfolio in the Administrative Arrangements Order. On 5 June 1981, in a joint statement with the Minister for National Development and Energy, I foreshadowed far reaching changes to Commonwealth legislation on nuclear matters which would affect, in particular, the Atomic Energy Act. In line with the Government's decision on the Review of Commonwealth Functions, responsibility for the regulation and control of nuclear activities in Australia will be implemented as far as possible by the States and the Northern Territory with the Commonwealth maintaining a co-ordinating role. Any changes which might occur in the responsibilities within my own portfolio could depend, to an extent, on the outcome of the discussions and negotiations with the States and the Northern Territory on control and regulation of nuclear matters.
(2) and (3) The Government in co-operation with the States and the Northern Territory will seek to establish a revised legal basis to cover nuclear activities through appropriate State legislation, complemented as necessary by Commonwealth legislation, taking account of the respective

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 541

competences of the Commonwealth, the States and the Northern Territory. In the development of the new legislative base, Government officials have been asked to maintain close consultation with the States and the Northern Territory.
Regulation and Control of Nuclear Activities
(Question No. 2508)
Mr Uren asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:
(I) Further to the Prime Minister's statement to the Parliament on 30 April 1981, as part of the Review of Commonwealth Functions, that responsibilities for the regulation and control of nuclear activities are to be implemented as far as possible by the States and Northern Territory,with the Commonwealth maintaining a co-ordinating role (Hansard, page 1837), which responsibilities for the regulation and control of nuclear activities within the Minister's portfolio will no longer be implemented by the Commonwealth.
(2) Have assurances been sought from the States that they will now implement these responsibilities; if so, what replies have been forthcoming.
(3) What arrangements exist or are proposed for the Commonwealth to playa co-ordinating role.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The honourable member is referred to the Minister fOr National Development and Energy's answer of 5 May 1981 to a question without notice on this subject (Senate Hansard, page 1567). The honourable member's attention is also drawn to the announcement of the Ministers for National Development and Energy and Trade and Resources on 5 June 1981 concerning the future legal base for the development, regulation and control of nuclear activities in Australia.
Tertiary Education Fees
Mr Fife-On 9 June 1981 (Hansard, page 3331) Mr Steele Hall asked me a question, without notice, concerning the scheme to impose tertiary education fees.
The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
On the basis of 1980 enrolments in universities and colleges of advanced education.it is estimated that the revenue in 1982 from the limited re-introduction of tuition fees will be in the order of $8m. It is my intention that the arrangements to be adopted for tuition fee collection will be such that costs should be minimal.
Communication Facilities in Tasmania
MrSinclair-On 26 May 1981 (Hansard, page 2520), Mr Groom asked me a question, without notice, concerning radio services on the west coast of Tasmania.
The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Officers of my Department have advised me that a draft planning proposal relating to the commercial broadcasting service is nearing completion, a field survey for the national service has been completed and a technical report has been prepared for submission to the National Broadcasting Service

Planning Committee for evaluation prior to being brought before me for my decision. It should be borne in mind however that implementation of these proposals is dependent upon the availability oflimited financial and man-power resources.
Department of Foreign Affairs: Special Arrangements for Disabled Persons
(Question No. 463)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) In view of the fact that 1981 is designated as the International Year of Disabled Persons, what special arrangements has his Department made to assist disabled persons.
(2) Do any special arrangement made include
(a) increased employment of disabled persons and (b) improved access for disabled persons to any building
or other facility occupied by his Department; if so, what are the details.
(d) What budgetary allocations were made in 1980-81 to facilitate any special arrangements for disabled persons in his Department.
Mr Street-I refer the honourable member to the answer by the Minister assisting the Prime Minister to Question No. 458 which appeared in the weekly Hansard of 10 June 1981.
Coastal Surveillance
(Question No. 563)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
How many aircraft flying hours were dedicated to aerial surveillance of the coastal and fishing zone by (a) RAAF long range maritime patrol aircraft, (b) other RAAF aircraft in (i) 1977-78, (ii) 1978-79 and (iii) 1979-80.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) (i) 2,556 hours.
(ii) 2,311 hours.
(iii) 2,260 hours.
(b) (i) 519 hours.
(ii) 74 hours.
(iii) Nil hours.
Ad hoc coastal surveillance is conducted, particularly in RAAF training areas, by all RAAF aircraft and this is complementary to the dedicated effort given above. It should be borne in )11ind that a major component of coastal surveillance is the littoral surveillance co-ordinated by Department of Transport and undertaken by civil aircraft.
Commonwealth Property around Sydney Harbour
(Question No. 894)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(I) What property is (a) owned and (b) leased by the Commonwealth Government around the Sydney Harbour foreshores in the Federal Electoral Divisions of (i) Sydney, (ii) Warringah, (iii) Lowe, (iv) North Sydney, (v) Bennelong and (vi) Wentworth.

542 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) Which Departments or instrumentalities are in possession of this land.

(3) How much of the land is (a) permanently occupied and

(b) vacant.

.

.

(4) How much Commonwealth Government property .around the harbour foreshores in each of the electoral div-
Isionsref~rred to in part (I) has been handed over to the New South Wales State Government in the last 10 years.

(5) What negotiations are currently pending for the transfer of Commonwealth harbour foreshore land to the New South Wales State Government.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2)-

Electorate and ownership (i) Sydney (owned) (i) Sydney (leased)
(ii) Warringah (owned)
Warrlngah (leased)

Address

Use

Elkington Park, Balmain

Cable Hut

Glover Street, Leichhardt

Marker Beacon

Schnapper Island

Training Depot

Lincoln Crescent, Wooloomooloo Residence

Cockatoo Island

Dockyard

Jones Bay Road, Darling Island Victualling Store

Spectacle Island, Drummoyne

Naval Base

Charles Street and Canal Road, Stores Depot

Leichhardt.

Garden Island Admiralty House, Kirribilli Point,
Kirribilli Chowder Bay Chowder Bay
No. 19 Wharf, Pyrmont

Wharves and Slipways Wharf, Steps and
Boatshed Dolphins and Jetty Dolphins, Fenders and
Mooring Piles Snack BarjCanteen

No. 12 Wharf, Pyrmont

Snack BarjCanteen

No.7 Wharf ( 1) Pyrmont

Snack BarjCanteen

No.7 Wharf (2) Pyrmont

Snack BarjCanteen

Overseas Passenger Terminal, Sydney Cove

Snack BarjCanteen

'Tresco', 97 Elizabeth Bay Road, Elizabeth Bay
Jones Bay Road, Darling Island Jones Bay Road, Darling Island Shark Island

Wharf
Bridge Access Entrance Road Degaussing Range

North Head, Manly

Quarantine Station

2 Cross Street, Mosman

Residential and

Administration Bldg

Off Cross Street, Mosman

Training Depot

Middle Head, Balmoral

HMAS Penguin

Chowder Bay, Georges Heights Fuel Depot

North Head, Manly

Defence Reserve

North Head, Manly

Police College

Chowder Bay, Middle Head Road, Defence Complex

Mosman

Middle Head, Georges Heights, Defence Reserve

Mosman

Balmoral Oval, Balmoral

Recreation

Area (h.a.) User
.0019 Telecom . Commission
.05118 Transport 1.6458 Defence (Navy) .0240 Defence (Navy) 20.0389 Defence (Navy) .6248 Defence (Navy) 2.4925 Defence (Navy) 3.6839 Defence (Army)

.0139
.0877 .0306

Defence (Navy) Prime Min. &
Cabinet Defence (Navy) Defence (Army)

.0040 Australian Stevedoring Industry Authority
.0040 Australian Stevedoring Industry Authority
.0045 Australian Stevedoring Industry Authority
.0045 Australian Stevedoring Industry Authority
.0040 Australian Stevedoring Industry Authority
.0034 Defence (Navy)

.0001 Defence (Navy) .0048 Defence (Navy) .0002 Defence (Navy)

25.8999 Health .1435 Defence (Army)

1.1500 Defence 17.4647 Defence (Navy) 4.0275 Defence (Navy)
73.6800 Defence (Army)
1.7590 Admin. Services
36.7062 Defence (Army)

6.5090 Defence (Army)

2.0000 Defence (Army)

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 543

(iii) Lowe (owned)

Balmoral Manly
Nullawarra Avenue, Concord Spring Road, Abbotsford

Diving School Jetty
Repatriation Hospital Nil Former Animal
Quarantine Station (for disposal)

.4570 Defence (Navy) .0348 Health
21.9908 Veterans' Affairs 2.3819 Admin. Services

Lowe (leased) . . . . . . Spring Road, Abbotsford

Nil Former Animal Quarantine Station (for disposal)

(iv) North Sydney (owned)

Kirribilli House, Kirribilli Avenue, Residence

Kirribilli

Admiralty House, KirribilIi

Residence

Avenue, KirribilIi

31 Carabella Street, Kirribilli

Office

High Street, North Sydney

HMAS Platypus

2 Hayes Street, Netural Bay

RAAF Provost Unit

North Sydney

Cable Hut

Plunkett Street, Kirribilli Lower Ben Boyd Road, Neutral
Bay

Office Customs Marine
Centre

Blues Point

Cable Hut

North Sydney (leased)
(v) Bennelong (owned) Bennelong (leased) (vi) Wentworth (owned)
Wentworth (leased)

Balls Head Road, Berry's Bay

Quarantine Depot

Horace Street and Balls Head

Training School

Road, Waverton

Waverton

HMAS 'Waterhen'

Kirribilli House, Kirribilli Avenue, Jetty Area

Kirribilli

Horace Street and Balls Head

Special Services

Road

Training Centre

Franki Avenue and Clark Road, Woolwich

Water Transport Depot

Franki Avenue and Clark Road, Boat Ramp Woolwich

Garden Island 'Tresco', 97 Elizabeth Bay Road,
Elizabeth Bay WatsonsBay WatsonsBay
Pacific Street, Watsons Bay
Green Point, Pacific Street, WatsonsBay

Dockyard Residence
HMAS 'Watson' Nil, Former HMAS
'Watson' Green Point Defence
Reserve Residence

Captain Cook Dockyard, Garden
Island Berth 6, Cowper Wharf Road,
Woolloomooloo

Wharves Snack Bar/Cafeteria

Garden Island Shark Point & Steel Point,
Neilson Park

Test Pump Facility Degaussing Range

.0341 Admin. Services .
.4553 Prime Min. & . Cabinet
1.8951 Prime Min. & Cabinet
.3585 Attorney-Generals 1.9305 Defence (Navy) .3699 Defence (Air) .0015 Telecom
Commission .2213 Attorney Generals .3825 Business &
Consumer Affairs .0015 Telecom Commission
.3433 Health 1.0737 Transport
3.2267 Defence (Navy) .0158 Prime Min. & Cabinet .1074 Attorney-Generals
7.3658 Defence (Navy)
.0007 Defence (Navy)
26.8554 Defence (Navy) .3326 Defence (Navy)
14.6000 Defence (Navy) 9.3000 Admin. Services
.2845 Defence (Army)
.9940 Admin. Services
.7247 Defence (Navy)
.0065 Australian Stevedoring Industry Authority
.0008 Defence (Navy) .2512 Defence (Navy)

(3) The area of land permanently occupied is 282.3482 h.a., while the vacant land area is 11.7160 h.a.
(4) The area of land handed over to the New South Wales State Government during the last 10 years in each of the e.lectoral divisions referred to in Part ( I) include:
(i) Sydney, Nil

(ii) Warringali, 271.0l20h.a. (iii) Lowe, Nil (iv) North Sydney, Nil (v) Bennelong, Nil (iv) Wentworth, 7.0040 h.a.

544 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

(5) Negotiations are currently proceeding for the transfer of the following harbour foreshore land to the New South Wales State Government.
(i) North Head, second release 102.5000 h.a. (ii) Middle Head, second release 6.5090 h.a. (iii) South Head, second release 9.3230 h.a. (iv) Abbotsford, former Animal Quarantine Station 2.3819 h.a.
Commonwealth Property in Sydney
(Question No. 895)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:

(I) How much property, excluding harbour foreshore land, is (a) owned and (b) leased by the Commonwealth Government in the Electoral Division of Sydney.
(2) Which Departments or instrumentalities are in possession of this land.
(3) How much of this land is (a) permanently occupied and (b) vacant.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The area of property owned by the Commonwealth, excluding foreshore land, in the Electoral Division of Sydney is 27.7331 h.a. The area of leased land is .8079 h.a.
(2) The Departments and instrumentalities in possession of this land are:

(a) OWNED LAND

Address
34-36 Pitt Street, Sydney
Dalby and Underwood Streets, Sydney
Pitt Street, Sydney Clarence, Erskine and Kent Sts.,
Sydney Glebe Point and St John's Roads,
Glebe Barlow and Parker Streets,
Haymarket The Crescent, Annandale 48 Nelson Street, Annandale Darling and Montague Streets Evans, Henry and George Streets,
Balmain Myrtle Street, Chippendale 77 York Street, Sydney 480 King Street, Newtown
Eliza, Lel)nox, Mary and King Streets, Newtown
King Street, Newtown Fisher and Audley Streets, Petersham Salisbury and Durham Streets,
Stanmore 64 Harbour Street, Sydney Stanmore and Enmore Roads, Enmore 65 Erskinville Road, Erskinville Glebe and St. John's Roads, Glebe 633 George Street, Haymarket Lorton and Wetherill Streets,
Leichhardt Parramatta Road, Leichhardt Johnston and Booth Streets,
Annandale Darling and Montague Streets,
Balmain Parramatta Road, Camperdown 153 Cleveland Street, Chippendale 77 York Street, Sydney Kent and Argyle Streets, Millers Point King, Erskinville and Wilson Streets,
Newtown Fisher and Audley Streets, Petersham Harris and Union Streets, Ultimo Darling Street, Rozelle Harris Street, Ultimo Alfred and Hereford Streets, Glebe

Use
Administrative Building
Exchange
Exchange Exchange
Exchange
Exchange
Line Depot Training College Exchange Stores Depot
Transport Depot Exchange Store and Administrative
Building Exchange
Transport Depot Exchange Pole Depot
Stores Post Office Post Office Post Office Post Office Post Office and Residence
Post Office Post Office
Post Office
Post Office Post Office Post Office Post Office and Residence Post Office
Post Office Post Office Post Office Post Office Training Depot

Area (h.a.) User

.0309
.1966
.2668 .1707

Telecom. Commission (Admin. Bldg)
Telecom. Commission (Exchange)
Telecom. Commission
Telecom. Commission

.0587 Telecom. Commission

.2500 Telecom. Commission

.1827 .1425 .1441 .2080

Telecom. Commission Telecom. Commission Telecom. Commission Telecom. Commission

.6090 .0001 .1100

Telecom. Commission Telecom. Commission Telecom. Commission

.5045 Telecom. Commission

.2232 .0794 .1176

Telecom. Commission Telecom. Commission Telecom. Commission

.1739
.0449 .0531 .0588 .0866 .0750

Postal Commission Postal Commission Postal Commission Postal Commission
Postal Commission Postal Commission

.0442 Postal Commission .0727 Postal Commission

.1441 Postal Commission

.0449 .0606 .0001 .0284
.0430

Postal Commission Postal Commission Postal Commission Postal Commission Postal Commission

.0793 .0411 .0752 .0273 .4363

Postal Commission Postal Commission
Postal Commission Postal Commission Defence (Army)

~~

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 545

Address Marlborough Street, Leichhardt Trinity Avenue and Fort Street,
Millers Point 12 Pyrmont Street, Pyrmont Cowper Wharf Road and Forbes
Street, Woolloomooloo 17 Dowling Street, Woolloomooloo 184-200 Broadway, Sydney The Glebe Estate, Glebe Glover Street, Leichhardt Dunblane and Lucas Streets, and
Missenden Road, Camperdown 38-52 Carrington Street, Sydney CustomsHouse, Circular Quay,
Sydney 77 York Street, Sydney Mackenzie and Hill Streets,
Leichhardt Commonwealth Centre, Chiftey
Square, Sydney Phillip Street,Sydney 5 Hickson Road, Millers Point 16 McElhone Street, Woolloomooloo Forbes Street and Cowper Wharf
Road, Woolloomooloo

Use Drill Hall Drill Hall Store Instruction Centre Store Terminal Building Residential and other Beacon Rehabilitation Centre Office Customs House Office Former Drill Hall (for
disposal) Office and Parking Light Transport Depot Office Light Transport Depot Former Car Park (for
disposal)

Area (h.a.) .0657 .0733 .1751 .1599 .2118 .2536 19.0214 .0518 .4919 .0999 .1796 .2376 .5463 .6430 .0664 .1505 .2573 .1637

User Defence (Army) Defence (Army) Defence (Navy) Defence (Navy) Defence (Navy) Overseas Telecom.
Commission Housing and Construction Transport Social Security Social Security Business and Consumer
Affairs Veterans' Affairs Admin. Services Admin. Services Admin. Services Admin. Services Admin. Services Admin. Services

TOTAL

27.7331

24-30 Grosvenor Street, Sydney 3 Victoria Road, Lewisham 'Pioneer House' George Street, Sydney 105 Addison Road, Marrickville City and Darlington Roads,
Darlington Woolloomooloo

(b) LEASED LAND Post Office Post Office Post Office Post Office Training Depot
Oil Storage

.0267 .0027 .0193 .0037 .2168 .5387

Postal Commission Postal Commission Postal Commission Postal Commission Defence (Army) Defence (Navy)

TOTAL

.8079

(3) (a) Permanently occupied land totals 27.8310 h.a. and (b)vacant land totals .7100 h.a.

Mineral Extraction, Processing and Export

-

Developments

(Question No. 1082)

Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :

(I) How many studies has he commissioned the Bureau of Transport Economics or his Department to undertake into the implications and requirements that expanded mineral extraction, processing and export developments will pose for the Australian transport sector.

(2) What priorities in terms of resources and personnel have been given to these studies.

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) and (2) The implications of resource developments for the Australian Transport sector are taken into account in the ongoing work of the Bureau of Transport Economics, the Department, the AustralianRailway Research and Development Organisation and in the intergovernmental consultative

fora of the Australian Transport Advisory Council and the Marine and Ports Council of Australia. Moreover, close liaison is maintained with both industry and other Government portfolios.
Recent examples of the work of the Bureau of Transport Economics include a Study of Western Australian Ports, and the Economic Evaluation of Proposed Completion of the Sandy Hollow-Maryvale Railway.
The Study of Western Australian Ports was carried out jointly by the Office of the Director General of Transport in Western Australia and the Bureau of Transport Economics and included consideration of the needs of the expanding min- .eral industry. The Sandy Hollow-Maryvale Railway study was concerned with the development of the Ulan coal seam and the carriage of grain and metalliferous concentrates.
At the instigation of the Marine and Ports Council of Australia the Bureau of Transport Economics is to undertake a study of the extension of the standard gauge rail links to the ports of Brisbane,-Melbourne and Geelong. As a matter of course this will comprehend forecast impacts of resource developments projects.
At a more general level my Department will be providing a .submission to the Senate Standing Committee on Trade and Commerce Inquiry into the Australian export coal industry.

546 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Furthermore, the Bureau of Transport Economics is preparing a paper on the transport implications of resource developments fo~ the Transport Outlook Conference later this year.
The honourable member may be interested to know that the jointly funded State/Commonwealth body Australian Railway Research and Development Organisation is expected to release its 1981 Report on Rail later this year. The report will articulate a basis for rail's future role and is expected to outline future rail infrastructure investment requirements.
Within the Australian Transport Advisory Council, the Railway Group is giving consideration to the question of rail infrastructure requirements. It is expected that this work will be further progressed on completion of the ARRDO 1981 Report. This will of course have direct relevance to the infrastructure requirements of the resources boom.
Underspending of Estimates: Department of Industrial Relations
(Question No. 1099)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister-for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(I) On what basis were the original 1980-81 appropriations made for division (a) 370-Administrative, (b) 372Conciliation and Arbitration and (c) 378-lndustrial Relations Bureau.
(2) Has there been underspending in these divisions by the estimate contained in the Department of Finance Information Paper, Statement of savings expected in annual appropriations made by Acts Nos. 141 and 142-Appropriations Acts (Nos./ and 2) 19BO-Bl;ifso, what are the reasons.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 1101 provided by my colleague the Minister for Finance (see House of Representatives Hansard of 13 May 1981, page 2374).

Nuclear Power Plants
(Question No. 1204)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(I) Can the Minister say how many deaths resulted from breakdowns and accidents in (a) nuclear power plants in (i) Britain, (ii) the United States of America, (iii) the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and (iv) Switzerland between 1947 and 1970, and (b) alternative energy industries producing the same proportion of the electrical supply for the same countries.
(2) Can he also say what compensation was paid by governments or companies to farmers and others for damage done by unplanned nuclear contamination from nuclear re_actors in the countries referred to in part (I).
(3) Can he also say whether the Price-Anderson Act limits the United States of America government and corporate liability to $560 million for each nuclear generator despite the 'likelihood that a melt-down accident would cause billions of dollars of property damage and casualties comparable to the Hiroshima bombing.
(4) Is it a fact that insurance firms offered cover for nuclear accidents with premiums comparable to those for other power plants in the United States.
(5) Is it also a fact that short-term employees in nuclear plants are used to limit radiation doses to 30 to 100 times recommended civilian dose tolerances of gamma rays without monitoring of alpha and beta radiation.
(6) Can he say whether the short-term employees referred to in part (5) are free to seek return employment at other reactors in the United States without checking previous radiation exposure.
(7) Can he also say whether recommended limits of exposure for civilians are roughly twice background radiation levels and believed to cause double the incidence of malignant diseases attributable to or contributed to by background radiation.

Departmental Air Travel: Department of Home Affairs and Environment

(8) Can he also say whether medical follow-up records are kept to monitor incidences of leukemia for 10 years and cancers for 20 years after industrial exposure to radiation as is

(Question No. 1151)

done for those exposed to Hiroshima and Nagasaki bomb fall-

Mrs Darling asked the' Minister for Home

out; if so, (a) where are the follow-ups practised and (b) which employees are informed of the importance of these

Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 7 April follow-ups while in relevant employment.

1981:

(9) Has his attention been drawn to claims that hundreds

(I) How many travel warrants have been issued for his Departmental officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80, (e) 1980 to 31 March 1981.

were killed, tens of thousands affected and a dead wasteland created after a nuclear disaster in Kyshtym, USSR in 1958, and that these details were first released from Central Intelligence Agency files in 1977 under the Freedom of Information
Act.

(2) What was the total cost of this travel.

(10) Has the Government plans to pass legislation for

Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Australia similar to the United States Freedom of InformationAct.
(II) Are (a) costs of decommissioning, (b) waste disposal,

(I) and (2) Records maintained in my Department are not in a form which provides the particular detail sought and I am not prepared to authorise use of the resources which would be required to identify that detail. Departmental records show:

(c) guarding of waste and (e) estimated increases in radioactive contamination of humans and other species included in estimates of costs of nuclear-generated electricity; if so, what proportion of the cost is so assessed.

Travel warrants for all domestic air travel, i.e. not just for travel to and from Canberra, numbered: 750 in 1978-79; , 1225 in 1979-80; 1490 in 1980-81 (to 31 March 1981).

(12) How do costs of nuclear-generated power in the
United States compare with charges for electricity made to aluminium smelting firms in Australia.

Expenditure on air fares for travel within Australia in-
curred by my department from 20 December 1977 to 31 March 1981 amounted to $277,095.

Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answers to the honourable member's questions:

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES ?47

(I) (a) and (b) The Government does not maintain comprehensive statistics regarding deaths from breakdowns and accidents in overseas power generating plants. However, there have been no fatal radiation accidents at commercial nuclear power plants in Britain, the United States of America or Switzerland, and I am not aware of any fatal radiation accidents at USSR nuclear power plants. Comparative studies of electricity generation from various energy sources indicate that, in terms of occupational and public health risk, and taking into account all stages of the relevant fuel cycles, nuclear powered plants are considerably safer than coal or oil fired plants.
(2) The only nuclear reactor accident in Britain during the period 1947 to 1970 resulting in radioactive contamination of property was the Windscale accident in 1957. The United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority, in accepting responsibility for the accident, paid claims amounting to Stg 70,000 mainly for financial losses incurred by the Milk Marketing Board and local farmers as a result of radioactive iodine contamination. I am not aware of any accident to a nuclear reac-. tor in the USA, USSR or Switzerland during the period in question resulting in contamination of farms or other property.
(3) The Price-Anderson Act currently limits the aggregate liability of licensees of nuclear plants in the United States for a single nuclear incident to $US560 million.
(4) In the United States nuclear plants must be insured in accordance with the Price-Anderson Act. Rates and policies have been arrived at under special arrangements with the insurance industry, and are not directly comparable with premiums applying to non-nuclear power plants.
(5) The International Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) recommends that radiation workers, whether short term or long term, should receive no more than 50 millisieverts in a year and that members of the public should receive no more than 5 millisieverts in a year for short term (a few years) exposure and no more than an average of I millisievert a year when averaged over a lifetime. These limits do not include doses received from background radiation or medical procedures. The 1977 report of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR) shows the average doses received by radiation workers in United States nuclear power plants to be 10 millisieverts per year, and in Britain 2-5 millisieverts per year. Almost all radiation experienced in nuclear power plants is gamma radiation, associated with a small proportion of beta radiation. The proportions of gamma and beta radiation are measured by film dosimetry. The only time alpha radiation would be present is in the handling of ruptured fuel, and if suspected is monitored separately.
(6) Short term employees seeking employment elsewhere in the industry in the United States are required to disclose their previous radiation exposure levels.
(7) Exposure to the maximum long term ICRP recommended dose of I millisievert in addition to the average natural background radiation dose, also of I millisievert, could be expected to double the mortality risk attributable to background radiation alone. The combined risk, however, would only amount to 1.4 per cent of that from cancer from all causes.
(8) (a) In most countries with large nuclear industries, licensees maintain cumulative records relating to employees' radiation exposures. Some countries, e.g. Canada, have established national registries for this purpose. Studies of the incidence of cancers arising in radiation workers have been undertaken in several countries, for example, USA and UK. In Australia, records of radiation exposures are kept by centres operating personal monitoring services. The Australian Radiation Laboratory of the Department of Health is remodelling its personal monitoring service to provide for determination of

working lifetime doses. This service covers over half of the radiation workers in Australia.
(b) Licensees are required to instruct all individuals, working in or frequenting any portion of a restricted area, on the health protection problems associated with exposure to radioactive materials or radiation.
(9) There have been conRicting reports of the cause and magnitude of the claimed USSR disaster. No information has been released by Soviet authorities. The honourable member's attention is also drawn to answers to Questions Nos. 1633 and 1658 answered in the Senate on 25 February 1977 (pages 508 and 509).
(10) The Attorney-General introduced the Freedom ofInformation Bill in the Senate on 2 April 1981.
(II) (a) Currently not all power generating authorities include decommissioning costs in their rates. In the United States typical quotes for allocations to cover decomissionings are around $2.5-3.5 million per year which translates to about 2-4 per cent of current generation costs. Similar percentages have been estimated recently for the Federal Republic of Germany.
(b) and (c) Generally the cost of guarding and disposing of the wastes arising from the nuclear generation of electricity using current disposal methods are included in the rates charged by the generating authorities. This is a small fraction of the total generating cost, e.g. the cost of ultimate disposal of all waste arising from the light water reactor fuel cycle was estimated by an International Nuclear Fuel Cycle Evaluation (INFCE) study to be in the range of 0.10 to 0.16 cents per kilowatt hour (1978 US dollars). This would be about 3-5 per cent of the total generating cost for a reactor coming on line in the 1977-78 period.
(e) Regulatory requirements for the nuclear industry ensure that radioactive contamination of humans and other species does not exceed limits established by public health and environment protection authorities. The costs associated with 'meeting these regulatory requirements are included in the costs of nuclear generated electricity.
(12) A recent analysis of nuclear generation costs for 1979 prepared by the US Department of Energy, including data from 61 operating nuclear power stations (all rated over 400 MWe), indicated a unit cost of the order of 2.1 cents US/kWH: at current rates of exchange, this is equivalent to \.9 cents Aust./kWH. The price of electricity to Australian smelters is publicly available in only two cases. Both of these involve prospective smelters, rather than existing smelters for which prices are likely to reflect long standng contracts. For the Alcoa (Portland, Vic) smelter, the net tariff for electricity (including an interruptibility discount and a rebate of the SECY turnover tax) is just over \,7 cents/kWH (as at early 1981). At the Tomago (NSW) smelter, the price (including an interruptibility allowance) is 1.825 cents/kWh (as at early 1981).
Annual Reports and Other Publications: Minister for Industrial Relations
(Question No. 1240)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What annual reports are produced by his Department and authorities under his aegis.
(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.
(3) Are other regular publications issued by his Department and these authorities; if so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of each.

548 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) Annual Report of Department of Industrial Relations.
(b) Annual Report of the Australian Trade Union Training Authority.
(c) Annual Report of the President of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission.
(d) Annual Report of the Industrial Relations Bureau.
(e) Annual Report of the Stevedoring Industry Finance Committee.
(2) (a) $1,000.
(b) $3,574.
(c) $615.
(d) $3,052.
(e) $280.
(3) Orders and decisions of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission in pamphlet form (a) $317,894 (b) $14,114.
Bound volumes of orders and decisions of the Conciliation 'and Arbitration Commission with indexes, with title Commonwealth Arbitration Reports (a) $198,417 (b) $1,21 1.
Determinations of the Public Service Arbitrator in pamphlet form (a) $8,770 (b) $2;160.

Bound volumes of determinations of the Public Service Arbitrator with indexes, with title Public Service Arbitration Reports (a) $6,000 (b) $1,002.
Replacement pages for updating information contained in the consolidated volumes of the' Public Service Arbitrator's Determinations (a) $7,254 (b) $3,230~ Commonwealth Government Submissions to the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission $10,364 (b) $247.
Employment of Private Consultants: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 1277)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Serv,ices, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by his Department in 1979-80; ifso, (a) how many were employed, (b) who were they, (c) for what purpose was each employed and (d) what 'payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firm.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member'S question is as follows:
A total of fourteen private consultants and consultancy firms were employed by this Department in 1979-80. Full details of who they were, the purpose for which each was employed and payments made to each consultant or consultancy firm are set out in the following schedule.

SCHEDULE

Name of consultant or consultancy firm

Purpose employed

Coopers and Lybrand
British Sulphur Co-operative Limited (London)
Mr E. S. Lightly Planning Research Corporation International Ancher, Mortlock, MurrilY and Woolley Joyce Nankivell Associates Joyce Nankivell Associates Julius W. Elischer and Associates Pty Ltd Interior Space Consultants Industrial Design Council of Australia Mr. T. Fukushima
Dr. G. Hawker Ms H. Fraser Mr R. Mackenzie

Provide advice to the Commission of Inquiry into the Viability of the Christmas Island Phosphate Industry concerning the financial operations of
the British Phosphate Commission

Provide advice to the Commission of Inquiry into the Viability of the Christmas Island Phosphate
Industry concerning the world price movements for sulphate rock current supply/demand methods for
determining price of Christmas Island rock

Advising on the development of terms and conditions for the Australian Federal Police . . -

Develop and implement computer software programs for the Australian Federal Police

Consultant architect-Chancery and Head of Mission Residence-Bangkok

Consultant architect - Chancery - Kuala Lumpur . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Consultant architect-Staff Housing-Kuala Lumpur . . . . . . . .

Consultant architect-Staff Housing-Lagos

Conduct 'House Pack' Study . . . . .

Drafting art diagrams

.....

Provide contact with top level media personnel and insight on Japanese thinking on special
issues . . . . . . . . . .

Lecturer for a series of departmental training sessions . . . . . . . . . .

Lecturer for a series of departmental training sessions . . . . . . . . . .,

Lecturer for departmental training session

Payments made to consultants or
consultancy firm $
5,705 17,657 110,677 49,117 34,510 5,407 16,520 8,556 1,325
3,000 160 80 52

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 549

Female Officers and Employees: Department of Industrial Relations
(Question No. 1344)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many female officers and employees are employed in his Department, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each Division are married.
(3) How many females were appointed or commenced employment in his Department during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to my answer to Question No. 1336 on page 3314 of Hansard for 5 June 1981.
Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of Foreign Affairs
(Question No. 1419)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by his Department in 1979-80.
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by his Department within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c) officers of the Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Comonnwealth and State Departments or representatives of Commonwealth or Statutory authorities.
(3) What officers in his Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by his Department occur outside Australia during the period; if so, what sum was expended.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) For questions (I), (2) and (3), I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Prime Minister to question No. 1414 (Hansard 5 June 1981, page 3315).
(b) In addition to this expenditure an amount of $16,316 was spent from Departmental funds on official entertainment in relation to Commonwealth sponsored international conferences in Australia. An .amount of $6,357 was also spent on entertainment and hospitality by officers of my Department undertaking short-term visits overseas.
Entertainment and Hospitality~ Department of Industrial Relations
(Question No. 1422)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What was the (a) estimated and (Q) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by his Department in 1979-80.
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by his Department within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c)

officers of his Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State statutory authorities.
(3) What officers in his Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by his Department occur outside Australia during this period; if so, what sum was expended.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Prime Minister to question No. 1414, Hansard of 5 June 1981, page 3315.
No expenditure was incurred by my Department in 1979-80 on official entertainment for (a) Commonwealth sponsored international conferences in Australia, or (b) official entertainment outside Australia.
Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of Defence
(Question No. 1423)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by his Department in 1979-80.
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by his Department within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c) officers of his Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State Statutory authorities.
(3) What officers in his Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by his Department occur outside Australia during this period; if so, what sum was expended.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) Certain expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by or on behalf of the Secretary and Chief of Defence Force Staff of my Department is included in the reply by the Prime Minister to Question No. 1413. In addition, in Australia an amount of $ \09,500 was spent on entertaining overseas visitors, local community leaders and officials. These functions generally were hosted at Service Unit level or by Contingent Commanders when extending hospitality during exercises. It is not practicable to dissect this expenditure in the manner requested because as in the case with expenditure from the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet's appropriations, individual functions could be attended by persons in more than one of the categories nominated.
(3) The following officers within my Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures:
(a) Prime Minister and Cabinet Funded Entertainment Secretary; Chief of Defence Force Staff
(b) Defence Funded Entertainment Secretary; Deputy Secretary A
Central StaffIndustrial Division First Assistant Secretary, Industrial; Assistant Secretary, Administrative Services Defence Communications Division

550 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

General Manager, Defence Communications System Joint Intelligence Organisation Director, Joint Intelligence Organisation
Navy OfficeOffice of the Deputy Chief of Naval Staff Deputy Chief of Naval Staff Personnel Division Chief of Naval Personnel; Principal Executive Officer-Service Personnel Naval Support Command Flag Officer, Naval Support Command Naval Area Commands Naval Officers Commanding/Naval Officers in Charge of Naval Area Commands General Commanding Officers, Her Majesty's Australian Establishments
Army OfficePersonnel Branch Chief of Personnel-Army Director of Service Conditions Reserve Branch Deputy Chief of the Army Reserve Field Force Command General Officer Commanding, Field Force Command; Commander, 1st Division; Staff Officer (I) Personnel Field Force Command Logistic Command General Officer Commanding, Logistic Command; Staff Officer (I) Personnel Logistic Command Training Command General Officer Commanding, Training Command; Staff Command (I) Personnel Training Command; Commandant, Joint Services Staff College; Commandant, Officer Cadet School; Commander, Army Aviation Centre; Commandant, Land Warfare Centre; Commandant, Australian Staff College; Commanding Officer, Army Apprentices School; Commanding Officer/Chief Instructor, Womens Royal Australian Army Corps School; Assistant Commander, Training Group RMC Duntroon Commandant, Royal Military College; Staff Officer (I) Administration Royal Military College Military District Commander, Military District; Staff Officer (I) Personnel/Deputy Commander of a Military District; Commander, District Support Group, North Queensland
Air Force OfficeOffice of the Chief of the Air Staff Chief of the Air Staff Personnel Division Chief of Air Force Personnel Formations Officer Commanding a Formation Units Commanding Officers of Independently located Units General Air Officers Commanding
(4) Expenditure on official entertainment and hospitality overseas during 1979-80 amounted to $19,800, which was funded from Defence appropriations.

Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 1427)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by the Department of Social Security in 1979-80.
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by the Department within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c) officers of the Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State statutory authorities.
(3) What officers in the Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by the Department occur outside Australia during this period; if so, what sum was expended.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) to (4) I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 1414 provided by the Prime Minister (Hansard. 5 June 1981, page 3315). No expenditure on official entertainment in respect of Commonwealth sponsored international conferences in Australia was recorded against Department of Social Security appropriations in 1979-80.
Expenditure on official entertainment outside Australia incurred by the Department of Social Security amounted to $520 in 1979-80.
Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of Business and Consumer Affairs
(Question No. 1434)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs in 1979-80.
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by the Department within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors from overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c) officers of the Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State statutory authorities.
(3) What officers in the Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by the Department occur outside Australia during this period; if so, what sum was expended.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's questionis as follows:
(I) to (4) With the exception of the information provided below, please refer to the answer given by the Prime Minister to question 1414, Hansard, 5 June 1981, page 3315.
Expenditure by the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs on official entertainment in relation to Common- .wealth sponsored International Conferences in Australia during 1979-80 was $12,303.00.

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 551

Expenditure incurred by the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs on official entertainment outside Australia in 1979-80 was $2,923.38.
Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of t~e Capital Territory
(Question No. 1435)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by the Department of the Capital Territory in 1979-80.
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by the Department within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect of (a) visitors From overseas, (b) Australian residents and (c) officers of the Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State statutory authorities.
(3) What officers in the Department are permitted to .authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by the Department occur outside Australia during this period; if so, what sum was expended.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (3) With the exception mentioned belowexpenditure on official entertainment within Australia by all departments is Funded through the appropriations of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet. In 1979-80 expenditure by all departments totalled $104,148. It is not practicable to itemise this expenditure in the Form requested because individual Functions could be attended by persons in more than one of the categories nominated. Expenditure on official entertainment is authorised by departmental Permanent Heads concerned.

Purchase and Use of Carpets by the Commonwealth Government

(Question No. 1760)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:

(I) What quantities of (a) woollen carpet a'nd (b) carpets made of man-made fibre, have been purchased by the Commonwealth Government during each of the last three finan-
cial years.

(2) What guid~lines currently govern the purchase and use of carpets by the Commonwealth Government.

Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) (a) Woollen Carpets (square metres)

1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 115,242 114,290 164,542

(b) Man-made fibre/woollen blend carpets

(80 per cent wool/20 per cent nylon)

(square metres)

14,756 2,772 24,185

(2) My Department is responsible For designating the stan-
dard and use of carpets in outfitting Commonwealth offices.
The use of carpet has been approved as the general basic floor covering for Commonwealth offices.

Commonwealth Employment Service Job Referrals
(Question No. 1899)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What follow-up measures are taken by the Commonwealth Employment Service with respect to job applicants designed 'referred' for statistical reporting purposes, but when job reFerrals prove unsuccessFul.
(2) Are unsuccessful referees counteo in monthly CES unemployment figures.

Expenditure on official entertainment in relation to Commonwealth sponsored international conFerences in Australia is a charge against the conference budget and Funded from the appropriations of the department concerned. No expenditure was incurred in 1979-80 by my Department in this regard.
(4) No expenditure was incurred by my Department in relation to official entertainment outside Australia in 1979-80.
Air Travel in Australia: Department ~fIndustrial Relations
(Question No. 1474)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The CES follows ~p with employers results of reFerrals and where the reFerrals have been unsuccessful normal CES procedures apply. This means that the applicant's details are kept active and matched against details of incoming vacancies. Where necessary and practicable special vacancy canvassing action is undertaken.
The Government's manpower initiatives (e.g. NEAT, SYETP) are also kept in mind for eligible applicants and utilised, where normal referral action is nO.t possible or proves unsuccessful.
(2) The monthly collection of CES figures of persons unemployed and awaiting placement has now ceased.

What sum was paid by his Department or by Departments Formerly encompassing the Functions now performed by his department, to each airline For air travel within Australia during 1979-80.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
This Department paid $221,452.00 to Ansell and $321,416.00 to TAA For air travel within Australia during 1979-80.

Defence Force Reserve Personnel
(Question No. 1917)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 28 Apri11981:
(I) Have arrangements been completed to provide adequate financial cover For defence force reserve personnel who are injured or incapacitated in the line of duty.
(2) If not, when is this matter expected to be finalised in accordance with undertakings given in 1980.

552 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) On 30 June 1981, [ announced that the terms of the new scheme to provide additional compensation for Defence Force reservists had been settled. After six months compensable incapacity, reservists will receive 76.5 per cent of their average civilian weekly earnings, up to a maximum of $500 per week. [f the reservist is a student or is unemployed at the time of injury, the 76.5 per cent will be based on military salary.
(2) For the first six months of incapacity, reservists, like other Commonwealth employees, receive full pay under the existing compensation legislation.
(3) The additional post 26 weeks payments will be made in accordance with an amendment to the Defence Act. Legislation to achieve this will be introduced to Parliament shortly.
Imports of Artillery Ammunition
(Question No. 1918)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(I) [s it a fact that ammunition for Australian 5.5in artillery is being imported from Pakistan.
(2) Are Australian stocks of 5.5in ammunition sufficient to enable sustained action should the Army be called upon to perform a military task involving medium artillery.
(3) Does capacity exist for manufacture of 5.5in ammunition in Australia; if so, is that capacity being used.
(4) What quantity of ammunition has been imported into Australia.
Mr Killen-} have already replied to the honourable member's question as follows:
(I) No. (2) No. Due to age and condition of 5.5in medium gun no longer has an operational role. The remaining serviceable weapons are used for training and stocks of ammunition are adequate for that purpose. (3) Yes. Both the projectiles and propellant can be manufactured in Australia but because use has been limited it has not been economic to manufacture projectiles in Australia for many years. Propellant is currently being manufactured in Australia. (4) The last import was approximately 14,000 projectiles from the United Kingdom in 1970.
The following additional information is supplied in relation to paragraph 2 of the questions:
It should be noted however that should a contingency arise which requires the use of this weapon, a capability could be made available. Subject to lead times, additional stocks of am~ munition can be procured. The introduction of the MI98 howitzer due into service in 1984 will replace this weapon.
Review of Commonwealth Functions
(Question No. 2096)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
In relation to the recent review of Commonwealth functions, will he make available the feasibility studies and planning strategies that formed the basis for the decisions made with respect to the 8 major functions of his Department.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:'

The documents which formed the basis of the Cabinet's decisions in relation to the Review of Commonwealth Functions are working documents of the Cabinet and are not available for examination.
Reduction of Staff and Functions: Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No. 2140)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 6 May 1981 :
Will he provide a detailed list of the (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of his Department that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions are implemented,
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Prime Minister announced in Parliament on 30 April 1981 that the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions were expected to lead to a total reduction in the number of Commonwealth government employees of the order of 16,000 to 17,000 over a period of two years (Hansard, 30 April 1981 ,page 1851),
Precise details on the effects on individual department staffing levels have not yet been finally determined. The Prime Minister also tabled a schedule of decisions arising from the review which outline the changes to departmental functions (Hansard, 30 April 1981, pages 1840-51),
Sale of Post Offices
(Question No. 2288)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
Are there any plans to (a) close down or (b) hand over or sell to the private sector, any post offices in Western Australia; if so, which post offices will be affected and when is it anticipated that this will be done,
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) Australia Post continually reviews its network of post offices to ensure that the facilities and services provided best meet the reasonable needs of the community, having regard to economy in operation, Under this program, post offices in all States may be identified for closure, where the level of business transacted is not sufficent to justify retention. It is Australia Post's objective to ensure that reasonable alternative arrangements for postal services are made for communities affected by a closure.
[n Western Australia, the following offices are scheduled for closure, because the level of postal business transacted at each office cannot justify their continued operation. Australia Post considers that alternative arrangements for postal services in each area affected will meet the reasonable needs of residents concerned.

Name of office
Attadale Koongamia Meltham Nedlands West Viveash

Ex pected date of closure
I September 1981 30 September 1981 31 October 1981 31 December 1981 31 January 1982

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 553

Name of office

Expected date ofclosure

Perth (Lord Street)
Mahogany Creek Joondanna Highgate Wembley (Grantham Street)

28 February 1982
31 March 1982 30 April 1982 31 May 1982 30 June 1982

All relevant Federal and State Members of Parliament and local representative bodies have been advised of the proposed closures.
(b) Australia Post has no plans to hand over or to sell any post offices to the private sector. It is Australia Post policy, however, that small official post offices may be converted to the non-official method of operation, when the volumes of postal business transacted are no longer sufficient to justify continuation under official conditions. Under non-official conditions, Australia Post arranges for the conduct of post offices on an agency type basis, but it still retains control of these offices. No offices in Western Australia have been identified, at this stage, for conversion to non-official conditions.
Defence Diesel Fuel Reserves
(Question No. 2298)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(I) What percentage of Defence Force (a) motor vehicles and (b) other internal combustion powered units are powered by diesel fuel.
(2) What are the daily requirements of diesel fuel to meet operational requirements during a total defence emergency.
(3) How many operational days of diesel fuel reserves are available for the exclusive use of the Defence Force-.
Mr KilIen~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The examination of records and compilation of the requested information would require the diversion of considerable manpower which I am unable to approve. Although some information is available as a result of preliminary surveys. standing alone it could produce a misleading impression.
(2) and (3) The information sought is classified and therefore not available for pUblication.
Concessions to Pensioners for Funeral Expenses
(Question No. 1336)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister, representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 27 May 1981:
(I) Is a pensioner whose Income falls below the tax-free threshold and who meets the funeral expenses of a deceased next of kin and former taxpayer, entitled to any Ananclal concession in respect of the funeral expenses.
(2) What Anancial concession is made available to a (a) tux paying pensioner and (b) non-taxpaying pensioner in respect of funeral expenses.
Mr Hunt~The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) A pensioner who is a taxpayer may be entitled to funeral beneAt and/or (2) taxation concessions in respect of the funeral expenses of a deceased person.

Under the provisions of the Social Services Act a funeral benefit of up to $40 is payable to any age, invalid or widow pensioner or supporting parent beneficiary whose annual income apart from pension or benefit is less than $2,040 (single) or $1,768 (married person) and who is liable for the funeral costs of either an age, invalid or widow pensioner or supporting parent beneficiary whose income also falls within those limits, or a spouse, or a child in his care. Where the pensioner or beneficiary has dependants, the income limits are higher than those mentioned.
A funeral benefit of up to $20 is payable to any person who is not entitled to the $40 benefit but who is liable for the funeral costs of an age or invalid pensioner whose income fell within the limits stated above.
I am informed that the current income tax lay provides that amounts paid by a taxpayer for the funeral expenses of deceased dependants, not exceeding $100 in respect of each deceased dependant, shall be treated as reba table amounts.
For this purpose a dependant is defined to include the spouse of a taxpayer, a child of the taxpayer less than 21 years of age, or a person towards whose maintenance the taxpayer contributes during the year of income and is thereby entitled to a concessional rebate in respect of that person. This latter group would include an invalid relative, as that term is defined in the Income Tax Assessment Act, and the parents or parents-in-law of the taxpayer.
Unless the total of the rebatable amounts exceeds $1,590 a rebate of tax is not allowable. Where the total of the rebatable amounts exceeds $1,590 the rebexcess of the rebate amount over $1,590. Other reba table amounts include medical, hospital and chemist expenses, education expenses, rates and land taxes and life assurance and superannuation contributions.
A pensioner who is not a taxpayer may qualify for funeral benefit as detailed above but would not be eligible for taxation concessions.
Defence Housing
(Question No. 2392)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
1. How many houses or flats have been under his control in each State and Territory during each of the last five years.
2. How many of these dwellings have been vacant at any time during that period and for what length of time have they been vacant.
3. Are there vacant houses in Miller Street, O'Connor, Australian Capital Territory, that come under his jurisdiction; if so, (a) what representations have been mode to him or his Department regarding the use of the houses for emergency or welfare housing, (b) who made those representations, (c) when were they made and (d) what was the result.
4. How mBny houses or flats have been nominally under his control but in fact have come from normal government stock under the control of some other Department or authority, in each State and Territory for each of the last five years.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
1. The numbers of houses provided to Servicemen (i.e., owned and leBsed by the Commonwealth Government, or provided under BCommonwealth/State Housing Agreement) have been as follows:

Queensland

1977 1978 197.9 1980 1981 4,463 4,407 4,959 4,986 4,994

554 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981

Answers to Questions

1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

New South Wales
Victoria South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory Australian Capital
Territory

9,132 5,650 1,100 1,300
142 299
1,561

9,249 5,649 1,156 1,304
136 609
1,531

9,110 5,511 1,129 1,361
136 620
1,456

9,266 5,315 1,102 1,302
\31 609
1,165

9,069 5,311 1,101 1,249
13l 697
1,065

Total

23,647 24,040 24,282 23,876 23,617

2. My Department does not keep records of dwellings which have been vacant for less than two months. The numbers of dwellings which have been vacant for two months or longer, as at 28 February each year, are shown below.
DWELLINGS VACANT FOR 2 MONTHS OR LONGER

1977 1978 1979 1980 1981

Queensland

34 103

21

25

46

New South Wales

93 196 258 418 255

Victoria

143 183 220 197 123

South Australia

II

9

II

4

4

Western Australia

42

31

85 105

77

Tasmania

2

1

I

3

2

Northern Territory

26

12

3

I

Australian Capital

Territory

6

21

30

59

38

Total

357 556 626 814 546

The average periods for which houses have been vacant in 1980 and 1981 are shown below. Details of the durations of vacancies in the preceding three years are not readily available.
AVERAGE PERIODS OF VACANCIES (IN MONTHS)

1980 1981

Queensland New South Wales
Victoria South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory

12

10

12

7

7

10

4

9

13

17

4

3

3

8

19

21

Average

II

10

3. There are vacant Defence houses in Miller St, O'Connor, Australian Capital Territory. Since.! 978 there have been various representations about the use of the houses by civilians, including one from the Minister for the Capital Territory (9 January 1981) and one from the Member for Canberra, Mrs R. Kelly, M.P. (3 June 1981). The responses have stated that the houses in Miller Street have not been occupied by Defence because their standards were below acceptable levels; that they are being renovated; and that they will be re-occupied by Service families when these renovations are completed later this year.
4. All dwellings nominally under my control, which have come from normal government stock, have been in the Australian CapiJal Territory under control of the Department of the Capital Territory. The numbers of these dwellings are:

1,199

1,163

1,119

863

759

Government Housing, Canberra
(Question No. 2411)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Defence the following question, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(1) Are 20 Government houses vacant in Miller Street, O'Connor, Australian Capital Territory.
(2) If so, how long have these houses been vacant.
(3) Will these houses be made available to the general Government housing pool to alleviate the long delays of up to 18 months currently experienced by the 1,889 persons on the waiting list; if not why not.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) There are 14 Defence houses vacant in Miller Street, O'Connor, Australian Capital Territory.
(2) Since 1978, they have been vacant for periods ranging from seven to 40 months.
(3) Most of the Defence houses in O'Connor have been vacant because their general standard has fallen below that approved for Service personnel. In view of civilian housing needs in the area, a study was undertaken to determine if these houses could be released or brought up to Defence standards.
As the houses are structurally sound and well located for use by Defence Force personnel, it was decided that they should be upgraded. A program of full internal upgrading and other improvements has been authorised. On completion of these works later this year, the houses will be occupied by Service families.
Reviews of Defence Science and Technology Organisation
(Question No. 2496)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:
(1) Did he commission external and internal reviews of the Defence Science and Technology (DST) Organisation for the Government approximately 3 months ago; if so, has he received the results of the reviews.
(2) Did he undertake to table the reviews and the Government's response to them for discussion by the ParliameI:lt and interested parties.
(3) Did his Department inform staff organisations on 8 May 1981 that the reviews would I)e tabled before the end of the autumn period of sittings.
. (4) Do the reviews comment very favourably on the efficiency and detailed research being undertaken by the DST Organisation and that this view is contrary to the Government's overriding intention to cut defence staff and research facilities without consideration for the long term defence needs of Australia; if so, is this the reason for the Government's refusal to table the reviews.
Mr Killen--'-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I announced the Reviews referred to by the honourable member on 13 November 1979. They were conducted in 1980 and the Reports were received in November 1980.

Answers to Questions

19 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 555

(2) It was my intention to table the Reports during the Autumn period of sittings. However some of the recommendations of the Reports come within the terms of reference of the recently announced Defence Review, The Government decided therefore to refer the Reports to the Defence Review. That body has now identified a number of recommendations it wishes to consider. Rather than delay action on the remaining recommendations I have therefore released the reports and the Government's response to those recommendations not being considered by the Defence Review, I tabled the reports on 19 August 1981.
(3) My Department did not indicate the Reports would be tabled but stated that it was expected that this would be the case. Subsequently the Government decided to refer the Report to the Defence Review.
(4) The reviews make a number of comments on the efficiency and detailed research being undertaken by DSTO. Some are favourable, some critical. They identified deficiencies in the organisation, management administration and operations of the DSTO which the Government is anxious to see remedied. The honourable member can be assured that the Government has no intention of taking any action with regard to the DSTO without the long term defence needs of Australia well in mind. It is in this spirit that we have responded to the recommendations of both reviews.
Social Security: Disclosure ofInformation
(Question No. 2502)
. Mrs Darling asked the Minister, representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:
(I) Does the Social Security Act prevent the disclosure of information such as the address of a social security beneficiary to the beneficiary's parents, next of kin, or State or Federal police even in those cases where the beneficiary is between 16 and 18 years old and listed as a missing person.
(2) If so, will the Minister consider raising the age limit whereby information concerning the whereabouts of social security beneficiaries is given to the beneficiaries' parents or legal guardians.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The Social Services Act prohibits the disclosure of any information with respect to the affairs of another person which has been acquired in the performance of duties or functions under the Act. These provisions apply regardless of the age of the person concerned.
Information may, however, be disclosed to third parties where the person to whom the information relates has expressly or impliedly authorised such disclosure or where the Minister for Social Security or the Director-General of Social Services certifies that it is in the public interest to disclose the information.
(2) The existing confidentiality provisions of the Act are necessary to protect the privacy of clients of the Department, while permitting access to information in situations mentioned above.
Where a person or authority is anxious to get in touch with a client of the Department of Social Security, the Department has a procedure under which it will forward on correspondence to the client or will advise him of the name and address of the person who wishes to contact him.

Estimates of Total Transportation Costs
(Question No. 2600)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
What are the most recent estimates that can be provided of the total transportation costs, from origin to overseas port, disaggregated by (a) mode, (b) service, (c) stage of production and (d) cost and as a percentage of the total cost of the product before unloading at an overseas port for (i) coal, (ii) bauxite, (iii) alumina, (iv) aluminium ingots, (v) iron ore, (vi) bulk grain, (vii) containerised wool and (viii) general containerised cargo in (A) full container loads and (B) less than container loads.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The question is a complex and wide-ranging one, requiring details of transport costs at each stage of production for a range of unspecified origins and destinations in respect of eight commodities. Against the background that much of the information sought is confidential to the organisations concerned, I do not believe that the employment of staff resources to undertake the considerable research needed to provide a detailed answer would be justified.
As the honourable member would be aware, most bulk commodities are transported on both land and sea at contract rates, details of which are not released by the organisations concerned. Consequently, the 'book' rates published by the various Australian rail systems do not reflect the actual rates charged for these traffics. Likewise, in respect of shipping the spot rates published in trade journals do not provide an adequate guide to rates applicable to long-term trade arrangements made between exporters and shipping companies.
In addition, it should be noted that for some commodities, especially iron ore, mining companies or customers provide their own transport for the rail or sea freight task.
Import ofhory Products
(Question No. 2614)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Trade and Resources the following question, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) Do any restrictions apply to the import of ivory products into Australia; if so, what are the details?
(2) Has the Government raised in any international organisation of which Australia is a member, the question of restrictions on the slaughter of elephants; if so, to what effect?
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Restrictions do apply to the import of ivory products into Australia. The restrictions are contained in the Customs (Endangered Species) Regulations which give effect to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora. The Convention, which took effect in Australia on 27 October, 1976 provides, inter alia, for regulation of the international trade in elephant ivory.
(2) At the third meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention in New Delhi (February/March 1981)- the Australian delegation assisted in drafting a resolution, subsequently adopted by the Conference, which recommended in summary:
(i) that any imports, exports or re-exports of African elephant ivory by a Party be authorised only if the Party is satisfied that the ivory was legally acquired in the country of origin.

556 REPRESENTATIVES 19 August 1981
(ii) that permits or certificates for raw ivory be accepted only if they mention the actual country of origin.
(iii) that Parties do not accept raw ivory which is not clearly marked.

Answers to Questions
(iv) that where possible Parties adopt domestic measures whereby importers, exporters or re-exporters of raw ivory would be subject to a licence to conduct such trade, unless such trade is only conducted by the Party itself.


