House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 122, 1981 Thursday, 14 May 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2391

Thursday, 14 May 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 10.30 a.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Proposed Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in: (i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline
services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Everingham, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Kerin, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Morris and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.
Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
l. The hotel industry in Australia is long-established and a valuable part of the community of this nation, providing places where the people may partake of the three basic needs oflife: a place to eat, a place to drink, a place to sleep.
2. The hotel industry is accepted throughout the nation as occupying an important place in the social and economic activities of Australia.
3. The hotel industry is almost entirely within the private sector and makes a large contribution to the government in taxes of various kinds.
4. The hotel industry has a need to sustain an appropriate level of turnover and growth, to make profit, and to sustain and improve the level of employment.
5. The hotel industry of Australia is gravely concerned at published reports that the Government intends to increase excise charges on beer in the forthcoming Budget.
6. Sales of beer constitute the major source of income of most of the industry's 5811 hotels in Australia.
7. The very steep rises in beer excise in 1975 and 1978 severely retarded the growth of the Australian hotel industry.
8. Any further increases in excise on beer in the 1981 Budget would further retard the industry at a time when growth is essential to maintaining economic viability and the

ability to serve the constantly growing needs of the community.
9. Such is its significance as a community requirement, beer occupies a place on the Consumer Price Index, and any alteration to its cost to the community would have an inflationary effect.
10. Any increase in excise would result in and force the hotel industry to pass on such increases to the consumer by way of higher prices for beer.
11. Higher excise would be only the starting point for an upward spiral in beer prices because of the presence of other factors, such as State Licence Fee taxes, which are directly linked to excise rates.
12. The hotel industry of Australia already is gravely handicapped by heavy excise and other tax imposts, its growth is at a standstill; and, inevitably must decline if beer excise is increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives:
(1) Recognise the importance and place of the Australian Hotel industry in the social and economic life of the nation.
(2) Accept that the viability of the hotel industry is essential to the maintenance of employment opportunities and stability of the industry is essential to enable it to continue to provide for the hotel needs of the nation in this period of growing popUlation and increasing tourism.
And further, that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives resist and reject any move to increase excise on beer.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon and Mr Porter.
Petitions received.
Rosemount Repatriation Hospital
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of undersigned Australian citizens showeth:
Rosemount Repatriation Hospital has been of inestimable value to eligible repatriation beneficiaries for many years, and the closure or dispersal of the facilities available at the hospital would be a retrograde step.
The proposed decision to close Rosemount Repatriation Hospital through active discouragement by departmental administrative officers of any further referrals by medical officers of patients for medically prescribed occupational therapy is objectionable.
Closure of Rosemount Repatriation Hospital would severely disadvantage veterans in Brisbane's northern suburbs, as well as their relatives and friends who would be required to travel a great distance in order to visit hospitalised veterans at either of the two alternative repatriation hospitals.
Closure of Rosemount Repatriation Hospital and trans fer of patients to Greenslopes would greatly add to the administrative burden of that repatriation and general hospital.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the government will reverse its announced decision to close the Rosemount Repatriation Hospital.
And your petitioners as in duty bound wiJI ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

2392 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Petitions

Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That, as ex-servicemen are eligible to receive a Service Pension five years earlier than other Australian males are eligible to receive an age pension, subject to certain conditions, so too should the age at which the means test is applied to pension increases be reduced for service pensioners by five years to age 65.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will, in recognition of the service they have performed for their country, and because of reduced life expectancy as a result of that service, reduce the so-called means test free age limit for service pensioners from 70 years to 65.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Privacy and Personal Information
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Austraiia respectfully showeth that:
Paragraphs 107 and 108 of the Privacy and Personal Information discussion paper number 14, brought down by the Law Reform Commission in June 1980, undermines the family unit and the authority of parents, which is the Christian basis of our society, by proposing that "between 12 and 16 years, a child should be entilled to object to disclosure of information to a parent."
It is your petitioners sincere belief that:
(a) an adolescent between the ages of 12 and 16 is not at a mature enough stage of life to decide whether or not the disclosure of information to a parent will be in the best interests of the adolescent.
(b) as a record keeper has no responsibility for the child, and as his moral standards may be different to those of a parent, he should not be permitted to come between child and parent.
(c) a parent has a unique position which may enable him/her to perceive a situation that the record keeper does not. The parent must therefore be aware of the problem if remedial action is to be taken, and has the right to guide the child in the direction he/she feels fit.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Members of the House of Representatives will reject the recommendation of the Law Reform Commission and find some other means to protect children from the excessive abuse of some parents.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrDobie.
Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian House assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of children's services, which has been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 Budget. And

further, that annual Budget allocations in the area of children's services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MI'Free.
Petition received.
Women's Refuges
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members oCthe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should take action as it deems appropriate to ensure the continuing effectiveness of the Women's Refuge Program. In particular that:
1. Realistic funding levels be introduced to maintain existing services offered by women's refuges.
2. That the needs for child care in women's refuges be acknowledged by a specific and adequate allocation of funds for this purpose.
3. That funding be allocated for the purpose of assisting women and children to establish themselves in the community on leaving refuges.
4. That funding be allocated for refuges to address themselves to areas of special needs of migrant women in refuges.
5. That funding be made available for the establishment of new women's refuges.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Holding.
Petition received.
EISalvador
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
That sending financial aid to EI Salvador identifies Australia with the repressive role of the security forces in that country.
That it increases the risk of wider military intervention.
That it jeopardises a constructive role Australia and the free world might play in the conflict.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Australian Government will undertake:
To desist from taking a course of action which can only contribute to the hardship and repression of the people of El Salvador.
To take a principled and public stand against the flagrant abuse of human rights in that country.
To consider instead, means of providing effective humanitarian assistance.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrHowe.
Petition received.
Travelling Post Office Service
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembed. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the Australian Postal Commission's decision to phase.out the Travelling Post Office (T.P.O.) in New South Wales.

Petitions

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2393

The T.P.O. service has given the country people of New South Wales a reliable and efficient service for many years. To replace this service with a road system would be a backward step which we believe would result in long delays in mail going to and from country centres.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition to retain the T.P.O. service in New South Wales.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lusher.
Petition received.
Discriminatory Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament in Canberra assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That the right to work without discrimination on any ground including, inter alia, discrimination on grounds of race, ethnic origin, marital status and/or sex is a fundamental human right;
That it is both the duty and the responsibility of society to fully support those denied work and therefore those who are unemployed as a result of society's inability to provide full paid employment should be guaranteed an adequate income without discrimination on any ground, including inter alia discrimination on grounds of race, ethnic origin, marital status and/or sex.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That appropriate and adequate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in Commonwealth employment, in employment of persons by statutory bodies and quasi-governmental organisations, in employment of individuals under federal awards, and in employment of all persons in areas over which Commonwealth and Australian Capital Territory equal opportunity legislation should have jurisdiction; and
That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits to all persons without regard to race, ethnic origin, marital status and/or sex.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr MacKenzie.
Petition received.
National Women's Advisory Council
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assemhled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
Their support for and endorsement of the National Women's Advisory Council.
We call on the Government to:
Continue to maintain the National Women's Advisory Council and increase Federal Government support for its activities.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr MacKenzie.
Petition received,

Abortion
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully petition:
That the government will act to prohibit the use of all puhlic monies for the killing of unborn children. That the said use of government monies is an unacceptable government endorsement of a great national tragedy-the deaths annually of at least 80,000 unborn children.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr MacKenzie.
Petition received.
Abortion
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia, respectfully showeth: That we support your efforts to strengthen our family and community life.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honourable House will:
(I) Cease paying out taxpayers money for unlawful abortion procedures.
(2) Eliminate subsidies for abortion referral centres. (3) Ensure that Australia's Human Rights Charter will in-
clude rights for unborn Australians primarily the right to life.
(4) Introduce further benefits for pregnant women to assist them in continuing with their pregnancy.
(5) Obtain each year from each of the State Attorneys General: (a) written details as to the reasons for which procedures were carried out under item 6469 of the Medical Benefits Schedule,
(6) (b) Declaration that no procedures in respect of which a claim is made within the Health Insurance Act are unlawful abortions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr MacKenzie.
Petition received.
Soviet Passenger Cruise Vessels
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Owing to an overwhelming and continuous demand by the Australian people for a cruise service within the economic scope of the working man and his family, we request the Government to lift the ban placed on Soviet Passenger Cruise Vessels entering Australian Ports.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia, respectfully calls for:

2394 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Petitions

The immediate and unconditional withdrawal of any proposals to deny unemployment benefits to unemployed people under 18 years old.
That the level of benefits for all unemployed people, and including people receiving sickness benefits and pensions, be raised to at least 120 per cent of the poverty line.
That future employment policies be devoted to job creation and the restoration of full employment rather than the evasion of this responsibility by hiding the unemployed in short term training and education schemes.
Public acknowledgement of the fact that unemployment is the result of insufficient jobs and not the fault of any minority group, the education system or the unemployed themselves.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Nixon. Petition received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of Parliament assembled in the House of Representatives. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other taxpayers can deduct business expenses from their assessable income.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Porter. Petition received.
Trade Unions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that we are gravely disturbed by the actions of militant unions and the ACTU, the failure of the President of the ACTU to assist positively in settling the dispute which has caused massive losses to Qantas our national airline, and we applaud the action of the Government in using RAAF planes to rescue Australians stranded abroad.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament and the Government should be of firm resolve not to permit such unions to hold the country to ransom and continue to take a forceful and resolute stand against such union militancy.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ruddock. Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully showeth:
I. That we are gravely concerned at the lack of children's services within the city of Northcote.
2. That we are dismayed at the refusal of the Department of Social Security (Child Care Division) to fund a Family Day Care Programme within the city of Northcote.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will ensure adequate funds for children's services will be made available so that family day care may be provided within the city of Northcote.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howe.
Petition received.
Staging of American B52 Bombers
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembed. The petition of the undersigned in the Northern Territory respectfully showeth:
That the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a refuelling and rest and recreation base for American B52 bombers-
Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the USA. and another power.
Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of whether B52s: (a) carried nuclear weapons; (b) were engaged in bombing missions against another
State. Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign policies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy. Violates democratic procedures in committing the Australian nation to participation in future wars without due consultation and informed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the militarisation of the Indian Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region. Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin, in that noise pollution and the threat of accidental radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents. Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of peace in the Pacific region and violates Australia's commitment to the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location in Australia, as a base or depot for American B52 bombers. And that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US. Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent.
Petition received.
POPE JOHN PAUL II
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)-by leave-Honourable members will be aware of the tragic reports this morning of the wounding of Pope John Paul II in St Peter's Square in Rome. All people throughout the world will be appalled by this senseless act of violence directed at one of the most dedicated advocates of peace and reconciliation. I inform the House that J have sent a message to the Pope in the following terms:
I was deeply shocked and distressed to hear of the attempt on your life.
The Government and people of Australia join with me in wishing you a full and speedy recovery.
My Government deeply deplores such acts of violence which your Holiness has so strongly condemned.

Pope John Paul II

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2395

Throughout his papacy John Paul has shown how often, however, they seem to be the product of

one man can provide people with hope for the disturbed personalities seeking to work out

future. He has risen above the partisan divisions tragedies in their personal lives by inflicting

of society and, by his own example, has sought to tragedy on others. We have seen assassination in

bring people together to overcome the barriers of the past but there seems now to be a new impetus

race and religion. It is tragic that in the world to pointless violence which afflicts our society and

today there are people who seek to achieve their which is extraordinarily difficult to contain. One

goals not through reason and example but of the problems in an open and free society such

through violence and murder. Their destructive as the one in which we live is that prominent pub-

acts do not advance their causes but breed horror lic figures must be accessible. But in being access-

and revulsion at those causes amongst the peoples ible, they are vulnerable; it is a strength and yet

of the world.

this brings in its wake a potential weakness as we

We thank God that the shocking act failed to achieve its purpose. However, it forces us to pause, to take stock and to ask ourselves why these senseless things happen and why it is that man's struggle for a better and more peaceful

see on this occasion and have seen on an earlier occasion in the United States of America. I re-
peat: The Opposition express its sympathy, its concern and its wish for a rapid and comfortable recovery for the Pope.

world is deflected through violence and terrorism. Honourable members- - Hear, hear!

The concern, I think, is all the greater if some of

the reports this morning that the would be as-

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

sassin was a known member of a terrorist gang are

later proved correct. If that is so it means that the

act has been perpetrated by design, deliberately, and that it was not the senseless act of one deranged man but the deliberate and concerted

PEACE-KEEPING FORCE IN THE MIDDLE EAST

attempt of a terrorist group. If modern interMr LIONEL BOWEN-My question, which

national terrorism is to embark on those paths, is addressed to the Minister for Foreign Affairs,

adding yet a further dimension to its horror, it arises out of certain answers given in this House

means only that governments and peoples will yesterday relating to the negotiations for the com-

have to reinforce their efforts against all terrorists mitment of Australian military forces to the

and acts of terrorism.

Middle East. What is the basis of consideration

Pope John Paul's life is a shining example of a commitment which seeks to uplift mankind. All Australians and all members of this House, I am certain, whatever their religion, will be greatly re-

for committing Australian military forces to the Middle East before the matter itself has even been considered or approved by the United Nations Security Council?

lieved to know that he will be able to continue his Mr STREET-As I am sure the Deputy

work, which is so important for his own church Leader of the Opposition knows, under the terms

and the rest of the world.

of the Egypt-Israel peace treaty a United Nations

Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition)-by leave-We heard the news of the attack on the Pope with horror. On behalf of the Australian Labor Party I am sending a message to Rome extending our best wishes for a comfortable recovery and for the early return of the Pope to his great task of leading the Catholic Church. Our concern will, I am sure, be reflected right across the Australian community. Pope John Paul II has never flinched in carrying out his duty. A man of great physical robustness and intellectual vigour, he has been a great voyaging Pope carrying a message of goodwill and peace throughout the world and a commitment to the oppressed of all nations of the world.

peace-keeping force was to be established to supervise the final phase of Israel's withdrawal from the Sinai by the end of April 1982. There are indications that the establishment of such a force under United Nations auspices, as originally proposed, would be opposed by some Arab countries and probably the Soviet Union. Therefore,
there could be major problems in reaching agreement within the United Nations framework for such a force. I understand that in these circumstances the parties immediately concerned-that is, the United States of America, Egypt and Israel-are giving consideration to a multinational force to do the job originally envisaged for the United Nations force. It is known, and we have known for some time, that Australia is under

Attacks of this kind are becoming increasingly consideration for participation in such a force. I

incomprehensible. Sometimes they are the result emphasise that no formal request has yet been

of terrorism, which must be rejected utterly. So made.

2396 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr Young-Did we ask them to make one like we did in Vietnam?
Mr STREET-I emphasise: We have not asked that a request be made. We know we are under consideration, along with a number of other countries, to be asked about the possibility of establishing a multinational force. The matter rests there at the moment. I hope that the Opposition will join with the Government in working towards securing a peaceful settlement to the Middle East problem and in helping to progress the Camp David Accords.
GOVERNMENT ECONOMIC MANAGEMENT POLICIES
Mr CHAPMAN-My question is directed to the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs. Are the Government's present policies of sound economic management based on less interventionist government and a more market oriented economy creating enough jobs and creating them quickly enough to fulfil Australia's needs? Would a different economic policy create more jobs '?
Mr N. A. BROWN-I can well appreciate the sentiments expressed in that question by the honourable member. Indeed, it should be well understood now by everyone that governments cannot create jobs; they can only adopt economic policies that will enable the economy itself to generate jobs of its own strength. That fact should be understood. That being so, it should also be said, of course, that the Government has a task and a responsibility to put in place programs which will give people the skills they need to be productive within the free economy. The Government has followed that broad objective and, indeed, its economic policies can clearly be seen to have been successful. We can see [rom the latest employment statistics that there have been very substantial increases in the number of people in jobs. Those increases have taken place in a broad range of industries. Again with respect to the unemployment figures, this month's statistics have made it plain beyond any doubt that there is a continuing drop in unemployment. Without going into the details, these figures show quite clearly that there have been falls in all age groups-both males and females-falls on the month, falls on the year and indeed the largest drop since this series of statistics was started. The Government wants these trends to continue but they will continue only if our economic policies which allow the economy to generate jobs are themselves allowed to continue.
I was asked also about an alternative policy. I see that an alternative policy was espoused by the

Leader of the Opposition in a recent address-- last Friday night -- to the Victorian Fabian Society. The policy advanced, which he and his party are now pursuing, is for more collectively owned goods and services. So, it should be plain without any doubt at all that the new forces in the Australian Labor Party, pampered to by the Leader of the Opposition, have adopted, on their own admission, this policy of collective ownership of goods and services. I have no doubt that, when the Australian people get an opportunity to say so, they will say that they do not want anything to do with the collective ownership of goods and services and will support the Government's economic policies which have improved the employment situation considerably.
SUBSCRIPTION TELEVISION
Mr LLOYD-The Minister for Communications will be aware of the concern being expressed by regional television over two aspects of the proposed amendments to the Broadcasting and Television Act. Will the Minister consider the following points made by regional television when finalising the amendments: Firstly, that the amendments will protect a television company from being stripped or irreparably damaged by a takeover which is subsequently disallowed by the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal; and, secondly, the availability of supplementary licences and the timing of their introduction particularly taking into account the views of regiona,l television on subscription television?
Mr SINCLAIR-The answer to the first part of the honourable member's question is yes. However, with regard to subscription television it is felt that it would be more appropriate for the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal to extend its cable television inquiry to take into account all aspects of subscription or pay television to ensure that when it is introduced into this country all the dimensions into which it can run are properly considered. Therefore, legislation introduced into this House in regard to supplementary licences is not intended to include any provision for subscription television. But a reference will be sent to the Australian Broadcasting Tribunal as an extension to what is now before the Tribunal so that, when considering cable television, it might also consider the parameters within which payor subscription television should be introduced into Australia.
BANK TAKEOVERS
Mr CUNNINGHAM-I refer the Treasurer to the reported takeover bids by the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd for the Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd, by the National

Questions Without Notice

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2397

Bank of Australasia Ltd for the Commercial indexation everyone per cent increase in average

Banking Co. of Sydney Ltd and the possible income will cause a 1.4 per cent increase in in-

takeover of the National Bank by the Bank of come tax? As this will mean a clear reduction in

New South Wales, which takeover would be by real spending power for an average income

far the largest in Australia's history. Is it a fact earner, what steps does the Government have in

that the Government's decision to deregulate demind to avoid what the Government was once

posit interest rates last year and the subsequent fond of decrying-the secret tax of inflation?

rise in lending rates has meant large windfall profits for the banks as evidenced-by the halfyearly profit increases of 33 per cent for the Bank of New South Wales, 39 per cent for the National Bank and 34 per cent for the ANZ Bank? Are the takeovers being financed out of these profits? Does the Treasurer regard it as proper that they should be paid for out of the pockets of Australian home buyers and small businessmen?

Mr HOWARD-I have no specific reason to dispute the figures that were used by the honourable member for Banks. Let me make it quite plain that, as everybody in this House will know, this Government was elected in October 1980 on the basis of a policy and a platform put forward at that election and that policy and that platform
contained a commitment to a tax cut of some $500m which would take effect on 1 July this year

Mr HOWARD-Takeovers are normally
financed out of profits. Equally, jobs are also normally provided out of profits. The idea that there is something inherently wrong or inherently grubby about companies making profits in Australia indicates just how out of touch people on the other side of the House are with economic reality in Australia at present and with the needs of the Australian community. The situation regarding bank mergers very simply is that proposals have been announced involving a merger of the ANZ Bank and the Commercial Bank of Australia on the one hand and a proposed merger of the National Bank and the Commercial Banking Co. of Sydney Ltd on the other. I have already indicated the attitude of the Government and the

as a consequence of the operation during that financial year of half tax indexation. As I made plain in my statement of two weeks ago, that commitment will be met in full without deduction, without quibble and without any equivocation. Any suggestion that the Government will do other than honour in full what it said in the last election campaign about the provision of that tax concession is complete nonsense and totally incorrect. As to the situation after the next financial year regarding taxation adjustments, I also made clear in my statement of a couple of weeks ago that in future the Government will make tax adjustments on a discretionary basis, normally in the Budget context. That remains and will remain our position.

fact that a decision will be required when application is made for consent, if application is made for consent. The sort of considerations that will be

NEW SOUTH WALES: SHORTER WORKING WEEK

taken into account have been the subject of a Dr EDWARDS-I ask the Prime Minister:

statement by me and answers to earlier questions What is the Government's position on recently in the House. I do not propose to speculate on announced New South Wales legislative changes

Press comment regarding other possible arrangefacilitating a shorter working week?

ments. The only proposals which have been formally announced are the two that I have mentioned. So far as the profitability of the Australian banking system is concerned, the long term profit position of the system, if the honourable gentleman cares to analyse the statistics, does not lend support to the proposition that excessive or undue profits have been made.

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I think that the position that appears to have been adopted by the New South Wales Government is regrettable from a number of points of view. It is regrettable because it would seem to indicate to the New South Wales industrial commissions that they should ignore and indeed almost seek to overturn the decision of the Australian Conciliation and

INCOME TAX INDEXATION

Arbitration Commission in relation to productivity bargaining. Against the background of

Mr MOUNTFORD-The Treasurer will rethe decisions of the Arbitration Commission

call that a fortnight ago he announced the terminwhich have been handed down after full debate

ation of income tax indexation. Is it a fact that if and after the parties had put their various points

the Government's promise of full tax indexation of view, it would seem to be quite arbitrary and

had been honoured the income tax bills of taxunreasonable, It would seem to be offering a di-

payers would be $l,OOOm less than would apply in rection to the New South Wales industrial com-

the absence of any income tax indexation? Is it missions which is entirely of a political nature.

also a fact that in the absence of any income tax Certainly it will be very unfortunate for industry

2398 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

in New South Wales. It is very similar to the legislation which Mr Wran introduced some time ago in relation to a reduction in working hours in the power industry, which spearheaded a general movement downwards in hours throughout the power industry in Australia. Again I find it difficult to understand how a Premier of a State which is so dependent upon industrialisation and heavy industry can undertake moves which must undermine the profitability of that industry and, therefore, undermine the capacity of that industry to employ people in New South Wales.
Mr Ruddock-Sabotaging Australia.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-My colleague interjects that he is sabotaging Australia. He certainly is sabotaging the efforts of this Government and of other people to encourage greater employment. If there is a choice as to which State industries will go to-New South Wales or another State-as a result of this kind of action they certainly will be looking to some other State. What the New South Wales Government is doing is unfortunate from another point of view. At the recent Premiers Conference, on the initiative of Sir Charles Court, we examined the need for an inquiry into the impact of a 35-hour week on the Australian economy and whether there should be a broad based examination of the role of wages in the community, how to achieve non-inflationary growth, and the impact of hours on the general well-being and living standards of Australian families. There was broad acceptance of some terms of reference that were initiated by the Commonwealth but worked over by State officials. It has now been left to see who would be able to undertake that inquiry, in a sense not just on behalf of the Commonwealth Government but, it was hoped, on behalf of all the State governments. The Premier of Tasmania in particular was keen to see a bipartisan approach to these issues. The decision of the New South Wales Government seems to be pre-empting that examination in a way which again is entirely unfortunate. If Mr Wran has not entered into commitments with the trade unions which he finds have put him in shackles on this issue, I urge him to reconsider this decision to see whether he cannot follow Mr Lowe's example.
Honourable members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! Honourable members on my left will remain silent.
Mr Hayden-Don't be put off because everyone is going to sleep, Malcolm.
Mr SPEAKER--Order! The Leader of the Opposition will remain silent.

Mr Charles Jones-Turn the record over Mal. Away you go again.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Newcastle will cease interjecting. The Prime Minister is entitled to cease speaking while there is continual interjection. I ask honourable members to remember the dignity of the House and to remain silent.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-[ urge the Premier of New South Wales to follow the example of the Premier of Tasmania in this matter and to join with the Commonwealth and other States in seeking a proper, impartial examination of these grave and serious issues which go to the living standards and the well-being of Australians and Australian families no matter what State they come from. Therefore, I urge him to desist from this legislation until the examination which was discussed at the recent Premiers Conference can be initiated and pursued and the results examined by the Government.
HEALTH CARE: COSTS
Dr KLUGMAN -Does the Minister for Health recall telling me, in answer to Question No. 235 on 24 February this year, that the proportion of private patients in public hospitals already paying for accommodation varied from 53 per cent in New South Wales to 20 per cent in Queensland and 14 per cent in Tasmania? I ask: Is it, therefore, not true that the introduction of a means test will produce a much larger increase in hospital income in Queensland and Tasmania, assuming a fairly even living standard across Australia? How can he then say that Queensland is entitled to extra money for hospitals and New South Wales is not?
Mr MacKELLAR-I do not recall my exact answer that I gave in February, I think it was, of this year to the question asked by the honourable gentleman. My recollection is that the figures at the present time for New South Wales are, as the honourable member stated, overstated. I believe that the number of pay-bed patients in New South Wales is less than 53 per cent at the present time.
Dr Klugman-It is still much more than Queensland.
Mr MacKELLAR-It is certainly still much more than Queensland. The honourable gentleman mentioned Queensland. As I said in this House yesterday, the Government looked at the special position of Queensland after listening to arguments put both at the Premiers Conference and at the meeting of Hea1th Ministers last Friday. In line with the recommendations contained in the report of the Jamison Committee of

Questions Without Notice

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2399

Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of

EDUCATION

Hospitals, particularly that recommendation that suggested that too rapid changes would be disruptive in any hospital system, the Cabinet has made a decision that a once only adjustment should be made in the case of Queensland. In the case of Tasmania, we still have not received a reply in relation to whether it will continue the fifty-fifty cost sharing arrangement which, of course, it is at liberty to do until 1985.

Mrs DARLING-I direct my question to the Prime Minister. Firstly, will he confirm that he is to receive an honorary doctorate when he visits the United States of America on a two-week tour during the winter recess? Secondly, will the decision of the Review of Commonwealth Functions to introduce tuition fees for university and college of advanced education students undertaking degrees and diplomas subsequent to the attainment

of initial tertiary qualifications mean that for

PROPOSED CHILDREN'S FOUNDATION many students the receipt of honorary doctorates

Mr SHIPTON-My question to the Prime Minister concerns the proposed children's foundation mentioned in the Prime Minister's policy

in overseas countries is now their best or only prospect of obtaining higher tertiary qualifications?

speech last year. Is it the intention of the Government to proceed with this Proposii1 in the near future? If so, will the views of voluntary agencies,

Government supporters interjectingMrs DARLINGThe Government does not

such as the Children's Protection Society and the like that part. Thirdly, will the Prime Minister in-

Mission of St James and St John, be taken into form this House and the one-third of a million

account before deciding the nature and consticoncerned tertiary education students in this tution of the foundation? Would the Prime Mincountry whether the decisions of the Review of

ister agree--

Commonwealth Functions firstly, to introduce a

loans scheme as a supplement to the Tertiary

Mr Innes~What about the Melbourne City Education Assistance Scheme; secondly, to adjust

Mission?

downwards the rate of TEAS to take account of

the availability of loans through this scheme; and

Mr SHIPTON-I include the Melbourne City Mission, which the honourable member for Melbourne knows very well. Does the Prime Minister agree that such a foundation should highlight

thirdly, to tighten further eligibility guidelines for TEAS, are attempts to pave the way for complete reintroduction of tertiary fees for all students? Fourthly, what effect will the inevitable--

problems of child abuse through communityeducation programs and sponsor research into the neglect and maltreatment of children on a national level?

Mr SPEAKEROrder! The honourable lady has asked enough questions for the moment. I call on the Prime Minister to answer them.

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The answer to

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-There is good reason to believe that the problem of child abuse is much more widespread in the community than many people understand or would readily be prepared to believe. The Government is proceeding with this election policy commitment. My col-

the friendly part of the honourable member's question is yes. The answer to the other parts of the honourable member's question is that, if the Government's policy has been adequately understood, it is quite clear that there are no fees in relation to primary degrees.

league the Minister for Social Security has been having discussions with the States. Obviously, the attitude of voluntary agencies will need to be

AUSTRALIAN WOOL TESTING AUTHORITY

taken into account in determining the final form Mr FALCONER-Did the Minister for

of the foundation. I think it ought to be said that Primary Industry attend a meeting in Canberra

the idea of establishing a national body of this yesterday with representatives of the wool indus-

kind came from voluntary agencies themselves tryon the proposed sale of the Australian Wool

and from people who have been intimately and Testing Authority? If so, can he say what the out-

very closely associated with the problem of child come of the meeting was? In particular, has the

abuse, especially in New South Wales, including industry persuaded the Government to change its

the Sydney area. Research and community edudecision on the sale of the Australian Wool Test-

cation are two of the things in which such a founing Authority? If not, what assurances was the

dation would certainly involve itself. The founGovernment able to give the industry to calm its

dation would be seeking to work with and through fears about the Australian Wool Testing Auth-

voluntary agencies to a very large extent.

ority becoming a private enterprise body?

2400 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr NIXON-In reply to the first part of the honourable member's question, along with the Prime Minister and the Minister for Industry and Commerce yesterday I met representatives of the wool industry to discuss the sale of the Australian Wool Testing Authority. The answer to the second part of the question is no; the industry did not put forward any reasons that would convince us that we should not sell it. I think that the interesting thing is that, in all the many telegrams and telexes that I have received from across Australia from wool growing interests on this matter, until yesterday nobody had really sought from me what proposals we had in respect of the sale.
Perhaps I can inform the House that it has never been the intention, and it was not the intention when the decision was taken, simply to sell the Australian Wool Testing Authority to the highest bidder and to have it broken up so that it lost its proper function in the issuing of certificates on wool testing. Indeed it is proposed that the industry itself can devise the form that the new structure will take. The industry will decide the representation that will manage it and, along with the Australian Wool Corporation, it will handle future wool testing. That body will be set up either as a wool testing house or as a foundation of some type with an absolute assurance that any certificate issued will be a legal certificate in a similar fashion to the one presently issued. I think that, following the discussions, those representatives of the industry who were present were certainly much more settled in their approach to this matter. The wool industry ought to know that the first interest we have in respect of the sale of the Wool Testing Authority is to ensure that there is no disruption to wool sales and the procedures that follow.
HOME LOAN INTEREST RATES
Mr LES McMAHON-My question is directed to the Minister for Housing and Construction and concerns the pressure for an increase in interest rates that will accompany the Government's restrictive monetary policy response to a large capital inflow in recent months. Does the Minister agree that a one per cent rise in housing loan interest rates from 11 t per cent to 12t per cent will impose an additional monthly repayment burden of $22 on a $30,000 loan and would increase the deposit gap for new home buyers? What provision is the Government prepared to make in order to prevent hardship to low and middle income earners seeking to buy homes or attempting to pay off housing loans?
Mr McVEIGH-The honourable member for Sydney has raised several interesting questions.

The facts and figures that he has quoted are, from memory, near enough to accurate, but I remind him to look at some of the statistics on the availability of housing finance in Australia.
Mr Charles Jones-Why don't you draw up a
chair, Tom?
Mr McVEIGH-it is a very serious matter. The Government is interested in maximising home ownership for all Australians. The most recent statistics indicate that the number of loans made available in Australia in the last 12 months to December 1980 totalled 240,345. That is an alltime record for Australia. We have one of the highest levels of home ownership in the world-71.9 per cent of Australian families own their own homes. The honourable member raised the matter of a deposit gap. One can readily understand the difficulty of a person saving for a deposit. However,let us analyse the facts. Only 30 per cent of the Australian home buyers are single income families. So 70 per cent of the people purchasing homes are from two-income families. Obviously it is easier for two-income families to save a deposit for a home. It must also be remembered that if finance is to be made available to home purchasers it is necessary not to isolate funds for home ownership. I fully support the initiatives announced by the Treasurer in this Parliament at the end of last year. They had the net result of attracting such funds to home ownership as to enable the totality of funds allocated last year to be a record.
Mr Charles-They can't afford to pay it back.
Mr McVEIGH-The honourable member said that they cannot afford to pay it back. The statistics speak for themselves. The honourable member for Sydney quoted certain facts relative to a $30,000 loan. For the information of honourable members opposite, the facts are that in December 1978 it took 27.1 per cent of average weekly earnings to pay back interest and redemption on a $30,000 savings bank loan over 25 years. In December 1980 it took only 26.1 per cent. These facts and figures are indicative of the climate of stability created by this Government since 1975. I will conclude on this note-
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr McVEIGH-Obviously those who sit opposite are not interested in the important matter raised by the honourable member for Sydney. Later today I will be introducing legislation concerning the new Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement. In that agreement initiatives will be developed, but the prime responsibility for welfare housing in Australia belongs to the State governments. I only hope that the New South

Questions Without Notice

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2401

Wales Government will show a little bit of concern for the underprivileged and will not go on uttering a litany of deceit in this vital and important matter.
REVIEW OF COMMONWEALTH FUNCTIONS
Mr CADMAN-Is the Treasurer aware of factors in the administration of governments in Australia which lend support to the decisions of the committee which reviewed Commonwealth functions?
Mr HOWARD-One of the more interesting responses to the statements made by the Prime Minister arising out of the review of Commonwealth functions is the claim that it was an unnecessary exercise in pruning the size of government and an unnecessary exercise in trying to attain greater efficiency in the operation of government and the operation of the Public Service. Some light is thrown on the validity of that criticism by reports this morning of very great concern being expressed about the waste of money in the administration of government in New South Wales arising out of a parliamentary committee chaired by the Australian Labor Party member for Heffron, Mr Brereton, which indicates that millions of dollars have been wasted in the administration of government in New South Wales. Apparently the New South Wales Government has $3m of the taxpayers' money to spend on funding political campaigns but it is not sufficiently concerned about the administration of government.
Dr Theophanous-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. We are concerned about the affairs of the Commonwealth Government. Today three attacks have been made in this Parliament against the New South Wales Government by honourable members opposite. They have been fallacious attacks.
Mr SPEAKER-The Treasurer is being relevant to the question.
Mr HOWARD-I think this morning's reports are further evidence of the need for all governments, whether they be the Commonwealth Government or any of the governments of the Australian States, to examine their own efficiencies and look at the sizes of their administrations and their public services. In this respect it would be a very good thing if the New South Wales Government followed the lead not only of the Commonwealth Government but also of the Victorian, Western Australian and South Australian governments which have very much decided in recent weeks to duplicate what we have done.

COMMONWEALTH-STATE RELATIONS
Mr HAYDEN-[ ask the Prime Minister whether he recalls saying in the House on 3 December 1976:
If these developmental proposals are to work it will require the kind of co-operation that comes from people of our political philosophy; the sort of co-operation that one ilnds from Sir Charles Court or Mr Hamer . . .
In view of this comment and his repeated pledges that Commonwealth-State relations under the Fraser Government would be established 'through a process of genuine consultation and cooperation', I also ask the Prime Minister whether he will say what has happened to these good intentions, leading to Sir Charles Court stating in a letter to him, and anyone else who was faintly interested, on 8 May:
I resent the States being treated as though they were merely departments of the Commonwealth Government to he told how to manage their atTairs and forced to accept whatever arrangements your Government considers appropriate to your own budgetary requirements.
Sir Charles further complained about the Government's policies in relation to the States being an 'imposition of your Government's proposals on the States without prior advice or discussion and against their unanimous opposition'. In fact, is this nasty confrontation with States further evidence of the Prime Minister's manic determination with getting his own way?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-If it is evidence of anything it is evidence of our determination to protect the taxpayer's dollars. It is the taxpayers who have the prime right to those dollars and to the expenditure of those dollars. It is time that all governments in Australia showed a concern for that and an interest in that. I have no doubt that a greater number of people right throughout the community will come to see that it is the Commonwealth Government above all that is protecting the taxpayers of this nation from higher and higher taxes.
UNION ELECTIONS
Mr RUDDOCKCan the Minister for Industrial Relations inform the House whether any challenges have been lodged in respect of the regularity of recent elections of the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union?
Mr VINER-I thank the honourable member for Dundas for his question because I am sure that all honourable members would be very interested to know that in fact challenges have been made to that election. Challenges have been lodged with the Industrial Registrar, who has referred to the Industrial Relations Bureau the application by two members of the Amalgamated Metal

2402 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

Workers and Shipwrights Union so that the Bureau may inquire into the circumstances surrounding that election and report to the Industrial Registrar. The applications have been made with respect to the AMWSU National President, Mr Dick Scott, the Assistant National Secretary, Mr Laurie Carmichael, and the National Organiser for Division 2, Mr. W. Martin. Of course, this is a very serious matter because the AMWSU is the largest union in Australia. It happens also to be the union which is mounting such a serious campaign against industry in Australia at the moment through the 35-hour week. Therefore while one, of course, cannot pre-empt the inquiry to be made by the Industrial Relations Bureau or, if the matter should be taken to the court, the findings of that court, having regard to the position of the AMWSU in the union movement in Australia, it is a matter of great concern to find that two members of that union have considered it serious enough to bring the matter to the attention of the Industrial Registrar and for him to refer the matter to the Industrial Relations Bureau.
EMPLOYMENT STATISTICS Dr JENKINS-My question is addressed to the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs. With the close-down of the Commonwealth Employment Service data collection unit, will the Australian Bureau of Statistics alter its information base to include such relevant details as the number of people registered for work, the age categories, and unemployment through part time work only being available?
Mr N. A. BROWN-I am glad that the honourable member for Scullin has raised this matter because it gives me an opportunity to make some comments to the House with respect to Australian Bureau of Statistics figures. The specific answer to the honourable member's question is that I will look at the proposed changes he has suggested to see what precise details are already collected in those areas and whether improvements, if any, can be made. Implicit in the question, and in some of the other comments that have been made over the last few days, is a suggestion that the termination of the Commonwealth Employment Service statistics is in some way a reprehensible act of the Government.
Mr Scholes-It is.
Mr N. A. BROWN-I notice that already that expression of opinion has been confirmed by a number of members on the Opposition front bench. May I say two things about this matter. It should be well known and accepted by anyone who understands the statistics and their method

of collection that the CES statistics cannot properly be regarded as an acceptable form of statistics if one wants to know the true extent and the details of both employment and unemployment in Australia. In the first place, it is known that there is no need for a person to be unemployed before he or she may register with the CES. Secondly, there is at least some double counting amongst registrations at the CES, and in a number of cases people who obtain employment through the valuable services of the CES do not have themselves removed from the roll.
The Government in reaching its decision was influenced by a number of things. It was influenced by the fact that both the Hancock report and the Norgard report drew attention to deficiencies in the CES statistics and, indeed, the Norgard report went so far as to say that the CES figures should not be used.
Mr Uren-What about the regions? Tell us about that.
Mr N. A. BROWN-I have been influenced in considering the debate and the argument on this matter by an additional set of factors, and this is particularly relevant in view of the comments made by way of interjection by a number of members on the Opposition front bench.
Over the years a number of prominent members of the Australian Labor Party have drawn attention to the deficiencies in the CES figures and have maintained on those occasions that the Australian Bureau of Statistics figures are the most re1jable set of statistics and should be used. Might I remind the Leader of the Opposition of his remark in a debate in this place. After discussing this issue, he said: 'But the Bureau's statistics are more reliable.' I suggest that the honourable member who asked the question and those who have views similar to his should take up this matter in debate with the Leader of the Opposition. If the Bureau's statistics are more reliable, then those statistics should be used and not the figures-one cannot call them more than that-collected by the CES, which is not a statistics collection agency. Without unduly taking the time of the House, I ask leave to incorporate in Hansard a number of statements by prominent members of the Opposition, both present and when in government between 1972 and 1975, which highlight the--
Mr Hayden-Point of order--
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister has asked leave to incorporate documents in Hansard. So far he has not identified what is to be incorporated.

Questions Without Notice

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2403

Mr N. A. BROWN-I wish to incorporate a Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable

number of statements by the former Minister for member will resume his seat.

Labor and Immigration, Mr Cameron, the former Minister for Housing, Mr Riordan, the present member for Adelaide, two statements by the present member for Gellibrand, and a statement by the present Leader of the Opposition--
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order.

Mr Hayden-The facts are that there were no--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. There is far too much noise on my right. I ask honourable members on my right to remain silent. I call the Leader of the Opposition.

Mr N. A. BROWN-Which highlight the superiority of the Australian Bureau of Statistics figures.

Mr Hayden-These quotes referred to seasonally adjusted unemployment figures which we wish were still being published and which have

Mr SPEAKER-The Minister will cease been suppressed by this Government.

speaking. The Minister has identified that which he wishes to incorporate. Is leave granted?

Mr Sinclair-Mr Speaker, J take a point of order.

Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I have raised a point of order. I would first like to be assured that the references are more reliable and relevant than the

Mr SPEAKER-lam hearing a point of order. Mr Hayden-This is clearly--

Minister claimed in terms of what he said a little Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition

earlier about a comment I was supposed to have is arguing the issue.

made in this Parliament. I certainly did, as I recall it in relation to seasonally adjusted unemployment figures which the Government suppressed because they were embarrassing the Government--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is not taking a point of order; he is arguing the issue.

Mr Hayden-It is clearly a display of mendacity from the new Minister to show that he belongs to the Fraser Government. He has the right qualities, a lack of integrity--
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat. The Leader of the Opposition is aware that he has used unparliamentary ex-

Mr Hayden-There were no unemployment pressions. I ask him to withdraw.

surveys--

Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, it is a very dishonest

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman display by the Minister.

will resume his seat.

Mr SPEAKER-I ask the honourable member

Mr Hayden-Well, it is a matter of credibility, to withdraw.

if not integrity, and in those circumstances we would have to oppose a doctored document coming forward.
Mr SPEAKER-Leave is not granted. J call the Minister.
Mr N. A. BROWN-J am certainly not going to read out all the documents because we would be here all day; I will table them. In conclusion, I will read to the House one of the statements

Mr Hayden-Yes, but for gosh sake do we have to sit here and bear with--
Mr Sinclair-Yes. Mr Hayden-I know that the Minister for Communications would expect it. We know how he made his family fortune. Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat.

which I think is particularly appropriate. Mr Government members interjecting-

Riordan, a former Minister for Housing, said:

Mr SPEAKER-Order! Honourable members

It is no use honourable gentlemen opposite trying to quibble about it. The fact is that the Bureau of Statistics conducts a survey consistent with international standards.

on my right will remain silent. I ask the Leader of the Opposition to withdraw.

I table those extracts.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. This is highly irrelevant and thoroughly misleading.
Government members interjecting-

Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I have and I repeat it.
Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable member has withdrawn, I ask him to resume his seat and not to interject continually.

Mr Hayden-I know honourable members op-

DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION

posite would have difficulty understanding the Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)

simple issue of integrity--

-For the information of honourable members. I

2404 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Personal Explanations

present the Department of Education report for 1980.
STUDENT ASSISTANCE ACT
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)- Pursuant to section 35 of the Student Assistance Act 1973, I present the report on the operation of the Student Assistance Act in 1980.
ADVISORY COUNCIL FOR INTER-GOVERNMENT RELATIONS
Mr FIFE (FarrerMinister for Education)- Pursuant to section 7 of the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Act 1976, I present report 4, which is the second report in relation to the relationships reference for the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations, entitled 'The Provision of Roads: A Report on the Relationships Among the Three Spheres of Government in Australia'.
AUSTRALIAN HERITAGE COMMISSION
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-Pursuant to section 43 (4) of the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, I present a corrigendum to the Australian Heritage Commission annual report 1979-80. Honourable members may be aware that the report was tabled in the House on 26 November 1980.
PERSONAL EXPLANATIONS
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for O'Connor has indicated to me that he wishes to make a personal explanation. Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr TUCKEY-Yes, I do.
Mr SPEAKER--He may proceed.
Mr TUCKEY-Last night during the adjournment debate the honourable member for Fraser (Mr Fry) included a statement in his presentation on behalf of the Women Against Rape organisation. The statement was in reply to my speech supporting the sale of strata title sections to the present tenants of the Belconnen Mall. The honourable member for Fraser said:
I was interested in the honourable member for O'Connor who has apparently become an instant expert on the Belconnen Mall. I wonder whether it is a fact or whether he was merely reading a speech prepared for him by the Minister for the Capital Territory.
That statement is totally inaccurate. I researched and wrote that speech myself and, as evidence of that statement, I refer the honourable member for Fraser to Mr Ivan Hodges, secretary of the Belconnen Mall Traders Association, whom I telephoned on the morning of 5 May to obtain the

information quoted in my speech. If he still doubts my conversation with Mr Hodges, he might consult--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member has made his personal explanation.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)-Mr Speaker, I claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable member wish to make a personal explanation?
Mr DAWKINS-Yes.
Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed.
Mr DAWKINS-On page 9 of today's Australian newspaper, there is a report of a rally which took place outside Parliament House yesterday. It says that I accused the Government of having developed 'a second rate antipodean education system'. That may be true, but that is not exactly what I said. I said it was probably because of the second rate antipodean education of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) that he is so disparaging of Australia's education system.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member is arguing the issue.
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin)-Mr Speaker, 1 wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr GOODUJCK-Yes, I claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member may proceed.
Mr GOODLUCK--During Question Time a circular was distributed in this House. It was signed 'Bruce Good luck'. I did not sign it.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member will have to make it clear how he has been misrepresented.
Mr GOODLUCK-It could be financially difficult for me if the words of the circular were accepted. The circular is very simple and is in these terms: 'In order to celebrate my birthday, you are invited to join me for drinks at the Members' Bar at 9 p.m. tonight'.
Mr Cunningham-Mr Speaker, I wish to raise a point of order. The honourable member for Franklin, in claiming to have been misrepresented, was deliberately using this House for publicity purposes, seeking to spread the fact that he is having a birthday today. We have all accepted his invitation and we will see him at the bar later.

Commitment of Australian Forces in Middle East 14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2405

Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the In answers to the questions which have already

Capital Territory)-Mr Speaker, I wish to make a . been asked on this matter it has been indicated

personal explanation.

that perhaps the Government is acting in the

Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman claim to have been misrepresented?

spirit of and in accordance with what is known as the Camp David Accords. Let me make it very clear and place on record that the Camp David

Mr HODGMAN-Yes, I do claim to have Accords, at all levels, at all times and in all sec-

been misrepresented.

tions, place the observance of the Accords and the

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman may proceed.

treaty in fulfilment of it in the hands of the United Nations Security Council.

Mr HODGMAN-I have been informed that, in the adjournment debate last night, the honourable member for Fraser (Mr Fry) made a number of comments reflecting upon myself, the Australian Federal Police and the Returned Services

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman is arguing the merit of the case he would be arguing if the Standing Orders were suspended. He must confine himself to why the Standing Orders should be suspended.

League. Unfortunately I did not have the traMr LIONEL BOWEN-I appreciate the

ditional courtesy of being forewarned--

point, Mr Speaker. The point I am trying to make

Mr SPEAKER-I interrupt the honourable gentleman to advise him that he cannot make a personal explanation on behalf of the Returned Services League or anybody else, just himself.

in furtherance of what you have said is that the Parliament has been led to believe that what is being done by the Government is in accordance with the Accords. I am trying to make the point that it is not. The serious step of moving for the

Mr HODGMAN-I appreciate that, sir. The suspension of the Standing Orders is being taken

RSL will take care of itself. I wish to respond on so that the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr

my own behalf to say that I did not have the traStreet) can clearly indicate that the action taken

ditional courtesy, unfortunately, of being by the Government is in accordance with what

informed that the comments were to be made. I has already been agreed between two parties am further informed that Hansard will not be which were engaged in war. It is a matter of the

available until 1 p.m. today. Accordingly, I will utmost significance. In urging the Minister to

seek your indulgence to make a personal explamake a statement, I point out that there is connation in response to the imputations made fusion in the Government ranks. I have evidence

against me as soon as Hansard is available and that the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony)

can be carefully studied.

has said that Australia would always have its

COMMITMENT OF AUSTRALIAN

forces under the umbrella of the United Nations.

FORCES IN THE MIDDLE EAST

Today, in answer to a question, the Minister for

Suspension ofStanding Orders
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (11.34)-Mr Speaker, I wish to move for the suspension of Standing Orders. Accordingly, I move:

Foreign Affairs made the point that perhaps we could not get United Nations approval and, therefore, there had to be negotiations between the United States and this Government as to what type of force ought to be committed to the Sinai Desert or the Middle East. No Australian force

That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as should be committed there until such time as we

would prevent the Minister for Foreign Affairs from forthwith (1) making a statement to the House giving details of all negotiations with the United States in relation to the commitment of Australian military forces in the Middle East and (2) tabling all relevant documents.

have had a full debate on this issue in this Parliament and obtained the approval of the Parliament and the approval of the Australian people. Any suggestion that the commitment is in accordance

Yesterday and today the House was advised that the Government had entered into negotiations, by way of correspondence, for the commitment of Australian military forces in the Middle East. I want to make it very clear that the Australian

with the Camp David Accords is incorrect. The suggestion was made today that it is in accordance with the treaty that apparently was approved subsequent to the Camp David Accords. That is not correct.

nation should at least have this matter discussed I draw attention to the fact that what the Par-

in this Parliament. We do not want any smuggling liament has already been told is quite erroneous

in of Australian forces to occur. We do not want and quite misleading. For example, the treaty says

any deceit and deception of the Australian nation that the parties shall request that United Nations

to occur.

forces be deployed. Annex one of the treaty says

2406 REPRESENTATl YES 14 May 1981 Commitment of Australian Forces in Middle East

that the parties shall agree on the nations from which the United Nations forces and observers will be drawn. Annex one contains an express prohibition in the statement that the parties will accept or support a United States proposal concerning the composition of the United Nations force. A further prohibition is the statement that the force will be drawn from nations other than those which are permanent members of the United Nations Security Council. The United States is a member of the United Nations Security Council and, therefore, cannot participatc in that force.
It is for those reasons that we stress that the Minister should make a statement urgently. Clearly it must be made in accordance with what has already been agreed to between the parties concerned. If any force is to be committed to the area-I stress that this Parliament must (irst agree on that it would only be a force approved by the United Nations and, secondly, it would only be a United Nations force. The Government appears, by deceit and certainly by some secret method, to have had discussions by correspondence with General Haig or somebody else on the basis that we might be part of a United States joint force in the Sinai, which is contrary to all the arrangements made in accordance with the Camp David Accords, the peace treaty itself and the United Nations' prior commitments in the area. The proposed settlement relates to the Sinai. It was the subject of a resolution of the United Nations known as Resolution 242. Resolution 242 pro-- vided for the withdrawal of military forces. Il went on to say that the Secretary-General of the United Nations would designate a special representative to proceed to the Middle East to establish and maintain contacts with the states concerned in order to promote agreement and assist efforts to achieve a peaceful and accepted settlement and that the Secretary-General would expect a report on the progress of the efforts of the special representative.
So there we have a commitment from 1967 onwards for the United Nations Security Council to be directly involved. In fact as a result of that Resolution, and the suggestion that all forces should withdraw, there followed some sort of settlement on the basis that the UN would be monitoring the whole situation. This is a matter of the utmost urgency to the nation. It is a matter that could well involve us in another Vietnam with all the problems that arose there.
Mr Charles Jones-While the Parliament is in recess next week.

Mr LIONEL BOWEN-We do not want to have a situation-as my honourable friend has suggested-where the Government could make a decision while this Parliament is in recess and we would be unable to evaluate the situation. Yesterday, in answer to a question the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) said that the Parliament would be advised when a decision had been taken. That is far too late for us. I wish to make it clear that at present no forces are to be committed anywhere unless firstly, this Parliament debates the malter, and, secondly, the Australian nation approves. At this stage there is not one tittle of evidence which would justify a commitment of Australian forces to the Middle East. It could be done only if the Australian nation approved and it would have to be a United Nations force.
I welcome a debate on this matter. At present we are in a situation where all we have learned, as
a result of our own questioning, is that the Government is considering making a decision. We know that the Minister has corresponded with the American Secretary of State, General Haig. We do not know what that correspondence contains but the Press seems to know some of the elements of it. Certainly, that correspondence is some weeks, if not some months, old. It is important that we have a discussion in this Parliament. It is important for decisions to be made in accordance with the international standards of peace and security. It is quite wrong for Australia to be involved in any United States force. During the Camp David Accords there were definite discussions about the sorts of facilities that could be taken over in the Sinai; for example, the use of the air fields near El Arish and other places. It is said that this has to be in accordance with the Accords and that the facilities will have to be used for civilian purposes only. Imagine our forces being committed to this area, with other forces of a military nature, and with all these air bases and other facilities available. Is it not likely that other nations nearby -this can include super-powers-would say that the use of the facilities would be an act of hostility?
Arc we to shut our eyes to the fact that in 1973, Dr Kissinger, when leading United States foreign policy, was anxious to have a rapid deployment force in the Middle East on the basis that there could be immediate strike potential so that the United States could take immediate military action to protect its oil supplies? At that time the then Labor Government said that no such action should be approved. The French Government said the same thing but the impetus was coming from Dr Kissinger and the hawks in Washington as far back as 1973. The same thing can happen

Commitment of Australian Forces in Middle East 14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2407

again because the same influences seem to be there. If, as the Washington Post says, this is a back door method of smuggling forces--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is now arguing the issue.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I just want to stress that this is a matter of urgency. There is a precedent for deception-over Vietnam. We were lucky to have a Labor Government which decried it and denied it. On this occasion it appears that correspondence has already been entered into on the basis that something will be done. Mr Speaker, 1 think you will agree that the people of this nation are entitled to know why there is a need for such a commitment. If there is to be a commitment it must be in the interests of peace. That immediately excludes the United States from the point of view of the Accords. This is important when one looks at our multicultural nation because the people in Australia come from all those areas and they have all sorts of different political points of view.
I conclude on this note: If one looks at the reaction to the Camp David Accords, one sees complete hostility from Syria, Libya and certainly from the Palestinian Liberation Front. One sees it also from Saudi Arabia and Jordon. If we look at those countries, if we look at our nation, and at the sort of people who would be suggesting that this is the forerunner of a major flashpoint in the Middle East, and a war in which we would be involved, would our troops be safe? Would they be contributing towards peace? I would suggest not. It is about time that this Government made a statement forthwith.
Mr SPEAKER-Is the motion seconded?
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (11.44)-1 second the motion. It is a procedural move which is necessary if we are to have any opportunity at all-of course, the motion has to be successful to get that opportunity-to discuss a matter which is assuming increasingly grave implications for Australia. The House will rise tonight and adjourn for a week. Tn the meantime, there may be profound developments in relation to this matter and the Parliament will not have had the opportunity to apply its attention to those developments, to explore the implications and to ask questions very properly about why, on the basis of the evidence before us on this point, there has been a dramatic change of heart on the part of government in relation to the proposal.
Let us understand clearly what this proposal is. H is not a proposal for an independent, impartial, international peace-keeping force. It is a proposal

for a United States sponsored on-the-ground military strategic force to be set up in the Middle East. The Washington Post has said it as bluntly as that. In those circumstances, we wish to create the opportunity for the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) to make a considered statement to the Parliament on this matter and, 1 hope, to allow debate to proceed.
Let us look at some of the features of this matter. There is a fundamental conflict associated with the unfolding of the Government's attitude on the proposal that there should be a US sponsored and controlled military force on the ground in the Middle East. It is becoming inreasingly clear from statements from the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the attitude of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) that, in fact, the Government is increasingly attracted to this proposal. I am grateful to the Melbourne Sun--not for many things-for its article on the front ?age this morning. 1quote it exactly. It reminds us:
On March 17 Mr Anthony told the Egyptian Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, Mr Ghali, that Australia would not be involved--
He said that Australia would not be involved-
in any force the United Nations was not party to.
That is the fundamental attitude of the Government as expressed by the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) speaking for this country overseas. He said that we would not be involved with any force unless it was a United Nations force. The article continued:
At the time, Mr Anthony told journalists that any move outside the UN would be 'illegal'.
The article went on to state:
Such a move would be similar to Russia moving into Poland on the basis that it had been 'invited', Mr Anthony said.
I concur entirely with those sentiments. But I inquire why there has been this dramatic change. I come to the next point. There are elements associated with this that have a deadening familiarity about them, a depressing deja vu, as it were. Let us take Vietnam. We know, because of documentation that has been revealed to the public, that rather than the Americans being unrestrained in their enthusiasm to rush into an escalation of the conflict in Vietnam, they were incited, they were bulldozed, by representatives of a conservative government of (he same colour as this one, a government of which the Prime Minister was a member.
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition will return to discuss the issue as to why the Standing Orders should be suspended to allow a statement by the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

2408 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981 Commitment of Australian Forces in Middle East

Mr HAYDEN-If that is not a good reason, Mr Speaker, let me put this proposition. I thank you for your indulgence. We are concerned that Australia may well end up in a situation which has depressing similarities to that which we endured in the 1960s. We were taken into a conflict which forever will blight the reputation and the credibility of conservative government on this sort of maHer. That is what we want to discuss. That is a grave matter. We have seen on a smaller scale, but no less significant, the way in which the Government wanted to establish home porting facilities in Western Australia for new US strategic forces thus converting Fremantle and Perth into a prime nuclear target. We have seen the Government's attitude on the B52 bombers and the way it wanted to go into an Indian Ocean naval exercise with America before the election and then rushed out after the election because it understood the foreign policy and trade implications.
If we are to be involved in anything, we want to be in control of it. We will not be in control of events in the Middle East should we participate in this sort of proposal with it being controlled by the United States. Decisions could be taken and forces put in train over which we have no control. I reassert the fundamental principle that we will stand by and fight for unflinchingly, that is, to preserve the sovereignty of this country and to preserve the lives of Australian military personnel. While we are not opposed to an adequately set up UN commitment we will oppose this tooth and nail.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)-Mr Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr ANTHONY-Yes. Reference was made to me. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) quoted a report of my visit to Egypt. I would like him to table the authority for that quotation.
Mr Hayden-I quoted the source. I am happy to table it if you wish.
Mr ANTHONYYou did not quote the source. What is the source?
Mr Hayden-l told you, It is this morning's Sun, quoting you from its record,
Mr ANTHONY-Who was the author? Is it in quotes?
Mr Willis-Have it incorporated in Hansard.

Mr Hayden-You see, he says things and he doesn't remember that he said them.
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition will remain silent. The Deputy Prime Minister, by my indulgence, asked a question of the Leader of the Opposition requesting him to provide information. Is the Leader of the Opposition in a position to do so?
Mr Hayden-Yes.' I quoted the source when I was speaking. It is this morning's Melbourne Sun. It is an article by Trevor Hawkins. There are a number of quotations in quote marks attributed to the Deputy Prime Minister. I have read the article in full. It is in the record. If the Deputy Prime Minister wishes I am happy to have it incorporated in HClnsard. I think this is unnecessary. I think theptoblem is that the right honourable member is one who makes a speech without knowing what he will say and then sits down wondering what he did say.
Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition has no need to make a comment of that kind.
Mr SINCLAIR (New EnglandLeader of the House) (11.52)-This motion for the suspension of Standing Orders contains two items. The second one relates to a prohibition within Standing Orders of which, I am sure, no honourable member of this House would be aware. It is quite appropriate that at any time a Minister is able to table any document in the House. Therefore, there is no need to suspend Standing Orders for that purpose. Of course, whether the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) wishes to table the documents is another matter. I suggest that there is no obligation at all on him to table the documents. I indicate to the House that I suspect he would not wish to do so.
The first part of the motion is also, I think, of some interest. I am really delighted to see honourable members of the Opposition supporting this motion this morning. As you know, Mr Speaker, part of today is set aside for General Business. it is General Business, Thursday No.2. We have a Notice Paper that is issued in this Parliament which covers the proceedings of this House each day. This sets down the business which will be conducted. A day for the discussion of General Business is a day for private members, that is, not the members of the front bench, not the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) who has moved a motion for the suspension of the Standing Orders or the Leader of the Opposition (Mf Hayden) who seconded the motion. It is not a time when members of the front bench of the Opposition any more than members of the front bench of the Government get up to take the time

Commitment ofAustraliim Forces in Middle East 14 May 1981 REPRESENTATlVES 2409

of private members. It is a time when properly business of the House is laid down and the private members in this place have an opportunity to conduct matters.
I think it is also of interest that there are two matters that are specifically limited. Time is available under our Standing Orders until 12.45 p.m. so that there can be an adequate discussion of those matters. The first matter is a proposed motion listed by Mr Barry Jones and the second by Mr Holding-both of those honourable gentlemen are, of course, members of the Opposition. It is interesting that they are, in other words, matters that the Leader of the Opposition and the Deputy Leader of the Opposition are prepared to push aside in order that debate can continue on this matter. I think it is also worth saying that not only are those two matters listed but also there are separately another 85 notices of motion which are also available for discusion this morning. They, of course, come from many honourable members of this place. So, we have 87 notices of motion all listed by honourable members and all of which could have been discussed in this place. Yet, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and the Leader of the Opposition chose to take the time of this place in order to discuss this matter. If they wish to do so, the Government raises no objection to Standing Orders being suspended for that purpose.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)--I wish to make a personal explanation. I have actually been given a transcript of the Press conference that I held in Cairo. It was the only time that I made public comments on this subject and was, therefore, the only opportunity the Press had to report any remarks that I might have made. The relevant part of the transcript relates to questions asked by one of the Press people attending the conference. It states:
Question: Would Australia be ready to contribute soldiers towards an international peace-keeping force in the Sinai?
Mr Anthony: Australia has made its position clear. We provide peace-keeping forces when it is under the umbrella of the United Nations and we would hope there will be United Nations support given for a peace-keeping force; otherwise we reserve our position.
Mr Hayden-You said more than that. Read the next page.
Mr ANTHONY-The transcript continued:
Question: So if you are not under the umbrella of the United Nations are you afraid of Arab reprisals?
Mr Anthony: We don'llike to make ad hoc arrangements. We work in accordance with the United Nations resolutions.
Question: Sir, I am sorry to insist but since the Soviet Union will probably veto something like this, what is the attitude of

your Government? Would you only participate under the umbrella of the United Nations or would Australia be ready to participate in a multinational force?
Mr Anthony: At this stage the Australian Government has made it clear that it wants to have a United Nations resolution before it gives consideration to sending forces there.
Mr Hayden-Now you are changing your attitude.
Mr ANTHONY-The newspaper article stated that I said the peacekeeping force would be illegal. The Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) used the word 'illegal'. There is no mention of the word 'illegal' in the transcript of the Press conference. The word was placed in inverted commas in the Press report this morning. The report is completely inaccurate. I did not say that a peacekeeping force would be illegal without a United Nations resolution. The Leader of the Opposition should not misrepresent the situation. I said that Australia's position was reserved.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. What the Deputy Prime Minister is saying is vastly different from what the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the Prime Minister are now saying. There was a much more rigid attitude.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat. The Deputy Prime Minister made a personal explanation. I will not permit the matter to be debated further.
Mr Charles Jones--Mr Speaker--
Mr SPEAKER-I will not call the honourable member for Newcastle. He is not entitled to the call.
Mr Charles Jones-I take a point of order.
Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable gentleman had said so I would have called him.
Mr Charles Jones-My point of order is that the Deputy Prime Minister has quoted partially from a document. I request that he table the whole of that document.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman misunderstands the Standing Orders. The point of order relates to another issue. The Deputy Prime Minister quoted from a document because he was making a personal explanation.
Mr Charles Jones-He quoted only partially from it.
Mr SPEAKER-The Deputy Prime Minister quoted from the document. Following an interjection which I permitted, he quoted more of it. The matter is now at an end. The Standing Orders have been suspended to enable the Minister for Foreign Affairs to make a statement if he wishes to do so.

2410 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981 Commitment of Australian Forces in Middle East

Ministerial Statement
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs) (12.0)- The Government can understand the interest in this matter but I would have hoped for a much more constructive approach on the part of the Opposition and a willingness to build on the Camp David Accords rather than an attempt to throw doubt on them. Therefore, the first point that needs to be made is that this debate has been brought on at a completely inappropriate time. No formal request has been received from the United States Government or anybody else for us to participate in a peacekeeping force in the Sinai. If and when it is received, the Government will make a decision on it and, as the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) indicated yesterday, there will be an opportunity for full and proper debate in this House in the event of any decision being taken. The Opposition is fully aware of the Government's current position.
The question needs to be asked why the Opposition has chosen to bring this matter on at such an inappropriate time. The answer can be only that the Opposition, once again, is attempting to throw a cloud of suspicion and distrust over Australia's alliance with the United States. Furthermore, the Australian Labor Party is revealing a clear ideological bias against the constructive initiatives resulting from the Camp David Accords. The Government fully supported those Accords and the Israel-Egypt peace treaty which followed from them in the firm belief that they constituted the first step towards a more comprehensive statement. The peace treaty envisaged Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai by the end of April 1982. The final Israeli withdrawal was to be monitored by a peacekeeping force under the auspices of the United Nations. Australia, as well as the parties concerned, wishes to see the United Nations sponsor such a peacekeeping force, but all the information currently available to us suggests that it is extremely unlikely that this will be possible because of a likely Soviet veto in the United Nations Security Council. In these circumstances Egypt, Israel and the United States are currently engaged in consultations on the means by which a peacekeeping force may be established in the very probable event tpat the United Nations is unable to establish the peacekeeping role envisaged for it in the peace treaty.
We understand that the countries concerned have under consideration a multinational force composed of countries acceptable to Israel and Egypt. Although no formal approach has been made to us, as I have already said, we understand that Australia is amongst a number of countries

being considered as participants in such a multinational force. We further understand that a number of Latin American, African and European countries are also being considered as possible contributors to any such force. It is likely also that the United States will contribute. It is our further understanding that such a force would be established solely for a peacekeeping role in the Sinai. It would be an error to ascribe any direct association between this proposal and separate proposals relating to the possible establishment of a rapid deployment force in the region, with which we have not been involved. The Government's concern that it be made quite clear that there would be no link between a proposed Sinai peacekeeping force and any rapid deployment force has been conveyed to the United States
Government.
I emphasise that any communications between Australia and the parties concerned can be described only as being of an exploratory nature at this stage. We believe that such an exploratory approach in the present circumstances is both justified and prudent and will contribute to any formal deliberations which might be required of the Government if and when a formal approach is made for Australian participation. As I have said, in accordance with the Government's support for the Camp David Accords and the peace treaty, it attaches importance to the smooth Israeli withdrawal from the final portion of Egyptian territory. This is a means of maintaining the peace process. It is hoped that success in this area will help open the way for more comprehensive peace negotiations in the Middle East. If and when the Government receives an official approach to participate in the Sinai peacekeeping force, it will take into account, in coming to a decision, a wide
range of issues affecting our national interests.
Obviously, our preference is and remains in favour of a force which has United Nations sponsorship. As I said earlier, it seems clear that it will not be possible to achieve this. It is important, therefore, that any proposed force cover as wide a political and geographic representation as poss-
ible. Moreover, the Government will need to be satisfied about the precise role and command structure for the force. The Government will not commit itselfto the force unless it has satisfactory assurances on these matters. The Government believes that the implementation of the Camp David Accords can be seen as the first phase in a lasting and equitable resolution of conflict in the Middle East. For that reason we regard the accords as a set of constructive initiatives which all countries with an interest in peace and justice in the Middle East would want to pursue.

Special Adjournment

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2411

Australia has limited political influence in the Middle East. Our interest is in the maintenance of stability in the region and cannot be described as being limited. The Government has accepted that, where our national interests coincide with those of the Middle East, it should give careful consideration to what contribution, even though it may be limited, it might be able to make towards the maintenance of peace in that region.
Mr Lionel Bowen-Mr Speaker, I seek leave to reply briefly to the Minister's statement.
Leave not granted.

BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE
The following Bills were returned from the Senate without amendment or re"'lests:
Census and Statistics Amendment Bill 1981. Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Bill 1981. Quarantine Amendment Bi111981.

SPECIAL ADJOURNMENT

Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House)-Mr Speaker, I move:

That the House, at its rising, adjourn until Tuesday, 26 May 1981, at2.15 p.m.,--

Mr Hayden-Come on. You are not building up the undertaking business now.

Ml' SPEAKER-Order! The right honourable gentleman will resume his seat and the Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat. I did not give the Leader of the Opposition the call but I did give the Leader of the House the call. I again call the Leader of the House.

Ml' SINCLAIR-Mr Speaker, I move:

That the House, at its rising, adjourn until Tuesday, 26 May 1981, at 2.15 p.m., unless Mr Speaker fixes an alternative day
or hour of meeting.

Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (12.6)-TheOpposition opposes this proposal. In the light of the dramatic events in the course of this week, which have yet to be resolved, we believe it is necessary that the Parliament continue to sit. A series of crises have developed in government. The government of the affairs of this nation has been brought almost to a standstill. The Government is preoccupied with its own internal dissent and discord.

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) put:

That the Leader of the Opposition be not further heard.

The House divided.

Ayes

64

Noes

46

Majority

18

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

AYES

Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. BirneyI R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M.A.
Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian
Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G.
Dobie, J. D. M.
Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.C.
Fisher, P. S. (Teller)
Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. MeD.
Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller)
Hodgman, W.M. Howard, J. W.
Hunt, R. J. D.
Hyde,J.M.

Jarman, A. W.
Jull,D.F. Katter,R.C. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A.
MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean,R.M.
McVeigh,D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar,P.C. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. PorterI J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C.
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F.
Sinclair, I. McC.
Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. I.
White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C.
Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G.
Cass,M.H.
Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B.
Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S.
Duffy, M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L.
Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Jacobi,R. JeDkins, H. A.
Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles
Keating, P. J. Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Les
Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford,J. G.
Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. West,S.J.
Willis,R. Young,M.J.

In division-

Ml' SPEAKER-I draw the attention of the House to the fact that I have directed the tellers not to include the Leader of the Opposition in the count because it has been indicated to me that the honourable gentleman is paired with the Prime Minister. But the Leader of the Opposition will remain in the chamber during the count.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr SPEAKER-The question now is: 'That the motion be agreed to'.

Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide) (12.14)-This Parliament has been sitting for three months

2412 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Science and Technology Policy

doing absolutely nothing and now we are going to beforced--
Mr Sinclair-Mr Speaker, I move:
That the question be now put.
Mr YOUNG-To put through all the important legislation in the next sitting week.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Port Adelaide will resume his seat.
Mr YOUNG-The Parliament should be sitting for the next month.
Mr SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for Port Adelaide.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:
That the question be now put.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (12.17)-1 move:
That this House-
(I) rejects the prevailing colonial mentality of the Fraser Government by which technology transfer is overwhelmingly under foreign control;
(2) rejects the concept of technological determinism-the idea that technological changes must be adopted regardless of social consequences, as set out in the CITCA (Myers) Report;
(3) expresses its preference for technologies which complement and enhance human capacity, dignity and diversity;
(4) asserts that the Australian people have the right to choose the most appropriate technologies from the range offering, e.g. solar as opposed to nuclear energy;
(5) believes that introduction, ownership and control of high technology should not be left to market forces alone;
(6) calls on the Fraser Government to follow the example of Switzerland and Sweden in encouraging higher levels of nationally based research and development, and
(7) calls for the establishment of an independent Office of Technology Assessment and a Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology so that both Houses can take an active and informed role in pursuing national policies on technology.
The House will have an opportunity today to vote on a series of basic propositions about where Australia is going and how it will get there. I hope that the motion will be supported by all honourable members because the area of science and technology is one in where we ought to have a bipartisan approach. I turn briefly, given the hour, to the individual points of my motion. In a number of earlier speeches I have criticised the prevailing colonial mentality of the Fraser Government and my concern that technology transfer is overwhelmingly under foreign control. I think that the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) recognised this fact in his

address to the Australian and New Zealand Association for the Advancement of Science yesterday. He is well aware that 94 per cent of the royalties or know-how payments in Australia are paid overseas. I hope for and expect his support on this point today. The report of the Committee of Inquiry into Technological Change in Australia, surely the most lightweight and irrelevant major report ever issued, even by this Government, totally failed to tackle the question of technology transfer. The report ignored the implications of foreign ownership except for one isolated and apparently naive comment. It said:
Technology is, in general, an international commodity and the ability of the Government or people of a small country such as Australia to influence the development of new technologies and their use in the world is probably extremely limited.
That is the end of the statement. That is the report's total comment. The words 'multinational corporation' literally do not appear anywhere in the 1,552 pages of that four-volume report.
Secondly, we ought to reject the concept of technological determinism and restore the significance of Parliament and the political process. Democracy does have its failures, as the past successes of Barabbas, Hitler and Peron indicate. But legislatures, though imperfect, have a greater sensitivity to human needs than any other political instrument. Parliamentarians must raise their consciousness and levels of debate on technology, tapping alternative sources of advice. We should assert the right to choose between varieties of technology. The futures debate in Australia, such as it is, has encouraged the simplistic view that technology must be either adopted in to to in its most advanced form, the sooner the better, or rejected in to to by adopting Buddhist economics and foresaking the flush toilet, the electric blanket and colour television. The debate has ignored our right to select appropriate technologies and to fit them to meet social needs. Technology is not a monolith. There are multitudes of diverse technologies.
If the democratic process is to survive in a period of rapid and insistent technological change, Parliament must assert the right to choose. The right to choose is inextricably linked with the right to be fully informed. The revival of the primacy of the political process in technologically or scientifically based areas does not involve the setting up of cumbersome regulatory apparatuses which are likely to prove irrelevant or anachronistic. Any regulatory body which attempted in the 1960s, for example, to preserve the thermionic valve industry against the competition of transistors would have faced an uphill

Science and Technology Policy

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2413

struggle and it would have failed. It is essential that the Parliament be properly informed of the political, social and economic implications of major technological change so that it is possible to provide answers to questions such as: What are the likely employment effects? Who owns the technology?
The critical issues in technological change are political and economic, not scientific. The Parliament must assert its right of access to information against special interests who are able to manipulate, to distort and to suppress. The Parliament must strengthen its own access to independent, arms-length advice which can enable it to question and, at times, challenge the basis of advice which is presented to a Minister through a Department. This is why the motion calls for the establishment of an independent Office of Technology Assessment similar to the one which operates as a vital agency of the United States Congress and also a parliamentary standing committee on science and technology representing both Houses. I hope that we will have the support of the Minister on that today and that the motion will be carried without opposition.
In addition, adequate and effective freedom of information legislation must be adopted; not freedom from information legislation, as is proposed by the Fraser Government in legislation which is currently before the Senate and which should properly be called the Bureaucratic Procedures Protection Bill. Existing restraints in Australia's defamation laws ought to be eased in this area, too. It is essential that we have a greater information flow in the areas of science and technology policy so that we can demystify science and technology. The mystification is largely a smokescreen by which people with a special or partisan interest are in a position to slant or distort data and influence its interpretation by omission and suppression. The history of the United States motor industry is a clear example of that, as the book On a Clear Day You Can See General Motors, by J. Patrick Wright and based on the experiences of John Z. De Lorean, indicates so clearly. Detroit's malaise has a direct impact on motor manufacturing in Australia. Suppression and distortion of information is not an aberration. In many areas of enterprise it has been the standard practice.
In the sensitive and vital field of biotechnology, for example, with the consequential ethical problems arising in such areas as the right to patent genetic material, cloning or the implications of dramatic increases in longevity so that the economically active members of the community are greatly outnumbered by the aged, tremendously

important questions arise. But how and when will parliament-any parliament, not just our Parliament-address itself to such problems when senior Ministers do not even know what the word 'biotechnology' means and when recombinant DNA might, for all they know, be the ZOOlogical name for a fruit bat.
I draw the attention of the House to the New Zealand Planning Act of 1977, which sets up two bodies-the New Zealand Planning Council and the New Zealand Commission for the Futurewith the respective duty of stimulating public debate on the short term and long term implications of technological change in New Zealand and of reporting to the Parliament. I seek leave to incorporate section 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, and 10 of the New Zealand Planning Act in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
1. Short Title-This Act may be cited as the New Zealand Planning Act 1977.
2. Interpretation-In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
"Body" means the Council or the Commission: "Commission" means the Commission for the Future established by section 8 (I) of this Act: "Council" means the New Zealand Planning Council established by section 4 (I) of this Act: "Minister" means the Minister of National Development.
3. Act to bind the Crown-This Act shall bind the Crown.
PART I
New Zealand Planning Council
4. Establishment of New Zealand Planning Council-(1) There is hereby established a council to be called the New Zealand Planning Council.
(2) The Council established by subsection (1) of this section is hereby declared to be the same council as the New Zealand Planning Council established by the Minister and in existence immediately before the commencement of this Act.
5. Functions and powers of Council-(l) The general functions of the Council shall be-
(a) To advise the Government on planning for social, economic, and cultural development in New Zealand:
(b) To assist the Government to co-ordinate such planning:
(c) To comment to the Government on programmes for social, economic, and cultural development in New Zealand, and to recommend the priorities that should be accorded to them:
(d) To act as focal point for a process of consultative planning about New Zealand's medium-term development:
(e) To foster discussion among those agencies (Government and private) concerned with planning, particularly in the economic, environmental, social, and cultural fields:
(f) To submit advice to the Government on links between planning at the national and regional levels:
(g) To prepare reports on any matler affecting the economic, social, or cu ltural development of New Zealand:
(h) To submit any report prepared by it to the Minister if it thinks fit:

2414 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Science and Technology Policy

(i) To recommend that any report submitted to the Minister under paragraph (h) of this subsection be laid before Parliament:
(j) To publish documents on planning topics which in the view of the Council merit wide consideration and pubIicdebatc:
(k) To consider any other matter which is referred to the Council by the Minister or which is relevant to the proper performance of the functions mentioned in paragraphs (a) to (j) of this subsection.
(2) The Council shall have such other functions, powers, and duties as are conferred or imposed on it by or.under this Act or any other enactment.
(3) The Council shall have such other powers as may be reasonably necessary to enable it to carry out its functions.
6. Membership of Council-( 1) The Council shall consist of-
(a) Not more than 12 members to be appointed by the Governor-General on the recommendation of the Minister, of whom one shall be appointed as Chairman:
(b) The Minister: (c) The Secretary to the Treasury. (2) In recommending persons for appointment as members of the Council the Minister shall have regard to(a) Their personal attributes; and (b) The need for a diversity of knowledge and experience
in fields relevant to the functions of the Council to be present among it members; and (c) The capacity of the Council as a whole to promote a sense of common purpose among different sections of the community in planning New Zealand's future.
PART II
Commission for the Future
8. Establishment of Commission for the Future- (1) There is hereby established a commission to be known as the Commission for the Future.
(2) The Commision established by subsection (I) of this section is hereby declared to be the same Commission as the Commission for the Future established by the Minister and in existence immediately before the commencement of this Act.
9. Functions of Commission-( 1) The general functions of the Commission shall be-
(a) To study the possibilities for the long-term economic and social development of New Zealand:
(b) To make information on those possibilities available to all Members of Parliament, and to publish such information for wider dissemination:
(c) To promote discussion on those possibilities and information relating to them:
(d) To report to the Minister on those possibilities.
(2) In carrying out its general functions the Commission shall-
(a) Give special attention to the long-term implications for New Zealand of new or prospective developments in science and technology; and
(b) Have regard to prospective trends, policies, and events in New Zealand and overseas which could have important consequences for the country's future.
(3) The Commission shall have such other functions, powers, and duties as are conferred or imposed on it by or under this Act or any other enactment.
(4) The Commission shall have such other powers as may be reasonably necessary to enable it to carry out its functions.
10. Membership of Commission-(l) The Commission shall consist of~~

(a) Not more than 7 members to be appointed by the Governor-General on the recommendation of the Minister, of whom one shall be appointed as Chairman:
(b) A Minister of the Crown to be appointed by the Minister of National Development:
(c) A Member of Parliament to be appointed by the Minister on the nomination of the Leader of the Official Opposition:
(d) A member of the Council to be appointed by the Minister on the nomination of the Chairman of the Council:
(e) The Director-General of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
(2) In recommending persons for appointment as members of the Commission under subsection (1) (a) of this section, the Minister shall have regard to-
(a) Their personal attributes; and (b) The need for a diversity of knowledge and qualifica-
tions in fields relevant to the functions of the Commission to be present among its members.
(3) Any Minister of the Crown designated for the time being by the Minister of National Development as an alternate member of the Commission may act as a member of the Commission in the place of the Minister for the time being holding office as a member of the Commission under subsection (1) (b) of this section.
(4) The fact that any Minister of the Crown acts as a member of the Commission in the place of the member for the time being holding office under subsection (1) (b) of this section shall be conclusive evidence of his authority to do so.
11. Term of office of members of Commission-( 1) Except as otherwise provided by this Act, every member of the Commission appointed under section 10 (l) (a) of this Act shall hold office for such term as the Governor-General on the recommendation of the Minister shall specify in his appointment, being a term not exceeding 3 years, but may from time to time be reappointed.
Mr BARRY JONES-I thank the House. I will read the critical part of that Act relating to the duty of the Commission for the Future. Section 9 states:
(1) The general functions of the Commission shall be(a) To study the possibilities for the long-term economic
and social developments of New Zealand: (b) To make information on those possibilities available to
all Members of Parliament, and to publish such information for wider dissemination: (c) To promote discussion on these possibilities and information relating to them: (d) To report to the Minister on those possibilities.
The Commission is also asked to give special attention to the long term implications to New Zealand of new or prospective developments in science and technology. Essentially the Commission has stimulated public debate by producing a series of very important reports which are then circulated to schools, councils and interested citizens. This provokes an ongoing debate in which Ministers and members of parliament are directly involved. I think that is a wholesome tendency.
The technology which Ministers and members of parliament ignore at their peril is capable of

Science and Technology Policy

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2415

making them obsolete. Of the 12 or so major functions of a member of parliament which I can identify, all but one could be done more cheaply and more efficiently by computers. The sole exception is, of course, speech making. If within a decade or two our functions are taken over by robots we will have nobody to blame but ourselves. This motion gives us the chance to express our collective will on the subject. I call on honourable members who believe that the House has the right and the duty to be informed and to make choices where appropriate to support the motion. Its rejection would say that we have abdicated our right as a parliament to choose and the age of robots and 1984 will sweep democracy away.

we are going to get? On the other hand, the satellite can be, and in Australia almost certainly will be, used to intensify the present media oligopoly and its controllers will be the Murdochs, the Packers and their camp followers. Its effect will be to strengthen the centre relative to the periphery. This is why we state in the motion that these things are too important to be left to the market. Just as Clemenceau said in the First World War that war was too important to be left to the generals, so science and technology is too important to be left to the scientists and the technologists or to the people who, by their ownership of capital, control access to and dominate science and technology.

Technology-that is, the technological artefacts themselves-is politically, economically and morally neutral. The decisive questions for us and for the nation relate entirely to the issue of who owns the technology and to what end it is used. This can be illustrated by a shott list of examples-telephones, television, Xerox machine, communications satellites and computers. Where telephones are readily available at low cost with easy access to directories and where the lines are not bugged they can be instruments of liberation, enlarging personal freedoms and opening up a wider world of knowledge and experience, strengthening the position of individuals vis-a-vis their rulers. On the other hand, where there is tight central control over telephone systems, coupled with bugging, lack of telephone directories and a very small number of telephones available to subscribers so that if A wants to phone B he has to ask the controllers of the telephone system for the number and explain why he is doing it, the telephone can be-and is-used as an instrument of surveillance, strengthening the central bureaucracy vis-a-vis the individual.
Similarly, television can be used to stimulate and inform or to stupefy, to oversimplify and to coerce. The key factor is not the technology itself but the use to which it is put. The Xerox machine can be a revolutionary instrument in the cause of freedom of information. Material can be, and indeed is, leaked or disseminated with speed and precision. In the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics the Xerox machine is seen as an instrument of counter revolution and dry copiers are kept under very tight control, out of the reach of ordinary citizens. The communications satellite is particularly ambiguous. It can be used to widen access to information from a variety of citizens and interest groups, to strenghten the periphery relative to the centre and to effect a massive redistribution of power in the information sector and, of course, to
be a common carrier at low cost. But is this what

Computers can end dull, repetitive and dangerous jobs and lead to a major and more equitable redistribution of employment and wealth. They can also be used to decimate employment without any compensating redistribution and to intensify the gap between rich and poor, the skilled and the unskilled.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! As it is now two hours after time fixed for the meeting of the House the debate on the motion is interrupted.
Motion (by Mr Thomson)-by leave-agreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent consideration of General Business notice No. ! being continued until! p.m.
Mr BARRY JONES-I thank the House and the Minister for Science and Technology. I believe that we are entering into an extremely critical period-one of the most critical periods in our history. I return to my central argument. There is a prevailing view that in a small country like Australia the whole question of technology transfer should be left to the global market. In other words, if something is adopted, pursued and pushed we in Australia simply adopt it, we acquire the technology off the shelf. 1 think that members of all parties recognise the dangers implicit in that. It will be a very serious problem if Australia is merely a technological colony.
Mr Jacobi-Major areas are vertically integrated anyhow.
Mr BARRY JONES-Absolutely. There are a number of other small countries of which Sweden and Switzerland are outstanding examples, with comparatively small but highly skilled populations. It is possible for them to playa very important role in the world market because they have kept control of their own technology. The technology is theirs. In Australia we cannot sell what essentially we do not own. That is why it is a

2416 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Science and Technology Policy

hollow piece of hypocrisy to talk about the Australian motor car industry. There is not an Australian motor car industry. Australians are employed in a motor car industry which is owned and controlled overseas. But it is not our industry. We have a completely derivative technology.
Politicians are often unjustly pilloried. But it is essential that the parliament asserts its right to be central in the determination of policy about where we are going. But parliamentarians are faced with an information overload of such dimensions that it discourages rather than encourages investigation of complex issues. We are understaffed and outmanoeuvred by a very numerous public service. As a result, Parliament has been encouraged to lose collective confidence in its capacity to take any position at all in a technologically shaped society. We have the worst informed legislature in the world on scientific and technical matters, lacking the resources or the intellectual vitality to initiate a national debate on where we are going or how we are getting there. In the thirty-first Parliament between 1977 and 1980, there were two 50-minute debates related to science and technology for the three-year period. Only one of Australia's 784 members of parliament made a submission to the Committee of Inquiry into Technological Change in Australia.
Mr J obn Brown-Who was that?
Mr BARRY JONES-Modesty prevents me from identifying him. There is no committee on science and technology for the Parliament as a whole although the Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment has done valuable work. Parliament has proved almost totally incapable of taking any collective position on the social impact of technological change and has retreated into an embarrassed silence, almost indistinguishable from a catatonic trance. Questions on science policy are received with dismay especially when the Minister is overseas. A question to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) on what action the Government was taking to respond to the enormous challenges of biotechnology was shunted off to the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) with manifest confusion on all sides.
If we are to get the best and not the worst out of science and technology, to make sure that we retain high levels of employment, that we encourage people to develop their own personal skills, that we try to do what we can to make sure that there is a preference expressed for the kind of employment which complements and enhances human capacity, dignity and diversity, then we cannot leave this simply to the market. Of course, market

factors are very important. They are not to be disregarded; they must be taken into account. However, they are only part of a whole number of factors. Economic efficiency and social efficiency are not exact equivalents. Other factors have to be taken into account. My own electorate from a point of view of economic efficiency is outstandingly successful with, I would think, probably the highest amount of value added of any electorate in Australia. Nevertheless, from a point of view of social efficiency Lalor has appalling unemployment and the possibility of future social tensions. I hope that the Minister will indicate that the Government will accept the motion. We should have a bipartisan policy on this matter. I ask an honourable members to support the motion.
Dr CASS (Maribyrnong) (12.36)--1 second the motion moved by the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones). Considering the long time that this motion, proposed by the honourable member for Lalor, has been on the Notice Paper I am amazed that the Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) could be so badly advised by his Department that he could come into the House on Tuesday and make such a vapid, ineffectual speech when tabling the Science and Technology statement for 1980-81. In the main, the statement is, of course, a rather dull, pedestrian account of levels of expenditure on research and development. It attempts to make the best of our efforts. The Ministerial Statement was sparsely peppered with significant observations which one fears may not have been understood by the Minister and which certainly were not understood by the Liberal-National Country Party Government.
Activities in a number of departments, which I would have thought had nothing to do with research and development and which I would not have expected to be acknowledged in a science and technology statement, are listed. I will select just one of these activities to illustrate what I mean. On page 49 of the report, in the section describing research and development conducted by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, it was stated:
expenditure in 1979-80 on R&D into English language needs was $191,000, while expenditure on the survey of migrant information needs was $74,000.
I am not suggesting that these activities should not have been pursued; of course we should know about the needs of migrants. I argue that perhaps the way it was done could have been better or different, but that is not the point. However discovered, is such information-which any government should have-really a result of research and

Science and Technology Policy

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2417

development? On page 101 of the report we find a been discovered and developed mainly in

definition of research and development which Australia. The research worker objected to these

states among other things that:

takeover tactics and returned to Australia where

R&D ceases when work is no longer experimental.

he joined the Commonwealth Scientific and In-

Was any of that work ever experimental? It would be horrifying to know how much of the effort included in the statement was research and development-but which clearly is not-has

dustrial Research Organisation. He has been able to continue his work. However, his early work is owned by the transnational organisation and not by Australia.

boosted the value of our effort expressed as a perI return to the main point of whether the Minis-

centage of gross domestic product. Even with this ter understands the full impact of his comments

padding, our effort is embarrassingly inadequate and our objections to this situation. In a sense the compared to that of other countries we would question is academic because in practical terms no

care to compare ourselves with.

matter what the Minister thinks it is quite clear

I will now refer to the motion proposed by the Australian Labor Party and the speech by the Minister which, perhaps accidentially, addressed itself to the number of issues raised by the honourable member for Lalor in moving the motion. We in the Opposition object to the almost total dependence of this country on the importation of technological innovation. To be fair to the Minister, on page 2232 of Hansard he observes:
It is a paradox that, in order to apply science more directly and effectively to problems, we must extend our knowledge of basic science. Without this foundation successful technology transfer will not be possible.

from the Government's action that it either does not know or does not care-if it does know-what the prospect means. The problem exists at two levels. Firstly, basic research, often overlapping and dependent upon other research in perhaps seemingly different areas, nonetheless may help to spark the idea or suggest a lateral approach to the investigation of the problem and will facilitate the breakthrough to the discovery of a new process-a technological innovation. Thus we need a community of research establishments and basic research workers if we wish to be in and part of the growing edge of scientific innovation which

I do not know how the Minister understands his own statement; we are almost totally dependent on the transfer of technology from overseas via the large corporations which are so rapidly increasing their penetration of so much of Australian industry. In fact, that penetration is so extensive that we can assert that these industries now have a stranglehold on a distressingly large

will ensure for us a place in the sun-for the whole country not just the particular research group. The discovery and the basic research is only the beginning. The idea has to be developed and implemented and the transfer to the rest of the community has to take place. I quote the Minister's brave words on page 2230-1 of the Hansard where he stated:

number of key industrial areas such as chemicals, . . . the science and technology sector should not be condrugs, mineral extraction and processing, plastics, sidered in isolation.

petroleum and other industries. These industries The Minister continued:

tend to be the ones most affected by technological Scientific, economic and social policies must be integrated.

innovation. In this instance the transfer of new technology to Australia is almost totally in the hands of these foreign-owned corporations.

Later he stated:
The plan is to stimulate and support basic research, applied research, to transfer research results into the market place and

Over the years, with the expansion of such to minimise any undesirable impacts of new technologies.

interests in Australia, trans-national corporations These are brave words but we need more than

have at times poached our skilled workers, transbrave words. Where is the evidence of the

ferred them to their base countries and then Government's understanding of the problem or of

closed down the Australian research establishthe implications resulting from the razor gang's

ments. I know of a case where a range of new slaughter and the cut back in resources for ter-

products was discovered by an Australian team tiary institutions at all levels? How about the cut

working in this country. The research team was backs in teacher training which thus reduces the

taken to America-they are employed by a subnumber of qualified people to teach the young

sidiary of the company here-where the key rewho may aspire to become our research workers

search worker after a time was offt;red a permaof the future? What about cutbacks in colleges of

nent appointment at the head office, the advanced education and universities at lecturer

Australian laboratories of the company were and general staffing levels so there are neither the

closed and the rest of the team declared redunplaces for, nor the people to train, aspiring re-

dant. Australia then had to purchase the new search workers? What about the limitation on

technology from that company even though it had future research resulting from the imposition of

2418 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Science and Technology Policy

fees on graduates studying for a second, usually higher, degree during the course of which much of the basic research work is done in the universities? As a result, aspiring researchers who manage to get their basic training, unless they are able to depend on a rich daddy or supporting spouse, will have to get a job out in the real world. There is to be no wasting time or taxpayers' money doing basic research on impractical, esoteric problems in ivory towers. Clearly the Government, this collection of intellectually cretinous liberals, whose range of vision does not extend beyond the primitive dirt track, did not understand the Minister when he said:
The great social and humanitarian reforms of the last century were largely possible because of increased industrial productivity, better health services and improved communications. Science and technology played a major role.
I will repeat the Minister's words:
Science and technology played a rnajor role.
The Minister continued:
It is equally true that science and technology will underwrite Australia's economic and social development in the future.
r The Opposition heartily agrees. say: 'Lift your
eyes, you lazy Liberal lotus eaters; we cannot for ever depend on others, on rich and powerful friends to forcefeed us forever, to carry us along in their arms'. We have to develop the knowledge and skills to nurture our own deVelopment and growth. We must walk-dare I suggest it, even run-on our own feet just to keep up with the ever-increasing rate of progress.
That is only the first point arising from the Minister's observation of the paradox. He seems to believe that others can do better and bigger research, and he forever asserts that duplication is wasteful. It is an article of faith of this mindless Liberal Government whose thoughts run along a single track. It is an arrogant and ignorant assumption that there is only one way to approach these problems. Why does the Minister assume that two research workers seemingly setting out to do the same research will inevitably tread the same ground? He talks so much about initiative and enterprise. Why does he not believe in it? Can he not see that, even if teams of researchers start off at the same point, inevitably they will diverge? Is that not how it all happens? Is not the richness and diversity of humanity due to just that?
For the sake of the second point which arises from the Minister's comments, let us accept his blinkered view of the extension of knowledge. I remind honourable members again of the Minister's words, with which we on this side of the House agree. He stated:

in order to apply science more directly and effectively to problems, we must extend our knowledge of basic science.
The Australian Labor Party agrees with that. What is most significant is that we understand and believe in that philosophy while quite clearly the Minister, if he understands and believes in it, is on his own. Clearly his Liberal and National Country Party colleagues do not know what he is talking about, nor do they care. If we wish to overcome the problem of technology transfer, which is overwhelmingly under foreign control, and the associated enormous prices we have to pay for it-perhaps a comment on the cost will stir the petty shopkeeper, ledger clerk minds of members of the Government to take notice-and if we wish to control technology transfer ourselves we must have more and not less basic research. We have to do our own basic research.
In arguing how to overcome this ignorance on the part of Government politicians, to enable us to deal with some of the concerns expressed by the Minister, I wish to quote his words again. On page 2230 of Hansard, he said:
Over the past decade there have been significant changes in community attitudes to science and technology which cannot be ignored. Presently there is concern ahout joh replacing technology, the environment, the availability of a highly skilled work force and a continuing supply of energy. In addition, I sense a growing fear of the impact of science and technology among the less well informed.
To enable intelligent decisions to be taken and etTective action to be implemented in relation to the first six points raised by the honourable member for Lalor in his motion, as weJ] as the points raised by the Minister, we call for the action proposed in the final point of the motion. That point is that the Opposition:
calls for the establishment of an Independent Office of Technology Assessment and a Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology so that both Houses can take an active and informed role in pursuing national policies on technology.
This approach is reminiscent of the approach the Labor Party considered when it was in government was necessary in regard to the environment. It is rather like the environmental impact statement approach. The proponent prepares an EIS on whatever it is he is putting forward. We suggest that we call it a technological impact statement which should be prepared by the proponent, giving all facets of the problem, including all the advantages, all the uiSadvantages and all the costs. Of course, one could not expect that impact statement to be unbiased; clearly, it would be the views of the proponent. In order to assess that we would need what we proposc--namely, an independent office of technology assessment to assess the impact statements, to assess whatever is going on in

Science and Technology Policy

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2419

the whole technology innovation area and then to make recommendations to the Government.
Mr Barry Jones-No, to the Parliament.
Dr CASS-r ask the honourable member to
hold on-the recommendations would be to the Government. The question is: How will that be done? How will we cope with items 2, 3, and 4 that the honourable member for Lalor has mentioned? They are, firstly, that we reject the concept of technological determinism. How will we make assessments on that? We think we should express preference for technologies which complement and enhance human capacity, dignity and diversity. How will we do that? The Australian people have a right to choose the most appropriate technologies from the range offering. How will we do all that? It is only by these reports being presented to the Parliament and to a parliamentary standing committee on science and technology that we can encompass and understand these facts. It is not done in mad debate in this chamber, the way we carryon in this chamber; it will be done only when we have the set up what the Opposition proposes so that these issues can be fully understood by honourable members on both sides of the House. Then and only then will we get an intelligent approach to the impact of technology on Australia in the future. 1 support the recommendation proposed by the honourable member for Lalor.
Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for Science and Technology) (12.51)-1 thank the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) for giving Parliament an opportunity to debate this very important issue. However, 1 very much regret that the ineptitude of the Opposition has cut our time short very much indeed. 1 will have only a few minutes, and there will be only one speaker from the Government side. It is a great pity that such an important debate should have been cut short by the inept meanderings that went on before this debate commenced.
1 was very flattered that so much of what 1 said this week in my statement on science and technology was quoted by the honourable member for Maribyrnong (Dr Cass) and the honourable member for Lalor. It is flattering to think that they agree with what I said. 1said it, 1 mean it and so does the Government mean it. The Government has a well-defined policy in this very important area but 1 have great problems in defining any policy from the meanderings of the Opposition. The wide-ranging debates we have had in the last couple of weeks on this issue have not suggested one piece of Opposition policy. There has been none at all.

Mr Barry Jones-I just told you. Mr THOMSON-There was no policy in that. The honourable member meandered and quoted, but there was no policy. I appreciate the difficulties that the Opposition has in drawing up a policy in this area. Sections of the trade union movement are demanding that there should be no new technology without their permission. Dr Cass-That is not true. Mr THOMSON-It is not nonsense; they have said it many times. The Opposition knows it is true but finds it very difficult to handle. 1 know the honourable member for Lalor has never said one word about this in any of the wide-ranging speeches he has made on the subject. At the same time, the trade union movement seeks a 35-hour week based almost entirely upon increased productivity caused by the introduction of technology. It is a battle between the Luddites of the Australian Labor Party who still wish to smash the machines, and the realists who see technology as an extension of the worker's arm. 1 will come back to that later. I would be very pleased to hear a debate in this House on science and technology in which the Opposition put forward a realistic policy. The Opposition talks about multinational corporations. It has a fixation about the multinationals. Members of the Opposition also have a fixation with the fact that governmentsparticularly Labor governments-can decide what is best for the people. Mr Barry Jones-Parliaments, not governments. Mr THOMSON-We are debating the subject now in this Parliament. The Opposition wants to set up all sorts of control mechanisms. Mr Barry Jones-No, 1did not say that. Mr THOMSON-The honourable member suggested an independent office of technological assessment. There are thousands of pieces of technology developed and adopted every year. It would be impossible to assess that whole range. Unfortunately, 1have very little time. I will not be able to make most of the points 1 wish to make. There is no doubt that the Government believes that science and technology should not be considered in isolation. Science and technology and social and economic policies must be integrated. I emphasise that, and 1 believe it. The plan which I outlined in the statement on science and technology is well worth looking at. But, as a government which believes in free enterprise, we believe that the market should largely determine economic priority. The market is a reflection of what people want.

2420 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Science and Technology Policy

Mr Barry Jones-On Wednesday you said it should not be left to market forces alone.
Mr THOMSON-I will come to that in a moment. Labor believes that governments know best, that they can dictate to the people what should be done in relation to science and technology. I did say that in some areas the market is deficient or, because of the pace of technological change, is too slow to adapt to public demands and overseas trends. In this area we believe in limited government intervention to assist industry, as we do with the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Scheme. That is a very important scheme. It is a measure of government intervention to correct an area where market forces are not operating either correctly or fast enough. Unfortunately, the time allowed for this debate is running out and I will not be able to mention many of the points I wished to deal with. As I have mentioned, there have been many changes in community attitudes. They need to be ,nonitored, taken account of and assessed.

That is, Mr Chapple believes
trade unions should not oppose change but demand its acceleration: That we should take a lead in persuading industry to modernise and innovate; that we should campaign for higher productivity, greater wealth creation and for large scale investments in productive sectors of the economy.
1 could not agree more. I wish we could have a bipartisan policy. I wish that the honourable member for Lalor would get up an say something like Mr Chapple said and support this philosophical approacli to the whole problem of technological change and the introduction of high technology industries. It is a great pity that in Australia we do not have in the trade union movement, in the Australian Labor Party generally or in the Opposition any far-sighted people who are prepared to get up and say: 'We should be co-operating. We should be encouraging industry to innovate. We should encourage technological change'.
Mr Barry Jones-Re-read the motion.
Mr THOMSON-The motion is emotive. It is exaggerated. It tries to make some points--

Mr Barry J ones-Who is doing it? Mr THOMSON-The honourable member knows that the Australian Science and Technology Council is setting up an office of technological assessment. Mr Barry Jones-But it is not accountable to Parliament. Mr THOMSON-The Council will report to me and I am accountable to the Parliament. I wish to make a point about the problem of monitoring technological change, the objective of enhancing skills, and the quality of the work force and how this may be achieved. In this regard I wish to quote from a statement made by Mr Frank Chapple, the General Secretary of the powerful British Electronics, Telecommunications and Plumbing Union, which has about 450,000 members. Mr Chapple said:

Mr Barry J ones-Why don't you touch on it?
Mr THOMSON-I would touch on it except my time is now running out. I would have been able to touch on it if the honourable member had given me time to do so and if he had been able to control his side of the House so as to allow me time to touch upon those points in this very important debate. I do not have time to deal with them, which is a great pity. If the honourable member had given me a couple of minutes more in which to speak and if the honourable member for Maribyrnong had cut his speech a little instead of taking his full time, I might have had a chance to respond. But ~hey did not do that. I do not accept this motion. I agree that we should have a bipartisan approach. There are elements of the motion with which I would have a fair measure of agreement, but the motion is emotive and exaggerated. It talks of technological determinism. How many people would understand what the honourable member for Lalor was talking about?
Mr Barry Jones-But they should. That is the point.

Trade unions should support the development of new technology, and efficient production while simultaneously ensuring that working people share its benefits and do not become its ignored victims.
He went on to say:

Mr THOMSON-But the honourable member did not explain what he meant. I cannot accept the motion. Although I welcomed the opportunity to debate the issue, I feel that it is a great pity that it could not have been conducted more fully.
Question put:

This means that I believe--

That the motion (Mr Barry Jones's) be agreed to.

Defence Force Retirement Act

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2421

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

45

Noes

57

Majority
AYES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B, C. (Teller) Hurford, C J. Innes, U.E,

12
Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Los (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J. Kent, L. Kcrin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, \V, L Mountford, J. G, Scholes, G, G, D. Scott, j, 1.. Theophanous, A. C. Uren,T. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young, M. J.

NOES

Baumc,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M.
Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Connolly, D, M. CowanjD.B.
Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, p, D.
Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Good luck, B. J,
Grooffi,R.J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Howard, J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.

Hyde,J.M. Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F.
Katter, R. C. Lioyd, B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip
MacKellar, M. 1. R. McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M,
Moore,J. C. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Porter, J. R.
Robinson, Ian
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Tambling,G.E.J. Thomson,D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, J. B. C.

Question SO resolved in the negative,

Sitting suspended from 1.6 to 2.15 p.m.

DEFENCE FORCE RETIREMENT AND DEATH BENEFITS ACT
Ministerial Statement
MR KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence)-by leave-I wish to inform the House of the Government's intention to introduce in the Parliament as soon as practical a Bill to amend the

Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Act 1973 to correct an unintended effect of this legislation which was revealed in a recent Federal Court decision. In short, the amendment will restore the operation of the scheme to the basis intended since its inception, in October 1972.
Contributions and retirement benefits payable under the DFRDB scheme have, since the inception of the scheme, been calculated by reference to the rate of salary applicable to a member's rank as defined in section 3 (1) of the DFRDB Act; that is, substantive, provisional or probationary rank. However, the Federal Court, in upholding an appeal on this issue, has decided that the effect of the relevant legislation is that the contributions and entitlements of a person holding acting or temporary rank must be calculated on the basis of the rate of salary for the acting or temporary rank. Consequently, all members who have held acting or temporary rank since the commencement of the scheme are liable to pay additional contributions based on the rates of pay for their acting or temporary ranks. At the same time some 550 pensioners who retired while holding such ranks qualify for additional retirement benefits.
The purpose of the amendments is to restore to the scheme what was the original intention, namely, that a person's contributions and entitlements are, based on rates of salary for substantive rank. I wish to make it clear that despite the magnitude of the costs involved, there is no intention of denying payment of the higher pension benefits available under the law as it stands at present to those retired persons who have an entitlement. At the same time no justification can be found for continuing the payment of these benefits into the indefinite future, or for extending the same entitlements to currently serving members holding acting or temporary rank.
Accordingly, the DFRDB Act is to be amended with effect from today, to restore the intended policy and to revert the pensions of those who are presently entitled to higher benefits, to the levels applicable to their substantive ranks on retirement. Further, the amending Act will provide for the waiver of additional contributions for periods of acting or temporary rank when the person did not retire on that rank. Further details of the amendments will be announced when the amending legislation is introduced in the Parliament.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio)-by leave-The Opposition does not dispute the Government's intention to introduce into Parliament legislation to enforce the intentions of the original Act. However,

2422 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Defence Force Retirement Act

there are some anomalies which are brought to light by this Federal Court decision which, as I see it, will not be corrected by a restoration of a tighter interpretation of what was intended in the original Act. There is one other question on which the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) may be able to give some clear indication. He said that additional entitlements, which have accrued as a result of deficiencies in the Act, will not be denied by the intended changes to the Act. Are we able to deduce from that statement that the 550 retired pensioners who would be entitled to an additional pension under the Court's decision will get that additional pension, or will that entitlement be removed by the legislation? Obviously it is a matter of some consequence to those persons and to persons who sought and won an interpretation in the Court which was different to the interpretation which had previously been applied.
I want to deal now with the matter of acting, substantive, or temporary rank. Unfortunately, the Commonwealth Public Service and the defence forces have a long-standing practice of appointing persons to acting or temporary positions which they occupy for excessive periods. Under this legislation, as it stands, in some of the Services these positions would be substantive in accordance with the Act. In other service areas they would not qualify for pension entitlements. I think that major area of difference would be between the interpretations and methods of appointing to higher office people acting in positions in the Navy and the Army, the latter of which has a fairly poor record of appointing people to permanent positions. Rather it utilises temporary and acting positions over long periods.
It would seem that rather than having a general interpretation, which, to all intents and purposes removes this entitlement from persons who act in higher positions, carry out the duties, and accept the responsibilities of those positions, some qualifying provisions should be written into the original Act which would enable those persons to qualify for pension entitlements on retirement from those acting positions. Under the Commonwealth Public Service Act a person with 12 months' service in a higher position qualifies for superannuation benefits in respect of that period. People in this position have an advantage also over defence force retirement and death benefits pensioners because if they contribute during a period which does not qualify them for higher rank they do not suffer a loss in any way. On retirement they receive refunds of all contributions. Therefore, they benefit from interest payments in respect of that amount of money.

I wish to put the following proposition to the Minister: If, for instance, the Chief of the Defence Force Staff became indisposed for a significant period but not so indisposed that he was not expected to resume his duties, and the next in line took up those duties for a period, the person who took up those duties would accept all of the responsibilities which go with that office. As it would be likely that that person would be near retirement age it would not be unreasonable to expect him to make contributions and to receive benefits from any additional salary which goes with the responsibilities that he has accepted. The fact that a person is in an acting position does not reduce the obligations on him to serve; it does not reduce the responsibilities or the results of his failure to carry out those responsibilities. All of the obligations and consequences of higher office are there. Certainly it would not be acceptable if a person acting in a higher rank were able to take advantage of notional retirement ages at the lower rank and receive pension entitlements for the higher rank. I will deal more substantially with this matter when the legislation comes before the Parliament.
I hope that the Minister will examine the position of those people who, to all intents and purposes are being 'used up' and that is the only way in which I can put it. The Commonwealth does this fairly regularly and it has always had a bad practice in its appointment of persons to temporary positions which they can occupy for many years. If a person is substantively in higher office and retires for reasons other than voluntary-in other words, he retires because the term of office is up-he should be entitled to obtain the benefit of his service in that higher office in his pension payments. Short term temporary appointments obviously are quite different. The legislation, whilst it does not alter the intent of the Bill, does continue a situation in which a number of people who do all of those things which could entitle them to benefits, who act in positions for substantial periods and who may retire at the appropriate age for the rank for which they are acting will be denied pension entitlements. It is an easy way to avoid responsibilities if persons are placed in positions and not, in fact, appointed to them.
EDUCATION
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER eMr Millar)-Mr Speaker has received letters from the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) and the honourable member for Dundas eMr Ruddock) proposing that definite matters of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion

Education

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2423

today. As required by Standing Order 107, Mr Speaker has selected the matter which, in his opinion, is the most urgent and important, that is, that proposed by the honourable member for Fremantle, namely:
The damaging consequences of declining opportunities in Australia's education system due to the persistent withdrawal of Commonwealth financial support.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number a/members required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (2.27)-This Government's contempt for education has descended to new depths. To its great shame this Government is now beginning to reap the bitter harvest of its antagonistic policies. For the first time in at least 25 years the school drop-out rate is on the increase. For the first time in at least 25 years Australian children are succumbing to despair as they ask themselves rhetorically: 'What is the point?' What is the point of staying at school if at the end access to higher education is blocked to those with inadequate means? What is the point of staying at school simply to end up a better educated member of the dole queue? What is the point of staying at school when the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) continues to assert that the schools are failing?
Until recently, the post-war Australian experience has been characterised by grarlually increasing participation rates in schools. In the 10 years from 1969 to 1979 the proportion of children remaining at school from the first to the last year increased from 27 per cent to 35 per cent. Even with this increase Australia is still far behind many comparable countries. In Japan there are twice as many 17-year-olds in full time education as there are in Australia. The comparison with the United States of America is just about as embarrassing. In the last two years, however, the retention rates have turned around; they have started to decline. Upon closer examination we find that this phenomenon is confined totally to the Government sector. The drop-out rate has always been higher in the government sector but now, amazingly, it is getting worse at a time when more of the students at non-government schools are staying there longer.
It is all too easy to blame the schools and the teachers, as the Government and particularly the Prime Minister have done. What we have to do is to put the question in another way. If in Catholic schools 44 per cent of children complete their secondary schooling and if in other non-government

schools 87 per cent do so, why cannot we encourage more than 29 per cent of children in government schools to stay to the final year? After all, three-quarters of all parents choose to send their children to government schools and our obligation to them must be paramount. This is not to begrudge the non-government sector its success in retaining more students for longer. It is simply a matter of asking why the government sector does not do as well. Given the experience of the nongovernment sector there is no reason to suggest that government schools cannot do much better and thereby encourage more students in total to remain beyond the end of compulsory schooling. In this context it is unbelievable to see the Prime Minister attacking Australian schools and the people who run them. How does he expect to encourage children to stay at school if he continually disparages the efforts of the teachers? How can parents be expected to continue the struggle of supporting their sons and daughters at school if the Prime Minister says that it is all a waste of time? The Prime Minister is doing great damage to Australian education. He will have a lot to answer for unless the slide can be arrested, that is, the slide to ignorance as more and more children desert our schools.
The Government should set itself the target of ensuring that the government sector can first stem the drop-out rate and then turn it around so that as many children remain in government schools as do; on average, remain at school in the nongovernment sector. -That is, the Government should commit itself to ensuring that at least half of those students who start school finish their final year. To achieve this will require a reversal of the Government's dismal approach. It is not only the Government's rhetoric which is the problem; its counter-productive action is part of the problem as well.
In every area the approach could not be worse. The recent cutbacks demonstrate this most of all. At a time when many adults are keen to return to school to make up for the lack of earlier opportunity, the eligibility for the adult secondary education scheme is to be restricted. At a time when the school curriculum is under attack the Curriculum Development Centre is to close. At a time when there is a desperate need for greater investigation of the education process, both qualitatively and quantitatively, and its success in providing equal opportunity, support for educational research is to be terminated. At a time when we should be closely watching the manner il1 which funds are spent in schools the Schools Com.- mission is to stop collecting the relevant information. At a time when poverty is becoming more

2424 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Education

wjdespread the secondary allowance designed to help families keep their children at school is now worth$130 less in real terms than it was in 1975.
While all these reductions, these truncations, are taking place the only new expenditure is in the area of the highly misconceived school to work transition program. The Government has forced the States into this program which has no clear objective or measurable results. That is not to say that the program has not had some limited benefits but what success it has had has been in spite of, not because of, this Government. It is because the teachers in some schools have been free to devise their own projects under this program that some good has come out of it. But the school to work transition program entirely misses the point. The just resigned Director of the Curriculum Development Centre in his assessment of the program said:
The conclusion we draw from the lengthy debates and excited activity under the heading 'school-to-work transitiem' . . . is that they are no answer to our dilemmas. This remark need not be a signal to resume a complacent attitude about what may be the school's role in preparing youth for working life. There is indeed a crucial role for the school in this respect but it is more basic and long term and cannot be accommodated by crash programs.
Perhaps it was the Director's outspoken criticism of one of the Prime Minister's pet schemes which brought about the Government's retribution and closure of the Curriculum Development Centre. After all, the Director was only doing what he was paid for and, indeed, his efforts and the efforts the Centre had earlierattracted the most fulsome praise from the Minister for Education (Mr Fife). The Minister said when he went to open the Centre's building just six weeks before he announced the Centre's closure:
.In the five years sin.ce its establishment the Curriculum Development Centre has undertaken a formidable array of projects which have resulted in an enrichment of the fabric of Australian education.
The ,Minister might.have a sense of deja vu about that. because some of us might remember the sticky position he got into in 1979 when he came intothe House defending the Narcotics Bureau for the months leading up to the Prime Minister's annQuncement that the Narcotics Bureau was to be abolished. I wonder whether the Minister always reads about the Prime Minister's decisions in. relation to his portfolio first of all in the newspapers.
What the CDC and, indeed, the Schools Commission have done is to contest the Prime Minister's view that young schoolleavers lack the persOl~al qualities and basic skills which confer employability and that if only the schools would do their part in correcting these deficiencies the

problem of youth unemployment would vanish. The Schools Commission firmly rejects that argument and maintains that, whilst it is true that a number of young schoolleavers lack confidence, initiative and motivation and need to improve basic skills, there are many adequately prepared young people who want jobs and who are simply unable to get them. In a similar vein, the Director of the CDC has said on the theme of education and work:
. . . there has been as we are all well aware, a noticeable tendency during the past three or four years to ascribe to schooling, the various inadequacies of working life . . . the pre-occupation of certain sectors of our society with narrowly utilitarian goals and practices for schooling has to be calmly and firmly resisted.
The CDC also said in its paper on the core curriculum for Australian schools, which the Minister also has complimented as an important advance in Australian education:
We emphasise that the core curriculum cannot be reduced to the so-called 'three-Rs', often termed the basics. Society requires more of its citizens by way of common universal understandings and skills than reading, writing and arithmetic. Morever, effective participation in contemporary life, which is an entitlement and responsibility of all individuals, depends on a wide, complex and interrelated set of learnings and experiences, well beyond the popular view of basics.
Interestingly, the core curriculum has been widely accepted by schools in all sectors. It is to be regretted that the success of this initiative by the CDC is considered by the Prime Minister to be heretical, and therefore he has set about ending its valuable work.
The fallacy about the connection between school and work is not the only one to have been exposed. The Prime Minister has continually claimed that it is only 'those without academic ability', as he is fond of calling them, who do not get enough out of the education system. Not only are more students dropping out of schools but also, of those who stay, fewer are going on to higher education. The Tertiary Education Commission reports that, whereas in 1974 some 54 per cent, or a little over half, of final year secondary students went on to universities and colleges of advanced education, in 1980 the proportion had fallen to 42 per cent. That is an appalling develop~ ment, and it reveals that the Prime Minister is not content simply to chase students out of schools but wants to discourage those who stay from proceeding to higher education. Now, as a result of the imposition of fees for second and higher degrees, we will surely see that, of those who make it to universities and colleges, fewer will go on to post-graduate studies and research. Just at a time when everybody accepts that we desperately need to exploit our own creativity and imagination and

Education

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2425

other talents, more and more young people are the national government. It has been demon-

simply giving up.

strated around the country-in demonstrations

outside this Parliament yesterday, in demon-

Why is it that this Prime Minister so despises strations on campuses around Australia, and in

the education system in this country? Why has he the rally of 10,000 people in Melbourne last

shattered the tradition of support for higher eduweek-that people are becoming increasingly dis-

cation which was so close to the heart of one of his turbed about the way in which this Government

predecessors, Sir Robert Menzies? It was Menzies not only is ignoring the education needs of this

who took up the Labor proposal and established country but also has set about systematically to

the Commonwealth scholarship scheme in 1951, disparage the education system and withdraw

and it was he who expanded it in 1966. The Labor Commonwealth support from it. This Govern-

Government replaced it with the Tertiary Edument has managed to do that with reasonable

cation Assistance Scheme, and now the Fraser alacrity over the last few years.

Government is in the process of gutting that scheme. A scheme started in 1951 by Menzies is being gutted in 1981 by Malcolm Fraser. It was Menzies who introduced the Commonwealth post-graduate awards scheme. The scheme was improved by the Labor Government and has now been reduced by the Fraser Government. Not only has the number of awards decreased but also their value has declined. It was Menzies who introduced support for secondary students. This scheme was improved by the Labor Government and has been largely ignored by the Fraser Government. As I mentioned, the value of the awards has been allowed to deteriorate. It was Menzies who initiated the Commonwealth's involvement in universities and colleges of advanced education. It is the Fraser Government which has taken the fist deplorable step towards withdrawing that involvement through its threat to close 30 colleges of advanced education. It was Menzies who established the Australian Research Grants Scheme to fund research in universities, and it is the Fraser Government which not only has reduced the value of its support for this scheme but also has now decided to penalise through fees the post-graduate students who are an integral part of the research effort in univerisity.

I serve warning on the Minister for Education that he will not get away with it now and he will not get away with it in the next three years. I promise him that, by the time the next election comes, the question of education will be a major issue. The task of mounting a national offensive to get education back on the tracks is, I regret, one to which this Minister is quite unequal. He is destined to go down in history as the Minister who failed Australian students, whether at schools, universities or colleges. If he cannot lead the sort of educational renaissance which this country now requires, at least he might persuade the Prime Minister to get off the backs of the nation'8 educators and let them do what they can.
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education) (2.41 )-The honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) has made a number of points and, in doing so, has engaged in a great deal of exaggeration. It is important to note that his comments regarding the Commonwealth's support for education in Australia failed to mention one important element, an element which Australian electors have endorsed time and again since the Labor Government left office almost six years ago. That element is responsibility-responsibility with taxpayers' money, responsibility in being sensitive to the expectations of the Australian community.

The Prime Minister has attacked the education system, presumably for two reasons: Firstly, it does not conform to his quaint nineteenth century precepts about what education is for; and secondly, it has served as a convenient whipping boy for the failure of this Government's economic

This Government is responsible, and is recognised as such by the majority of Australians, in education as in other areas of Government activity. It remains a firm commitment of this Government that substantial assistance will continue to be provided at the Commonwealth level for education.

policies. In the end, the results of this assault will However, we must not lose sight of the whole

be catastrophic. An undereducated population spectrum of government responsibility in edu-

cannot hope to compete in an increasingly highly cation. The Commonwealth shares a responsi-

educated world, nor can a modern democracy bility with the States, who have an historical and

work if the people of that democracy are underconstitutional responsibility for the provision of

educated. What is required is a national offensive educational services. Over the past decade or' so

to get our education system back on the tracks. the Commonwealth has undertaken a greater in-

The students, the teachers, the academics, and the volvement in education funding, with a number of

parents are correct in demanding that education worthwhile objectives in mind, in particular, the

be elevated as a leading priority in the activities of satisfaction of the need for national purpose in

2426 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Education

education, and the correction of imbalances which occurred between State systems. Another of these objectives was the achievement of a general high resource standard as set by the Government's expert advisory body for Australian schools, the Schools Commission. The provision of Commonwealth funds for these purposes has had the desired effect. However, as I have said, the Government perceives its responsibility to be sensitive to changing needs in pursuing a policy for education which reflects the expectations of the community.
The Opposition, when it was in government, recognised that Commonwealth responsibility in education meant more than merely increasing expenditure. In fact, in its last year of office it did not provide the funds for education at the level recommended by the Schools Commission and the Tertiary Education Commission in their reports. I assert that at last it had a glimmer of realisation that handling the nation's budget required a degree of responsibility. Indeed, it soon found out that responsibility is demanded by the Australian people. The Government has no intention of jeopardising the great advances which have been made in the calibre of education standards and facilities over the period of Commonwealth involvement. However, it does accept the responsibility given to it by the majority of the Australian people. This responsibility has been exercised in relation to education by maintaining an adjustment to trends in enrolments, movements in population, and demands for new directions and emphasis in education. The Government's commitment to education remains in tertiary education as well as in the schools area following the very detailed examination of Government priorities exemplified by the decision announced recently by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in response to the report of the Review of Commonwealth Functions committee.
The honourable member for Fremantle made reference to the tertiary sector and the availability of tertiary education to those Australians who seek it regardless of their financial position. Let me point out that this Government's policies and funding decisions between 1975 and 1981 have allowed student numbers in universities and colleges of advanced education to increase significantly. During the period that I have mentioned, full time equivalent student numbers in universities have risen from 132,484 as the official figure to 141,400 and in the colleges of advanced education from 101,949 to 122,200. This is an increase in student numbers of about 14 per cent. I think that is a very significant figure.

In relation to the Government's decision to reintroduce tertiary fees for those undertaking second or higher degrees, let me take the opportunity to remind the House, others who might be listening and those who might read the Hansard report of this debate, that the Government has taken a firm decision not to reintroduce tertiary fees for those students undertaking their first degree. This matter has been misrepresented around Australia. Indeed, 1think the honourable member for Fremantle has had a hand in this misrepresentation. I indicate that the Government has recently reviewed this whole area of responsibility and it has taken a firm decision in relation to tertiary fees for those undertaking their first degree.
I also draw attention to one of the initiatives that were announced-the honourable member for Fremantle conveniently overlooked it-and that is the decision taken by the Government to introduce a loans scheme as an additional form of assistance for students in the tertiary area. This is a major step forward and it is one that will be discussed over the coming weeks with the banks and the institutions. The details have yet to be determined and they will not be determined until after the negotiations I have referred to. The Government plans to have this scheme in operation by the beginning of 1982. Of course, it will be a scheme that will be government guaranteed and I believe it will provide tremendous assistance to many who presently are in need of additional assistance while undertaking tertiary studies.
The honourable member for Fremantle also made reference to the Government's decision to abolish the Education Research and Development Committee, known as ERDC. I point out to him and to the House that the Commonwealth will continue to be involved in national research into the conduct of education activities, but in future this will be decided as part of the Commonwealth Government's annual review of overall research undertakings. The Government will be committed to a very close examination of research priorities from the points of view of national ends to be served and the funds that are available on a year to year basis. The education portfolio will be provided with a total amount for its research activities in the Budget and discretion will then be exercised on the ways in which it will be allocated. It has to be recognised that priorities in education research in the States have to be closely responsive to the needs of their systems. The ordering of these priorities will accordingly now be entirely in the hands of the States.
I now wish to. turn to the decision that was announced by the Prime Minister on behalf of the

Education

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2427

Government in relation to the future of the Curriculum Development Centre. The Government has said that, if the States are willing to co-operate with the Commonwealth in relation to the Curriculum Development Centre, it will be maintained as a co-operative propect. The Commonwealth Government is prepared to continue to provide 50 per cent of the Centre's operating costs. I emphasise that the Commonwealth is prepared to have the Curriculum Development Centre retained and to provide 50 per cent of the operating costs, provided the States are prepared to share the remaining 50 per cent. If the States are not prepared to enter into this co-operative arrangement, which I believe is in the States' interests and in the national interest as well, the Commonwealth will still maintain a curriculum development cell within the education portfolio but it will only undertake curriculum development in concert with the States, that is, with the States sharing in the costs of the development work, or when the Commonwealth declares that a particular development ought to be undertaken in the national interest.
I turn now to the remarks that were made by the honourable member for Fremantle in relation to the school to work transition program. I inform him and the House that contrary to what he said all State governments strongly support the school to work transition program. The State governments were not forced into that program. At the last meeting of the Education Ministers, which was held recently in Hobart, Minister after Minister reaffirmed strong support for the school to work transition program and indicated clearly that the program is not only working well but also is highly successful.

I reiterate what has been said by the Prime Minister, by myself and by other members of the Government from time to time: In the coming months, the Commonwealth will be diverting more of its resources to technical and vocational education and we will be concerning ourselves to a large extent with the problems that face many 16 year olds and 17 year oIds, who unfortunately are leaving school before they should. I share the concern expressed by the honourable member for Fremantle that the retention rate at Australian schools is alarmingly low. I hope that, along with other initiatives that will be taken by the Government, the school to work transition program will help to overcome this problem. I have no doubt that many young people at schools switch off in the school years 11 and 12 because they do not see the curriculum as being relevant to their future needs. They see the curriculum as being too heavily directed in favour of those students who intend to go on to higher education. So there is a need for some re-direction of funds to help overcome the problem referred to both by the honourable member for Fremantle and by me. It will be the Government's intention to do this.
The last point that I want to make relates to the comparison that was drawn by the honourable member for Fremantle between government and non-government schools. Let me re-emphasise that this Government, along with other governments throughout Australia, believes that it has a responsibility to all Australian children, regardless of whether they attend government schools or non-government schools.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The Minister's time has expired. The discussion is concluded.

In the course of the policy speech of the Prime Minister he said, on behalf of the Government that we would be directing, as a government, more of our resources to technical and vocational education. It is not real life, at a time when student numbers in schools and in institutions are either static or declining, to expect the taxpayer to provide additional substantial sums of money for education. However, there is a need to re-direct some of the money in accordance with the needs of the present. I remind the House that Commonwealth and State governments are together spending no less than $18m every day of the week throughout the year on education. The community is crying out not for the Government to provide more money in this sector but for the Government to see that the money is better distributed and perhaps some of it re-directed into the essential areas.

PETROLEUM (SUBMERGED LANDS-MISCELLANEOUS AMENDMENTS) BILL 1981 Bill presented by Mr Anthony, for Mr Sinclair, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources) (2.56)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The package of off-shore legislation passed in May last year included the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act 1980. That Act has not been proclaimed yet but since its enactment it has become apparent that some amendments of a mainly technical nature to it and to the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act 1967 are required before the 1980 Act is proclaimed. The Bill introduces the necessary amendments. As

2428 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Amendments)

part of the off-shore constitutional settlement it activities to be U1idertaken in those areas. In re-

was agreed that Commonwealth off-shore petgard to the areas adjacent to the Great Barrier

roleum legislation would apply beyond the threeReef region the Government is very mindful of its

mile territorial sea and that State legislation undertaking to protect the reef and it has there-

would apply in the three-mile territorial sea. The fore been decided that no commitment will be

Commonwealth Petroleum (Submerged Lands) given to issue exploration permits within 30 miles

Amendment Act 1980 implements this agreement of the reef, and furthermore that all exploration

by amending the Commonwealth Petroleum proposals within the new area will be subject to

(Submerged Lands) Act 1967 so that it will no the closest scrutiny under the Commonwealth en-

longer apply inside the three-mile territorial sea. vironmental legislation. In this respect it is very

The 1980 Act contains a scheme for transitional relevant to point out that all islands and cays in

arrangemtmts, agreed on between the Commonthe area are excluded from the ambit of the

wealth and the States and the Northern T\!rritory, Bill. In the second reading speech for the in-

under which existing permits straddling the troduction of the Petroleum (Submerged Lands)

boundary of the territorial sea are to be split into legislation in 1967 it was indicated that when, at

two permits. The two new permits consisting of a some future time, the legislation was extended to

Commonwealth permit and a State permit are to the Coral Sea area, administration of the legis-

cover those parts respectively under Commonlation in that area would be carried out by

wealth jurisdiction and under State jurisdiction. Queensland. This Bill therefore provides that for

The scheme for transitional arrangements, which appears as Schedule 4 of the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act 1980, was drafted in close consultation with the States on the basis that State action to implement the offshore constitutional settlement in this regard would take the same form as that adopted by the Commonwealth, namely, by amendment of the State Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act 1967. Subsequently, however, it was decided that for constitutional reasons the State Acts should be reenacted with the necessary changes, rather than merely amended. The Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act 1980, which was drafted to refer to the 1967 State Acts as amended from time to time, should therefore be appropriately amended so as to make it clear that it refers to the State Acts as proposed to be re-enacted.
The opportunity is being taken in this Bill to extend the application of the off-shore petroleum legislation to the continental shelf in the Coral Sea area. This is one of the last areas of the Australian continental shelf virtually unexplored for petroleum. It is considered to be prospective and the petroleum industry has expressed keen interest in exploration there. This new area will be bo.unded to the west by the existing Queensland adjacent area boundary, to the south partly by that boundary and partly by the parallel of latitude 25 degrees south, and in due course will be bounded to the north by the seabed boundary to be established when the Torres Strait treaty enters into effect, and to the east by seabed boundaries under negotiation with the Solomon Islands and France.

the purposes of the petroleum legislation the area is to be administered as if it were part of the Queensland adjacent area. Thus the new area will be covered by Commonwealth legislation alone, with day to day administration being carried out by Queensland, but with the Commonwealth, through the joint authority arrangements, having overall responsibility for the area and the final say in major decisions which of course will include drilling proposals. The Bill also amends the boundaries of the Queensland adjacent area in the Torres Strait area. There are several anomolies in that boundary. The requirement to amend it at this stage arises out of the fact that, when the boundary was established in 1967, it intersected the Australian territorial seas of five islands in the Torres StraIt resulting in some areas of territorial sea of those islands laying outside the Queensland adjacent area. This has not been a practical problem to date. However, under the provisions of the Coastal Waters (State Powers) Act, legislative powers are to be granted to States only in territorial seas which lie within adjacent areas immediately before that Act comes into force. It is therefore necessary to amend the Queensland adjacent area boundary to encompass these territorial sea areas, to ensure that State legislative powers are extended to those areas. When the Torres Strait treaty is ratified, the adjacent area boundary will be amended to correspond to the treaty seabed line, which is considerably further south than the present boundary. The Australian territorial sea around Australian islands north of the seabed line will continue to be covered by the Coastal Waters (State Powers) Act. As an interim measure, the adjacent area boundary has been amended so that

The Coral Sea area is thus one of considerable it accords also with the limits of areas of Papua

dimensions and most of it is sufficiently distant New Guinea territorial sea. Turning to the pro-

from the Barrier Reef to permit exploration visions of the Bill, Part II of the Bill amends the

Minerals (Submerged Lands) Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2429

1967 Act. The main provisions in this Part, apart

Second Reading

from some drafting amendments, are the amendments in clause 6 designed to allow an offence against the Act to be tried summarily without a

Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources) (3.7)-1 move:

jury and the re-drawing of the boundary of the That the Bill be now read a second time.

Queensland adjacent area in clause 8 for reasons which I have already explained. Part III deals with amendments to the 1980 Act. The main amendments here are the extension of the legislation to the Coral Sea area by clause 10 and the redefinition of State Acts contained in clause 13. I have already mentioned the reasons for these amendments. Clause 11 is a drafting amendment clarifying the meaning of the provision and clause 12 contains certain technical amendments, as explained in the explanatory memorandum, designed to ensure the proper continuity of titles during the transition period. Part IV of the Bill contains a consequential amendment of the Coral Sea Islands Act 1969 resulting from the extension of the off-shore petroleum legislation to the Coral Sea area. The Bill also tidies up certain drafting

This Bill and the associated Bills will provide a framework for the exploration for and production of minerals other than petroleum on Australia's continental shelf beyond the outer limit of the three-mile territorial sea. The Bills are part of the agreed arrangements on off-shore mining in the context of the off-shore constitutional settlement. The arrangements for off-shore petroleum were dealt with in the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act 1980 passed in May last year. The minerals Bills were also prepared in close consultations with the States and their extensive experience in the administration of mining operations made a valuable contribution in this regard. The provisions follow closely the principles agreed in regard to off-shore petroleum mining.

errors of a typographical nature in the 1980 Act There is increasing interest world-wide in other

and these are contained in Schedule 2 of the Bill. I mineral resources of the seabed. Deposits so far

commend the Bill to the House.

identified include construction materials such as

sand, gravel, limestone, et cetera; detrital minerals Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned. such as tin, gold, platinum, diamonds; the beach

PETROLEUM (SUBMERGED LANDS) (REGISTRATION FEES) AMENDMENT
BILL 1981

sand minerals magnetite, ilmenite, rutile, zircon, monazite; and phosphorite. Deposits of this nature have been identified on the continental shelves of many countries. The value of pro-

Bill presented by Mr Anthony, and read a first duction of minerals recovered from the seabed so

time.

far is however small when compared with that of

off-shore oil and natural gas.

Second Reading Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources) (3.6) - -I move:

There has not been much activity in mining for other minerals in Australia's off-shore areas to date and the constitutional uncertainty may have

That the Bill be now read a second time.

been a contributing factor in this regard. There

This Bill is subsidiary to the Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill 1981 introduced earlier. The amendment contained in the Bill clarifies a legal point that became apparent during the drafting of the complementary State legislation. The effect of the amendment is to ensure that the relevant provisions of the legislation will apply to transfers of title held by several corporations where two or more of the corporations are related and not only

are three off-shore exploration permits current at present, two off New South Wales and one off Queensland, but no production licences have yet been granted. There are, in addition, several onshore coal leases in New South Wales which extend off-shore and in some of these subterranean mining operations are carried out as extensions of on-shore operations. It is also understood that in Tasmania there may be some subterranean mining of tungsten from on-shore.

to cases where all the corporations are related. I 'there is as yet no Commonwealth legislation to

commend the Bill to the House.

cover off-shore minerals other than petroleum.

Debate (on motion by MI' Hurford) adjourned.

However, in this respect the Australian Minerals and Energy Council agreed in 1978 that mining

MINERALS (SUBMERGED LANDS) BILL 1981

titles for off-shore minerals could be issued under the respective State laws. The Commonwealth stipulated, however, that this procedure was with-

Bill presented by Mr Anthony, and read a first out prejudice to any future arrangements and the

time.

operators involved must be prepared to accept the

2430 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Minerals (Submerged Lands) Bill

risk that any title so granted may not be conTurning now to the provisions of the Bill, the

sidered valid. The Commonwealth undertook to off-shore mining agreements I mentioned earlier

transition such titles when new legislation is are given effect to in the Bill and in particular I

enacted. The Bill contains transitional provisions refer to Part II of the Bill where the establish-

to deal with such titles.

ment, functions and procedures of the joint

As I have already mentioned, the arrangements for off-shore minerals being given effect to in this Bill follow closely the arrangements for off-shore petroleum. I shall not repeat the constitutional history or the history of the negotiations with the States which were outlined when the package of off-shore Bills was introduced in May last year. The basic agreement between the Commonwealth and the States on off-shore mining, including pet-

authorities and designated authorities-the relevant State and Northern Territory Ministerare set out in detail. Part III deals with the application of laws in the area adjacent to States and Territories and the principle embodied in this Part is that the laws of the State or Territory should apply in the off-shore area adjacent to that State or Territory for all purposes connected with the off-shore mining of minerals.

roleum included the following:

Part IV of the Bill is the actual mining code.

all off-shore mining would be conducted in The Bill provides for a two stage system of titles.

accordance with a common mining code;

An exploration title, referred to as an 'exploration

Commonwealth legislation would apply beyond the three-mile territorial sea and State legislation within the three-mile territorial sea, but for reasons of administration all underground mining extending from on-shore will be excluded and controlled by State legislation;
there would be joint authorities in respect of

permit', may be followed by a production title, referred to as a 'production licence'. In addition, provision has been made for a 'works authority' which will authorise a title holder to have access
to areas outside his title area to carry out operations or to construct works associated with operations in the title area.

all mining operations beyond the three-mile territorial sea consisting of the relevant Commonwealth and State Ministers;
the joint authorities would be responsible for major matters relating to titles, for example, granting or refusal, renewal, transfer, farmins, et cetera. The view of the Commonwealth Minister would prevail in the case of disagreement;
the States and the Northern Territory would have an active role in the day-to-day administration of the legislation.

The Bill provides for the granting of an exploration permit to an applicant. Such a permit grants its holder a right to explore for minerals in an area not exceeding 500 blocks, that is an area of approximately 575 square miles. The initial permit term is two years, and there is provision for renewals, for periods of two years each, subject to the permittee's compliance with the permit conditions and the legislation. Upon each renewal the permittee must relinquish at least one-quarter of the area previously held. Because of the many un-

The original agreement between the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Premiers left the question of royalties for off-shore minerals for further consideration. Following further consultation with the States the arrangement embodied in the Bill is that royalties will be shared 60/40 between the States, including Northern Territory, and the Commonwealth in the same way as applies to petroleum. The sharing arrangement is intended to apply: both beyond and within the three-mile territorial sea and also to underground mining extending from on-shore.
The States and the Northern Territory will re-

known factors in off-shore minerals technology it
is not possible to specify precise permit conditions in this Bill. The joint authority will therefore determine the conditions of each permit according to the circumstances of the case. In this respect the possible effect on the environment will be given full consideration under the Commonwealth Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act which, of course; applies in relation to decisions taken by the Commonwealth; and it is anticipated that the States will exercise similar control in respect of the three-mile territorial sea area.

tain all fees received from title holders and appliA permittee may apply for a production li-

cants for titles. This is seen, at least in part, as a cence, covering no more than 50 blocks, that is, an

recompense to the States for the administrative area of approximately 58 square miles, of his pre-

expenses; as in the case of off-shore petroleum the vious permit area. A person who is not a permit-

States and the Northern Territory will undertake tee may also apply for a licence over an area that

the day-to-day administration and will be the priis not the subject of an exploration or production

mary point of contact between the industry and title. A licence and subsequent renewals may be

the governments.

granted at the discretion of the joint authority for

Minerals (Submerged Lands) Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2431

periods each not exceeding 21 years. It is a reThe provisions in the associated Bills deal with

quirement of production titles that a holder shall money matters and for that reason have to be con-

annually expend on exploration or recovery opertained in separate Bills. The royalties Bill imposes

ations an amount calculated at $5,000 per block, an obligation on licence holders to pay royalties.

that is for a maximum licence area of 50 blocks a As I have mentioned before the off-shore minerals

total of $250,000 must be spent each year. If, howindustry in Australia is in a very early stage of de-

ever, minerals are recovered in the licence area velopment and the economics of developing off-

the value of the minerals. recovered is offset shore minerals deposits are largely unknown. For

against the required expenditure. The joint auththat reason it is felt that flexibility is required in

ority has a discretion to grant an exemption from the setting of royalty rates and the Bill provides

this provision to deal with a situation where the that the rate is to be set by the joint authorities in

level of expenditure required may be too high. . relation to specific minerals. Once, however, a

It is an important feature of this Bill that applicants, permittees and licensees will be required to provide adequate information and reports, including samples where appropriate, on exploration and production activities. The overall geological knowledge obtained of the seabed is important to the Government in its systematic assessment of mineral resources. The information will be publicly available after a short period of confidentiality and this is expected to make a valuable contribution to other potential explorers. In accordance with the Convention on the Continen-

rate is set and the determination published in the Commonwealth of Australia Gazette, it is intended that it will apply uniformly in all offshore areas. However, to cope with situations where a particular operation may be uneconomic the joint authority is given the p()wer to reduce the royalty. Uniform criteria would be applied in the exercise of this power. The joint authority is also given power to determine the landed value of a mineral and the quantity of a mineral recovered for the purpose of determining the amount of royalty payable by a licensee.

tal Shelf there is a provision in this Bill for the The Exploration Permit Fees Bill, the Pro-

joint authority to consent to mineral exploration duction Licence Fees Bill and the Works Auth-

in the course of scientific investigations. The Conority Bill impose annual fees in respect of these

vention also requires that operations on the contititles. The annual permit fee i~ $10 per block or

nental shelf must not result in any unnecessary in- $300 whichever is greater. The annual licence fee

terference with navigation, fishing or the is $100 per block and the annual works authority

conservation of the resources of the sea and fee is $10 per hectare. The Registration Fees Bill

seabed. This is covered in the Bill.

imposes a fee on the registration of an instrument

Included in the Bill are provisions for the making of operating and safety regulations. The Bill, as does the petroleum legislation, gives the designated authority the power to issue directions on any matters with respect to which regulations may be made. Approval of the joint authority is required for directions of a standing nature. Included in this Bill are transitional provisions which enable holders of current State off-shore titles granted under arrangements I have already mentioned to apply for comparable titles under this legislation. The grant of such a title will be subject to such conditions as the joint authority thinks fit but it is intended to match as far as possible the conditions of the current titles for the unexpired portions of their terms. The Bill provides f()r the normal requirements associated with mining administration such as keeping a register, the appointment of inspectors, and for courts of competent jurisdiction for the prosecution of offences and other proceedings. There are also the usual provisions in the Bill for the joint authority to grant variation, suspension of, or exemption from conditions of a title and for the surrender

by which an interest in a title is assigned or dealt with in some other way. The fee imposed is 1.5 per cent of the value of the interest with a minimum of $300. In certain special cases the maximum fee payable is $3,000. The legislation provides a framework for the off-shore mining industry which I feel sure will grow in importance in the years to come. At the same time, the legislation illustrates yet again the success of the Government's co-operative federalism policy whereby the legal powers and responsibilities of the Commonwealth and the administrative experience of the States are combined for the mutual benefit of both and for the good of Australia. It is intended that once this Bill and the associated Bills are passed the States will introduce complementary legislation to apply in the three-mile territorial sea area and so give effect to the agreement for a common off-shore minerals code. The Commonwealth legislation will be proclaimed to come into effect after all the States and the Northern Territory have their own legislation in place. I commend the Bill to the House. (Quorum formed).

and cancellation of titles.

Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned.

2432 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Minerals (Submerged Lands) Bill

MINERALS (SUBMERGED LANDS) (ROYALTY) BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Anthony, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources) (3.26)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This is a Bill subsidiary to the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Bill 1981 and, as already explained in the second reading speech on the principal Bill, makes provision for the payment and determination of royalties in respect of mining of off-shore minerals. 1 commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Keating) adjourned.
MINERALS (SUBMERGED LANDS) (EXPLORATION PERMIT FEES) BILL
1981
Bill presented by Mr Anthony, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources) (3.27)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This is a Bill subsidiary to the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Bill 1981 and, as already explained in the second reading speech on the principal Bill, imposes annual fees in respect of exploration permits. 1 commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned.
MINERALS (SUBMERGED LANDS) (PRODUCTION LICENCE FEES) BILL
1981 Bill presented by Mr Anthony, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources) (3.28)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This is a Bill subsidiary to the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Bill 1981 and, as already explained in the second reading speech on the principal Bill, imposes annual fees in respect of production licences. 1 commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned.

MINERALS (SUBMERGED LANDS) (WORKS AUTHORITY FEES) BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Anthony, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources) (3.29)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This is a Bill subsidiary to the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Bill 1981 and, as already explained in the second reading speech on the principal Bill, imposes annual fees in respect of works authorities. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned.
MINERALS (SUBMERGED LANDS) (REGISTRATION FEES) BILL 1981 Bill presented by Mr Anthony, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources) (3.30)-1 move:
That the Bill he now read a second time.
This is a Bill subsidiary to the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Bill 1981 and, as already explained in the second reading speech to the principal Bill, imposes fees in respect of registration of certain instruments. 1commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned.
PAY-ROLL TAX (TERRITORIES) ASSESMENT AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (3.31)-lmove:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill will raise the level of the general exemption from pay-roll tax applicable to the Australian Capital Territory. The Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) and 1 announced the proposed increase on 12 May 1981. The exemption is to be raised from $72.000 to $80,400 per annum. The higher level will apply from 1 January 1981, thus providing an exemption for 1980-81 of $76,200. The last increase applied from 1 January 1980 when the exemption was brought up to $72,000, in line with that allowed in New South Wales. That State has since increased

Supply Legislation

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2433

its exemption level to $80,400 per annum with effect from 1 January 1981.
The maximum exemption allowable in monthly returns will increase to $6,700 and, in conformity with existing rules, will be reduced at the rate of $2 for every $3 by which wages for the month exceed $6,700. There will thus be no exemption once the monthly pay-roll reaches $16,750. As a general rule, the new exemption will first apply to returns for the month in which this Bill receives the royal assent. End of year adjustments will ensure that the benefits are in all cases back-dated to 1 January 1981.
Another effect of the Bill will be that, when it comes into operation, an employer paying wages of $1,500 or less a week will not be required to register for Australian Capital Territory pay-roll tax purposes. Explanations of technical aspects of the Bill are contained in an explanatory memorandum being made available to honourable members. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned.
SUPPLY BILL (No.1) 1981-82
Message from the Administrator recommending appropriation for proposed expenditure announced.
Bill presented by Mr Howard; and read a first time.

new States Grants (Income Tax Sharing) legislation to be introduced shortly, pending their absorption in general tax sharing grants. That legislation will also provide a standing appropriation for payments to South Australia and Tasmania under the existing hospital cost sharing agreements, pending advice from those States on whether they wish the agreements to continue or for the program to be absorbed in tax sharing grants.
Except to the extent already indicated, the Supply Bills do not anticipate decisions yet to be taken in the 1981-82 Budget context. The Bill includes $100m for the Advance to the Minister for Finance, which is the same amount as has been provided in Supply Act (No.1) in each of the last several years. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned.
SUPPLY BILL. (No.2) 1981-82
Message from the Administrator recommending appropriation for proposed expenditure announced.
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read.a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (3.38)-1 move:

Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (3.35)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill, together with its companion Bill, Supply Bill (No.2) 1981-82, seeks interim appropriations for the services of the Government for the period 1 July 1981 to 30 November 1981, by which date it is expected that the Appropriation Bills (Nos 1 and 2), forming part of the Budget for 1981-82, will have been enacted.
Supply Bill (No.1) seeks appropriations totalling some $4,363m for the ordinary annual services of the Government. This is $116m, or 3 per cent greater than the amounts provided in the Supply Act (No.1) 1980-81.
The provisions made in this Bill take account of the new health funding arrangements announced by the Government and of other decisions arising from the Review of Commonwealth Functions.
In particular, I mention that no provision is made in these Supply Bills for payments to the States for hospital cost sharing, the school dental scheme or the community health program. Interim funding of these programs will be sought in

That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill seeks interim appropriations, totalling $663m, for expenditure on capital works and services, payments to or for the States and certain other services for the period 1 July to 30 November 1981. This is $109m, or 14 per cent, less than the amounts provided in the Supply Act (No.2) 1980-81. (Quorum/ormed).
As I mentioned in introducing Supply Bill (No. 1), no provision has been made for payments to the States under the school dental scheme or the community health program, the funding of which would normally appear in this Bill, because they will be covered under the new tax-sharing legislation. That new legislation will also encompass the general tax sharing entitlement of the Northern Territory which has previously been funded from the Supply and Appropriation Bills. These are the main factors contributing to the lower provision sought in this year's Supply Bill (No.2).
This Bill includes $1 OOm for the Advance to the Minister for Finance, the same amount as' has been provided in Supply Act (No.2) in each of the last several years. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned.

2434 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Viner, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (3.42)-1 move:
That lhe Bill be now read a second lime.
The provisions of the Bill fall into two main parts and there are also some clauses which go to matters of a tidying up nature. The Bill seeks to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904 to do the following: Firstly, provide a procedure whereby members of an organisation at a particular place of work may apply for, and the Commission order, a secret ballot in respect of industrial action in which they have been directed or requested to participate; secondly, provide for technical amendments to certain provisions of the Act to overcome some apparent shortcomings within the Act; thirdly, provide for the appointment of members of the Commission to constitute the Industrial Appeals Tribunal of Christmas Island.
Obviously, the introduction of the right to call for a secret ballot is the major purpose of this Bill. The proposal for secret ballots was presented to the Australian people in the Prime Minister's policy speech in September last year. It was also foreshadowed by the then Minister for Industrial Relations in a ministerial statement to the House on 18 September 1980. Following consultatiolls with the major employer and union councils in the National Labour Consultative Council, the Government is now in a position to proceed with the proposal. The Government would have presented the secret ballot proposals in the summer session last year but, in deference to the wishes of the NLCC, it deferred this action to allow more time for NLCC to consider the secret ballot proposal.
The secret ballot provisions of the Bill represent a further development of a major theme of policy which the Government has sought to implement over the years. They are policies which encourage the democratic control of industrial organisations by their members and strengthen the rights of individual unionists against the central authority of officials.
These provisions of the Bill represent the Government's response to frequent requests from members of organisations and from the public to have access to the ballot box either before industrial action is taken or in the course of such action.

The Government has carefully examined the various proposals which have been put to it and has concluded that what is in the Bill is a practical way of giving effect to the principle that opportunities should be available for people to express their own personal views on industrial activity. The logical and practical course to the Government appears to be to extend and modify the secret ballot provisions already contained in section 45 of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act.
Many trade unions are administered in a manner consistent with democratic processes and they are run by conscientious, hard-working officials. Some organisations become centralised in their decision-making processes and they may fall out of touch with the aspirations and attitudes of their members. So there is a need for a safety valve-a mechanism by which the rank and file can express their attitudes upon a particular matter. Surely there can be no valid objection to this principle.
Section 45 allows the Commission to order a secret ballot of members where it thinks that the prevention or settlement of a dispute might be encouraged or assisted by finding out the views or attitudes of the members. The Bill will build on this. It will enable a prescribed minimum number of employees at a particular place of work who are members of an organisation which has called for the industrial action to apply to the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission for a secret ballot so that the views of the members at the place of work on whether they approve or want to participate in the industrial action can be ascertained. Two hundred and fifty of the members concerned at a place of work or a number equal to 5 per cent of them, whichever is the lesser, but no fewer than four members, may make the application.
The Commission, constituted by a presidential member, will be required to order the conduct of a ballot to indicate whether the members of the organisation concerned support particular industrial action involving them unless the Commission is satisfied that to do so would not encourage the cessation of industrial action. Alternatively, the Commission may order a wider ballot of all or some of the members generally under its existing powers in section 45 of the Act.
Unlike the existing secret ballot provisions, under which there is no review of the decision of the Commission, a refusal to order a place of work ballot must be reviewed automatically by the President of the Commission. Thus whilst there is a discretion given to the Commission it is designed so that the grant of a ballot will be the rule rather than the exception because it is primarily an aid to

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2435

the exercise of the rights of individual members to express their views. In other words, it will be the primary duty of the Commission to order the ballot but a subsidiary discretion is given to the Commission in the context of its conciliation and arbitration power. Where a ballot is ordered, it will be a secret ballot officially conducted by the Industrial Registrar or the Australian Electoral Office.
The Commission will be required to have regard to the outcome of the ballot in any conciliation and arbitration proceedings before it that relate to or are connected with a matter subject to the ballot. Furthermore, and more importantly for an individual member, if the vote is against the industrial action all the members at that place of work are relieved of any obligation under the rules of an organisation to obey a discretion or request to engage in or support the industrial action concerned, notwithstanding any rule or practice of the organisation or branch concerned.
This is an important new initiative in strengthening the individual rights of the membership of a union deciding as a collective group of employees at a particular place of work that they do not want to paticipate in industrial action directed or requested by the union's decision-making body. (Quorum formed). What it means in practical terms is that a group of employees dissatisfied with a call for industrial action by union officials will have the right to dissent firmly placed in their own hands backed by the protection of the law. To take it one step further, the effect of this Bill, through the operation of proposed new section 45c, is that it would be unlawful for a union to impose or try to recover a fine under its rules against a member not participating in industrial action as a result of a ballot.
This is in addition to the existing provisions of section 188 which by sub-sections (l)(d) and (1) (e) allow an individual member not to join in industrial action by making it an offence for an organisation to impose, or threaten to impose, a penalty, forfeiture or disability of any kind upon a member of the organisation with the intent to coerce the member to join in industrial action. No ballot may be ordered where the industrial action is in contravention of a 'bans clause' inserted in an award pursuant to the Act. I might add that these provisions will be in addition to the existing right of an individual or organisation to seek the conduct of a secret ballot under the present section 45.
Persons who apply or propose to apply for a ballot, or have participated in a ballot or who act upon a ballot will have the protection available under sections 5 and 188 as amended by this Bill

against victimisation, intimidation or coercion by the organisation of which they are a member or their employer. Honourable members will recognise the several benefits of the proposed amendments: They give the employees at a particular place of work the right, under the protection of the law, to determine for themselves whether to participate in industrial action; the existence of the right to petition for a ballot will, when availed of, alert the Commission to the fact that support for the industrial action may not be unanimous; the Commission will be able to test the stregnth and depth of that feeling and take it into account in coming to a settlement of the dispute giving rise to the industrial action; the organisation itself will be made aware of the existence of any strong dissent from its call for industrial action and will consequently need to re-assess its objectives; the general public will be alerted to the true situation and may bring legitimate pressure to bear upon the organisation concerned to cease the industrial action.
I have described in broad outline the purposes and the operation of the Bill and the importance of this new right to a secret ballot in the hands of the rank and file of an organisation. There are several matters of detail I would point out to the House: By new sub-section 45(8) 'place of work' in relation to any group of employees of an employer is defined to include any place at which the employees included in that group are required to report, whether in person or by telephone or any other form of communication, for the purpose of being allocated work by the employer or for any other purpose connected with the carrying on of the business of the employer. Thus, the legislation operates for the benefit of employees at a readily identifiable location, such as a shop or factory, so that the employees there who do not want to take part in the industrial action directed or requested by the organisation to which they belong may petition for a ballot. It eql;lally operates for the benefit of employees who do not stay in one place in carrying out their work or do not work at a single identifiable location. Air hostesses, pilots, salesmen and salewomen, timber workers and the like who are required to report to a pa1ce for or in connection with their work can likewise petition for a ballot as if the place at which they are required to report is their place of work.
New sub-section 45 (3D) makes it clear that the applicants must all belong to the one organisation, and work for the same employer at the one place of work. This permits particular work groups to indicate their desire to opt out of industrial action. New sub-section 45 (3G) provides that only a presidential member will be able to

2436 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Bill

consider an application for a ballot at a place of work. New sub-section 45 (3P) ensures that a bal-
lot is confined to those members employed by the same employer at the one place of work who may
petition for a ballot. New sub-section 45 (7) deems a direction or request to engage in indus-
trial action that is made by a committee of management or by an officer or officers, or by a
member or a group of members acting pursuant to the rules of the organisation or branch to be a di-
rection or request of the organisation or branch concerned.

New sub-section 45 (8) is important because it
extends the definition of 'industrial action' in subsection 4 (1) of the Act, to the situation where in-
dustrial action occurs in connection with an in-
dustrial dispute before an award is made prescribing, wholly or partly, the terms and con-
ditions of work affected by the industrial action. Industrial action; as here defined, also incldes 'in-
dustrial action' as defined in sub-section 4 (1) and also means any action in connection with an in-
dustrial dispute that results in work being performed in a different manner than is customary, or in
a restricted, limited or delayed way; and the per-
formance, acceptance, or offering for work being banned, limited or restricted.

With respect to the amendment dealing with

the Industrial Appeals Tribunal of Christmas

Island, clause 4 of the Bill inserts a new section

16A to provide the president with the power to

designate members of the Commission to consti-

tute the Industrial Appeals Tribunal of Christmas

Island to hear and determine appeals from the

Christmas Island Arbitrator. This proposed sec-

tion will complement amendments to the Indus-

trial Relations Ordinance 1976 of the Territory of

Christmas Island which provide for the establish-

ment, powers and functions of the Industrial

 Appeals Tribunal. Technical amendments are
made by clause 5, clauses 1 to 15 inclusive and

clause 17 of the Bill.

.

The then Minister for Industrial Relations in
his statement to the House on 18 September 1980, referred to the Government's objective of encour-
aging the formation of industry-based unions. The creation of industry-based unions is an established
policy of both Government parties and the Australian Council of Trade Unions. Work has been
done, in consultation with the NLCC, on amendments to the amalgamation provisions of the Act
on the basis of a criterion of the community-of-
interest of unions desiring amalgamation. However, the Government parties wish to con-
sider the full implications of such a criterion for
amalgamation and its relevance to meeting the
objective of encouraging the formation of

industry-based unions before proceding further with any such amendments.
The Government parties will be examining what other means might be available to achieving the formation of industry-based unions and also, within that examination, the possibility and practicability of the formation of enterprise-based unions as part of the concept of industry-based unions. (Quorum formed). The Government will be doing this because of the belief that the general public wishes to see a stronger movement towards industry-based unions. The public sees such industrial organisations as far preferable to the demarcation dispute-prone situations which so often wrack the great industries and the small businesses of this nation. Whilst the objectives are formidable ones, if something can be achieved in this direction, a significant service will have been done for the people of Australia. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned.
ROADS GRANTS BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Hunt, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) (4.3)- I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The main purpose of this Bill is to provide $685m by way ornon-repayable grants to the States and the Northern Territory for the construction and maintemmce of roads in 1981-82. Honourable members may recall that, in June 1980, the Commonwealth Government announced grants totalling $3,650m to the States and the Northern Territory for road works over the period 1980-81 to 1984-85. This announcement of funding levels covering five years responds to requests from the States for a longer funding guarantee than has been provided under previous triennial assistance arrangements. The grants apportioned over the five year period are:
1980-81-$628m 1981-82-$685m 1982-83-$734m 1983-84-$778m 1984-85-$825m
I should emphasise that these allocations represent the firm and final amounts to be provided in each of the years concerned. They involve annual increases of 11 per cent in 1980-81; 9 per cent in 1981-82; 7 per cent in 1982-83; 6 per cent in 1983-84; and 6 per cent in 1984-85. I should make it cleat that the declining annual percentage

Roads Grants Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2437

increases do not in any way signify a lack of awareness, on the Commonwealth's part, of the adverse effect which inflation can have on State and local government road programs. The control of inflation remains very much the Government's overriding concern. It is for this very reason that the Government refuses to encourage inflationary pressures by building into its own expenditure programs open-ended commitments to meet unlimited future cost increases.

funding relativities as exist in the current legislation. In adopting this course, the Commonwealth has on this occasion accepted the view expressed by State roads Ministers that there be no change in the relative State shares of the total Commonwealth roads program in 1981-82. However, this should not be taken to imply any commitment on the part of the Commonwealth to the maintenance of the current funding relativities for the remainder of the five-year program.

In all the circumstances, the Government considers that the levels of roads assistance which it has announced represent a very substantial commitment-one that will enable an adequate level of road construction activity to be undertaken during the five-year period. Honourable members will be aware that an amount of $628m has been available to the States and the Northern Territory in 1980-81 under the Roads Grants Act 1980. By providing for the appropriation of a further $685m in respect of the coming year, the Bill now before the House gives continuing effect to the Government's five-year funding commitment.
The Bill also provides for limited appropriations to each State and the Northern Territory for national roads in both 1982-83 and 1983-84. These are designed to provide the States and the Northern Territory with an assured basis for entering into longer term contracts for national roads construction works. I should emphasise that these national roads appropriations for 1982-83 and 1983-84 should be regarded solely as a minimum planning base at this stage. The. amounts currently specified in the Bill will be substantially supplemented when subsequent amendments are made to the legislation to appropriate funds for the balance of the five-year program. The total grant of $685m to be made available in 1981-82 will be allocated as follows:
New South Wales-$214.336m Victoria-$137.828m Queensland-$139.361m South Australia-$56,302m Western Australia-$83.895m Tasmania-$30.243m Northern Territory-$23.035m
The distribution provides for each State and the Northern Territory to receive a uniform 9. per cent increase in their grants as compared with the 1980-81 amount. The 9 per cent increase will also apply to each of the road categories for which Commonwealth funds are allocated. The Bill therefore maintains for a further year the same

The Commonwealth has a very clear commitment in relation to national roads and, in particular, the upgrading of the national highways system. I would expect, therefore, that the distribution of the funds to be provided in the remaining three years will reflect an increasing concentration of effort in the national roads area. To this end, the Commonwealth has set in train a joint examination with the States of options for achieving Commonwealth objectives in relation to national roads. The national roads category will again encompass both national highways and developmental roads. The Bill provides for an extension of the definition of developmental roads to enable some limited funding to be made available from within national roads allocations for significant tourist roads and the upgrading of major development roads in remote areas.
The Bill also provides for a number of significant changes in the arrangements under which Commonwealth roads assistance is to be made available to the States and the Northern Territory. Honourable members may be aware that the roads assistance arrangements have been the subject of extensive discussions with the States over the past two years. In addition, the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations has recently completed a major report on the relationships between the three spheres of government in the roads area. It has been against this background that the Government has considered the arrangements under which future Commonwealth assistance should be provided. The Governmerit is firmly of the view that, consistent with the Commonwealth's acceptance of full financial responsibility for national roads, it should ensure that its priorities and objectives in the national roads area are fully met.
The Bill provides that grants for national roads construction works will be qonditional upon tenders being called and dealt with in accordance with approved arrangements. Our intention to include such a requirement in future roads legislation was foreshadowed by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in his 1980 election policy statement. The matter has also been discussed at

2438 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Roads Grants Bill

some length with State roads Ministers at meetings of the Australian Transport Advisory Council. The Government considers that only by the creation of a competitive environment can it be sure that the maximum value is being obtained from its very substantial outlays on national roads. State and Northern Territory road authorities will not be precluded from undertaking works using their own day labour forces. It will be open to State authorities to submit bids for works in competition with private contractors.
The requirement will apply to all works commencing after 31 August 1981 for which tenders have not already been called. Detailed administrative arrangements are still to be finalised in consultation with the States. However, I should assure honourable members that, in administering this requirement, it will be the Commonwealth's intention to minimise any unnecessary disruption of the existing processes for dealing with tenders at the State level. At the same time, however, the Commonwealth will be taking whatever steps are necessary to ensure that its policy objectives are fully met.
The Bill pr()vides for a number of changes in the arrangements covering assistance for roads other than national roads. Whilst the State roads Ministers informed me that they were prepared to accept a one year extension of the current arrangements, we have taken immediate steps to reduce further Commonwealth administrative involvement in programming arrangements which are more properly the responsibility of the States. There will be a reduction from four to three in the number of road categories for which Commonwealth assistance is to be made available. The categories will be: National roads, arterial roads and local roads.
The reduction in the number of categories has been achieved by amalgamating the former rural arterial roads and urban arterial roads categories. This change is intended to provide the States with greater flexibility in the development and the carrying out of their overall road programs. Nevertheless, as I indicated last year in relation to the amalgamation of the former urban local and rural local roads categories, I would expect the States to continue to maintain an equitable balance of funding between urban and rural roads. On this basis, program approval requirements are to be discontinued in 1981-82 for arterial roads. These will be replaced with a retrospective reporting requirement under which the States must provide the Commonwealth at the end of each year with details of the arterial roads projects to which Commonwealth funds have been applied.

Provision has also been made in the Bill for the discontinuation of annual program approval requirements for local roads in States where principles governing the allocation of Commonwealth grants for local roads have been implemented. The development of this approach-known as the formula approach-has been the subject of consultations with the States over the past 12 months. Besides simplifying the provision and identification of Commonwealth funding to councils, such an arrangement will provide councils with a greater certainty of future funding levels on which to plan their road programs.
The Bill discontinues the practice of requiring the States and the Northern Territory to meet quotas of matching expenditure from their own resources. For some years now the States have not been required to contribute to the development and upkeep of the national roads system for which the Commonwealth has accepted financial responsibility. It will now be entirely a matter for the State and the Northern Territory governments to determine the overall level of funding which they themselves apply to the arterial and local road categories. The Bill also provides that Commonwealth assistance for the arterial roads and local roads categories will no longer be conditional upon Commonwealth participation in the State planning committees.
The changes which I have outlined in the arrangements relating to the non-national road categories are designed to streamline further the administration of the roads program. They are consistent with the general thrust of our approach since 1975 whereby we have progressively moved away from the stringent controls imposed upon the States by our predecessors under the 1974 roads legislation. The changes are also very much in line with the Government's current rationalisation of responsibilities between the Commonwealth and the States over a broad range of public sector activities. The explanatory memorandum and other material that I have circulated describe in detail the features of the Bill. Therefore, I do not propose to deal with individual sections at further length. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Morris) adjourned.
HOUSING ASSISTANCE BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr MeVeigh, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (4.15)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.

!lousing Assistance Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2439

This Bill authorises the Commonwealth to enter into a five-year agreement with each State and the Northern Territory for the provision of home purchase assistance and rental housing assistance. The operation of the agreement in each State requires the formal agreement of the State Minister. The Bill provides for the Commonwealth to pay advances and grants to the States and the Northern Territory for home ownership assistance to people not able to achieve it through the private market and for rental housing assistance for people who for various reasons are unable. to obtain adequate accommodation themselves. This Agreement will be the latest in a series of housing agreements stretching back to 1945, but it is the first time that the Northern Territory will be a party to a housing agreement common to all States. The 1981 Agreement follows detailed negotiations between the Commonwealth, all the States and the Northern Territory and consideration of more than 100 submissions received in response to the Commonwealth's request for suggestions from the public.
Through this legislation, the Commonwealth has firmly committed itself to the funding of welfare housing, but the Commonwealth will not interfere in the method of delivering the assistance which States are best able to assess, plan and provide. This reflects the Commonwealth's belief that the States know best their own needs. The Agreement before this House represents a continuation of, and in certain areas, an improvement on, the significant welfare housing reforms introduced by this Government in 1978. These reforms followed comments by authorities such as the report of the Commission of Inquiry into Poverty which found that assistance for welfare housing was not always directed to those most in need. The Henderson inquiry found that many people living in subsidised welfare housing were not poor, and many of the poor were not in subsidised housing. The 1978 Agreement addressed these problems through measures such as market related rents combined with rental rebates and escalating interest rates on home purchase assistance loans. Those reforms were aimed at tailoring assistance to people in need for the period of their need. At the same time the Agreement gave the States increased flexibility to enable them to design programs to meet their own particular requirements.
The current Bill further increases the flexibility given to the States and continues the process of ensuring that assistance is directed to people in need. The objectives of the programs, spelt out for the first time in the 1978 Housing Agreement, will not be changed. However, with the agreement of

the States, three new objectives have been added. Firstly, the design, style and siting of public housing will, as far as is practicable, reflect the needs of the handicapped. This objective is particularly appropriate in this International Year of Disabled Persons and demonstrates the Government's concern to assist these people to live normal lives. Secondly, the States will also have regard to energy savings which can be made. Again this is appropriate in an energy conscious era. Thirdly, tenants of public housing will be encouraged to participate in public housing policies and estate management. This illustrates our desire that tenants have a say in decisions concerning the management of their homes.
As the Government has promised, this Bill provides for a base funding level of $200m for each year of the five-year agreement. The States have sought a forward commitment for many years to enable them properly to plan their programs. It should be clearly understood that the $200m is a forward commitment for each of the five years and that total funding will be determined each year in the Budget context. Currently all funding is determined in the Budget context. The Bill appropriates an amount of $54m as part of the base yearly commitment in interest free non-repayable grants for rental housing assistance to special categories of persons listed in clause 38 of the Agreement. This is approximately the same amount which is being provided to pensioners and Aboriginals in the 1980-81 financial year.
Grants for rental assistance for pensioners were first introduced with the States Grants (Dwellings for Pensioners) Act 1969. Pensioner housing continued to be funded under the Housing Assistance Act 1978 and grant funds for Aboriginals were also made available under the Act from 1979-80. These grants reflect the Commonwealth's special responsibilities to disadvantaged groups.
The Bill also makes it possible for additional earmarked funds over the $54m yearly base level to be made available from time to time for disadvantaged groups. Any additional categories of people to be assisted will be determined only following consultation with the States and the Northern Territory. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has announced as part of the Review of Commonwealth Functions, that grants to the States for Aboriginal housing will be integrated into the Commonwealth State Housing Agreement. It is proposed that the transfer will occurfrom 1 July 1981. This will bring all aboriginal housing payments to the States under the one Agreement. Aboriginal housing will continue as an identifiable program component of the new Agreement.

2440 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Housing Assistance Bill

The remainder of the base level funding, $146m, is in the form of interest bearing repayable advances at the highly concessional interest rate of 4t per cent per annum over 53 years. This is the largest interest rate concession ever provided to States under welfare housing arrangements and further emphasises the Commonwealth's contribution to those in housing need. In 1973, for instance, the interest concession was 2 per cent; in 1978, it was 4 per cent. At current rates of interest, the Bill's provisions will result in an interest concession of over 8 per cent. Any additional untied funding will be as advances, grants or a combination of both. The composition will be announced at the same time as the level of additional funding is made known.
A major feature of the new Agreement is the considerable degree of autonomy which States will have. They will have complete freedom of choice in allocating all untied advances and grants between home purchase and rental housing assistance.

strong joint effort by the Commonwealth and the-- States to provide housing assistance for the needy.
Honourable members will be pleased to know that, as a result of these arrangements, over $630m was made available for welfare housing in 1979-80. This comprises Commonwealth funding, State funding and internally generated funds from program operations. This legislation also spells out the method of allocating funds between the States. The present method, based as it is on allocations made in the context of financial arrangements existing in 1973-74, is no longer relevant and has led to widespread inequities. For instance, in 1980-81, Queensland, with 15.6 per cent of the population of the States and the Northern Territory, is receiving 9.7 per cent of advances. New South Wales and Victoria also are receiving less than average per capita allocations. On the other hand, South Australia, with 9 per cent of the population, is receiving 14.2 per cent of advances and Tasmania, with 2.9 per cent of the population, is receiving 6.1 per cent of advances.

In the past the Commonwealth has laid down conditions as to the proportion of funds which should go either to home purchase or to rental. This new provision will allow each State to allocate funds between programs to suit needs in that State. States will also have autonomy as to how they apply funds made available under this Agreement, provided of course these meet the purposes covered by the Agreement. The Commonwealth has created an innovative climate and States will be able, if they so wish, to provide a wide range of assistance in response to various needs. Under our federalism policies, the Commonwealth has removed restrictions on States but will not force them to introduce new forms of housing assistance.
Since the 1978-79 financial year, States have matched advances provided by the Commonwealth with funds from their own resources. These arrangements recognise the co-operative approach between the Commonwealth and the States to welfare housing. The matching arrangements, however, have operated outside the legislation. This Bill incorporates details of matching arrangements into the Agreement. The States will be required to match all funds except those earmarked for rental assistance to disadvantaged groups. However, such funds allocated by the States from their own resources need not be subject to the Agreement. The arrangements have been designed to give the States maximum flexibility in running their own welfare housing programs which complement programs under the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement. These arrangements will ensure a continuation of the

The Commonwealth considers that the distribution of housing funds on an equal per capita basis would mean a fairer allocation of funds between the States and would be more in keeping with relative housing needs. Accordingly, this Bill incorporates a formula for the allocation of funds between the States which moves towards an equal per capita distribution over a lO-year planning period. All funds, apart from those earmarked for disadvantaged groups, will be distributed on the following basis: In 1981-82 they will be allocated in the same proportions as advances were allocated in 1980-81. Over the four remaining years of the Agreement they will be allocated on a basis that would progressively achieve an equal per capita allocation in the financial year 1990-91, if the Agreement were to operate until that financial year. To provide protection for the smaller States and the Northern Territory a guarantee has been built into the formula so that no State or the Northern Territory receives less than 5 per cent of the level of yearly base advances of $146m. I must stress that the gradual phasing-in of an equal per capita allocation over the nine years commencing in 1982-83, and the protection offered to the smaller States, will result in South Australia, Tasmania and the Northern Territory still receiving a higher than average per capita proportion of the united assistance over the life of the 1981 Agreement. However, the share of funds received by New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland will gradually increase over the life of the Agreement.
The Bill provides for the funds earmarked for rental assistance for disadvantaged groups to be allocated amongst the States on the basis of their

Housing Assistance Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2441

respective needs as determined by the Commonwealth Minister. This is a continuation of current practices. For example, pensioner funds are allocated amongst the States in proportion to the number of eligible pensioners receiving supplementary assistance. In order to allow funds to be paid out to States from 1 July 1981, there is provision in the legislation for an advance to the States of loans and grants authorised under the Act before the Agreement has been signed. However, if a State has not signed the Agreement by 1 January 1982, all such moneys are to be repaid.
I turn now to specific aspects of the home purchase assistance provisions. The arrangements for home purchase assistance continue under the new Agreement with one minor change from those in the 1978 Agreement. The 1978 provisions demonstrated our concern to encourage home ownership across the widest possible range of income groups. In 1978 the purposes for which home purchase assistance funds could be used were broadened to include a range of flexible practices, including interest subsidy schemes and flexible mortgage arrangements such as low start loans. I am pleased to say that some States have introduced interest subsidy schemes. By attracting private capital for loans to low income earners, these schemes enable more families to be assisted with the same amount of government funds. With the guarantee of continuity of funding contained in this Agreement, I am confident that we will see increasing use of these provisions.
A minor change relates to the interest rate charged on outstanding loans to agencies of the home purchase assistance program. The 1978 Agreement provided that the interest rate charged by the States to the lending agencies would escalate by one-half of one per cent per year until a level of one per cent below 'the long term bond rate was reached. This maximum rate is to be changed to one per cent below the Common-
wealth Savings Bank lending rate for housing loans. The individual borrower when he is no longer in need of subsidy will be paying an interest rate akin to a loan from the Commonwealth Savings Bank.
The 1978 Agreement made several improvements to the provisions governing rental housing assistance. The purposes for which funds could be used were greatly expanded to include activities such as leasing dwellings and joint ventures with the private sector and with voluntary organisations. We are now adding another purpose, which is 'to provide rental subsidy for eligible persons renting private housing'. This addition is a
further example of the flexibility being provided to the States under the new Agreement. It will

mean that States will not need to build or otherwise provide dwellings but will be able to subsidise people renting privately if they wish.
The 1978 Commonwealth-State arrangements introduced a requirement that the states charge market related rents for public rental dwellings with rental rebates for people unable to afford them. The Commonwealth believes that the continued development of a system of income related rents with a ceiling set by the assessed market rent for a dwelling offers the fairest deal for families in housing need. Accordingly, the new Agreement refers to a policy of market rents, instead of the market related rent policy required by the 1978 Agreement.
For those unable to pay the market rent, rent rebates apply. The majority of those who currently receive rent rebates are age, invalid, widow pensioners, and single parent families. The Henderson Commission of Inquiry into Poverty found that these were amongst the poorest groups in our society. Single income two-parent families where the breadwinner is on a low wage also benefit from these rebates. The market rent policy combined ,with rent rebates protects all of these persons from hardship. At the same time it ensures that those whose circumstances have improved pay a rent which reflects their increased capacity to pay. This ensures that subsidies are limited to those in need only for the period of their need.
The 1978 Agreement required Commonwealth and State governments jointly to seek ways of establishing a uniform approach to the calculation of rental rebates. Agreements has been reached on broad principles to apply, The formula should treat an tenants equany on the basis of their capacity to pay. Thus it should be income based, linked to total household income and treat tenants equally irrespective of how long they have been in public housing. Only such a system will be fair for all public housing tenants. To achieve equity between tenants living in different States, as well as in the same State, a uniform system across Australia is necessary. (Quorum formed). Hence the new Agreement requires that a uniform rental rebate policy be developed by the Commonwealth and the States and be applied for the calculation of rental rebates.
The 1981 Agreement will continue to provide for sales of rental dwellings to tenants and will continue the requirement that dwellings must be sold for cash. A cash sales policy ensures that the State housing authorities are able to replace dwellings which are sold and so mainatin the level of the public rental stock while still encouraging people who wish to purchase. Eligible tenants

2442 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Bill

may receive a housing loan under the home purAs enunciated in its policies, the Government is

chase assistance program. However, States will be committed to the protection of the Australian

able to adjust the market value of a dwelling so marine environment. The Government has pur-

that the sale price set for the tenant will allow for sued the implementation of this policy on both the

improvements made by the tenant before the purnational and international fronts by participating

chase. This means tenants can be rewarded for the in consultations aimed at producing agreed

efforts they make. This Bill represents an importmeasures for the prevention and control of marine

ant step forward in the implementation of thispollution.

Government's housing policy. This policy is to:

The purpose of the Bill, which is now before the

Ensure that every household in Australia is House, is to control marine pollution through

able to obtain adequate housing within its cadumping and incineration, by implementing the

pacity to pay;

Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pol-

Encourage home ownership across the lution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter,

widest possible range of income groups concentogether with amendments to the convention

trating Federal assistance in the areas of greatintroduced in 1978 and 1980. The need for a con-

est need;

vention to control the dumping of wastes at sea

Maintain and improve housing styles and seek the most effective use of the available housing stock;
Ensure stable economic conditions within the building industry;
Encourage research and innovation and, in co-operation with the States, develop imaginat-

was recognised in 1971 by the first meeting of the preparatory committee for the United Nations
Conference on the Human Environment. As a result of support expressed at this meeting the convention was finalised in 1972. It has been in force internationally since 1975, with some 45 countries now being a party to it.

ive housing programs for the underprivileged The control of marine pollution through dump-

and disadvantaged.

ing and Australian ratification of the convention

In the 1978 Act we moved a long way towards achieving these goals and in the better direction of welfare housing assistance to those in need. The present legislation before the House builds on that achievement. The provision of a guaranteed base level of funding will enable the States to plan ahead with confidence. It should lead to further use by the States of the opportunities for innovative practices provided in the 1978 Agreement.
This legislation demonstrates this Government's belief that the State governments are best placed to know the needs of people in their State. The agreement further increases the freedom of the States to tailor housing programs to meet their particular needs. No longer can any State say that it is restricted by Commonwealth direction. I commend this Bill to the House.

has been the subject of detailed discussions with the States and the Northern Territory in various forums, including the Australian Environment Council, the Solicitors-General committee, the Standing Committee of Attorneys-General and the Premiers Conference. These detailed discussions have paved the way for the Commonwealth Government to introduce this Bill to control, and in some instances prevent, the transport of wastes to sea for the purposes of disposal. This Bill, which has been developed in the spirit of cooperative federalism, takes full account of international, national and State interests. The Bill, which repeals the Beaches, Fishing Grounds and Sea Routes Protection Act 1932-1961 will enable Australia to formalise the existing voluntary arrangements dealing with dumping by the establishment of regulatory machinery which will:

Mr Uren-In regard to this disgraceful and miserable piece of legislation, I move:

Prohibit the dumping of wastes or other matter listed in annex I to the Convention, which

That the debate be now adjourned.

include organohalogen, mercury and cadmium

Question resolved in the affirmative.

compounds, plastics, hydrocarbons and high

ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION (SEA DUMPING) BILL 1981

level radioactive waste; Regulate through the prior issuing of a
special permit the dumping of wastes or other

Bill presented by Mr Thomson, for Mr Wilson, matter listed in annex II to the Convention,

and read a first time.

which includes bulky objects, wastes containing

Second Reading

significant amounts of heavy metals and lowlevel radioactive material;

Mr THOMSON (Leichhardt-Minister for

Regulate the dumping of all other wastes or

Science and Technology) (4.39)-1 move:

matter through the prior issuing of a general

That the Bill be now read a second time.

permit;

Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2443

Ensure formal consideration of all factors listed in annex III to the Convention concerning criteria governing the issue of permits;
Ensure the condition of the sea for the purposes of the Convention is properly monitored.

as part of the off-shore settlement. In addition, Australia's international standing with regard to proposals by other countries to dispose of wastes by dumping at sea will be strengthened. I commend the Bill to honourable members.

The regulatory machinery provided by this Bill will apply to Australian vessels, aircraft or plat-

Debate (on motion by Mr West) adjourned.

forms believed to be engaged in dumping and

vessels and aircraft loading in Australia or in Australian waters matter which is to be dumped. In line with the 1978 amendment to the Convention the Bill also applies to incineration at sea carried

TARIFF PROPOSALS Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.46)-1 move:

out by any vessels in Australian waters, by Aus-

tralian platforms and by Australian vessels in any Customs TariifProposais No.6 (1981).

part of the sea. The Bill does not apply to the op-

erational discharge of wastes from vessels, aircraft or platforms. This matter is covered by other international conventions many of which have been implemented in Australia.

The Customs Tariff Proposals I have just tabled relate to proposed alterations to the Customs Tariff Act 1966. Proposals No.6 (1981) which operates from tomorrow, contains tariff changes

For the purposes of this Bill Australian waters resulting from the Government's decision on rec-

is defined to include that territorial sea and any ommendations by the Industries Assistance Com-

sea that is on the landward side of the territorial mission in its report on certain monomers,

sea, other than any part of the sea that is within prepolymers and goods of the silicone type. The

the limits of a State or the Northern Territory. Government has accepted the Commission's rec-

This is to ensure that a legal vacuum does not ommendations relating to the goods under refer-

occur for the control of dumping inside the terrience. As a result, silicone raw materials will be

torial sea of Australia. Clause 9 of the Bill gives dutiable at minimum rates while silicone inter-

effect to the agreement reached at the June 1980 mediates and most finished silicone products

Premiers Conference. It makes provision for the under reference such as emulsions, greases, com-

States and the Northern Territory to control pounds, et cetera, will be dutiable at 10 per cent.

dumping in the coastal waters under their own The duties applying to silicone adhesives, silicone

legislation implementing the provisions of the planar forms and profile shapes and process en-

dumping convention, if they so desire. Naturally it gravers' screens will remain unchanged. Textile

will be necessary to establish consultative arsupported plastics continue to attract the same

rangements between the Commonwealth, States duties as the textile fabric that gives the goods

and the Northern Territory to consider the entheir essential character.

vironmental consequences of proposed dumping

operations, wherever they might occur.

The Commission in making its recommen-

Clauses 13 and 14 set out the penalties for an dations took into account the impact on manufac-

offence for dumping, loading or incineration of turers' costs of lower duties on silicone raw

wastes or other matter otherwise than in accordmaterials and intermediate products and con-

ance with a permit. As set out in clause 17 of the sidered that the levels of assistance recommended

Bill, in the case where the Commonwealth has inwould provide an environment in which the local

curred expenses or other liabilities in repairing or industry could further develop. The proposals

remedying any condition resulting from dumping also contain administrative changes to note 5 to

in contravention of the Bill, the person convicted chapter 39 to reflect properly the intended in-

of the offence is liable for expenses.

terpretation of the term 'adhesive' and to note 5 to

In keeping with Australia's participation in the development and implementation of international conventions, the enactment of this Bill will enable Australia to accede to the dumping convention. The legislation, by opening the way for Australia to become party to the Convention, will formalise our own national arrangements to control marine

chapter 84 to make legal provision for machines which fall equally within two or more items, as intended by the Customs Co-operation Council nomenclature. A summary setting out the nature of the duty changes has been prepared and is being circulated to honourable members. I commend the proposals to the House.

pollution through dumping as agreed between the

Commonwealth, States and Northern Territory Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned.

2444 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

INDUSTRIES ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4,47)-For the information of honourble members, I present the report of the Industries Assistance Commission on certain monomers, prepolymers and goods of the silicone type.

the repeated attempts by the Opposition to improve the parliamentary process in relation to tariffs and excise and despite the loud but empty noises of the so-called free traders-or are they now called 'dries'-on the Liberal back bench, these measures will never be fully considered within the context of an industrial development strategy for Australia while we continue using the present mechanisms.

CUSTOMS TARIFF AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading

The Bill we are presently debating is of direct relevance to the jobs of hundreds of thousands of Australians. Moreover, it relates to the overall

Debate resumed from 6 May, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.

pattern of our economic development. It deserves to be scrutinised properly by this Parliament. Accordingly, the Opposition will move an amendment to the motion that this Bill be read a second

Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (4.S0)-The purtime. Past Ministers for Business and Consumer

pose of the Customs Tariff Amendment Bill is a Affairs have indicated their agreement in prin-

daunting one. It is to enact a very large number of ciple with the Opposition views I have put time

tariff changes involving such major industries as and again in the last few years. But there has been

the textiles, clothing and footwear, iron and steel, no evidence of any action to date. At this stage, so

chemicals, carpets, gearboxes and rural products. the House knows what I am talking about, I move

The rural products include apples, pears and cheese. Of course, any Bill such as this Bill should be an integral part of an industry policy. The objective of industry policy, as far as the Australian Labor Party is concerned, is to create one and a half million new jobs in the 1980s. A net increase of one million people is expected in the work force in the 1980s. When the hidden unemployed are taken into consideration, there are at

as a second reading amendment:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not opposing this Bill, the House is of the opinion that a Parliamentary Standing Committee on Customs and Excise Tariffs should be established to examine each change in customs and excise tariffs following the gazettal of proposals or their being introduced into the Parliament on the one hand and before related Bills are introduced into the House on the other'.

least half a million people who want jobs and who should have jobs right now in 1981. The industry policy displayed by this Government in Bills such as the Customs Tariff Amendment Bill is totally inadequate-a fact which goes almost without saying. I will say more about the Bill before I enlarge further on what industry policy should be.

In moving the amendment, the Opposition again
is expressing its concern that changes in tariffs and trading relations should not be developed and . implemented in isolation but should, as I mentioned at the beginning of this speech, be considered in the context of overall industry and trade policy objectives. The fact that this Bill

Tariff changes have been announced in no less enacts so many changes at once may give the im-

than 18 proposals introduced over the past 12 months. These proposals deal with, firstly, changes in the preferential rate of tariff to apply to certain goods from developing countries; sec-

pression that the changes have been devised in conformity with a rational and coherent strategy. That is not so. There is no rational and coherent strategy in the measures validated in this Bill.

ondly, changes in arrangements relating to our Nothing could be further from the truth than that trade with New Zealand under the New Zealandassertion. Any impression of coherence or plan-

Australia Free Trade Agreement; and, thirdly, the ning in the Bill is an illusion. Industry policy under

new arrangements for closer trading relationships the Fraser Government conforms to no plan and with several Pacific island countries which are siglacks any uniformity of direction. The proposals

natories with Australia to the South Pacific Rewere all conceived in splendid isolation one from

gional Trade and Economic Co-operation Agreeanother. They were not developed against a backment. Clearly, therefore, this is a very important ground of understanding as to where Australian

and wide-ranging Bill. Yet, to the detriment of industry should be developed, or so it would seem.

Australian trade and industry, the Bill will pass The tariff decisions of this Government, like so with a minimum of public notice and with only many other decisions that it takes on economic

limited parliamentary scrutiny. Despite the cenand social issues, derive from a shaky marriage be-

tral importance of these measures to the future tween free-market fundamentalism on the one

economic development of this country, despite hand and political expediency on the other hand.

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2445

This same amalgam was the basis of the Of course, the casualty is industrial development

Government's industry policy decisions following and the creation of that one and half million jobs

the recent razor gang report. The Government's to which I referred earlier. I emphasise that it is

free market fundamentalists, its small governindustrial development that is the casualty and

ment protagonists, told the Government that it not the corporate sector, which has the principal

had to make the amount of money to be saved role of pursuing industrial development. The cor-

look impressive. What did it do? Without the porate sector is doing very well out of this

slightest regard for an industry strategy or a Government in certain sectors. The foreign-

rational business policy, it reduced the investment owned sector is doing particularly well and at

allowance from 20 per cent to 18 per cent and, present the rate of foreign takeovers is proceeding

more importantly from my point of view, it at a pace of $7 billion a year.

reduced depreciation acceleration by a similar proportion. What a remarkable achievement that was. Other countries with which we have to compete, particularly if we are to create those extra jobs which we must create to get back to full employment, give accelerated depreciation more generously in order to update machinery and to become more competitive, and therefore increase export trade and be able to compete with imports. This country is not an island on its own; it has to take note of what others are doing. That is not what is happening here. These fundamentalists came along with their ideology of small government and overnight they slashed depreciation rates at a time when our competitors were increasing the amount of depreciation manufacturers could claim in order to become more competitive. How clever that is.

Local and foreign corporations are enjoying resurgent profits as a result of unconstrained pricing policies, inadequate taxing policies in the mining sector and the scuttling of effective trade practices legislation. The attraction of foreign investors and burgeoning corporate profits is not synonymous with optimal industrial development. Foreign takeovers and massive profits are the antithesis of what is needed because the inequalities which they exacerbate lead to a breakdown in the social conditions needed for sustained industrial growth. Worker management co-operation for mutually beneficial economic development is neither warranted nor possible under the conditions of deliberately increased inequality which are fostered by so many of the policies of this Fraser Government which we are enduring at this time. This all points to the continuing urgent need for

Here we have the strange result of a meeting of the processes of industry policy development in

rhetoric and expediency, a government which is this country, of which tariffs are a major part, to

penny wise but pound foolish. All it does for be radically overhauled.

industry is create more paper work and more difficult tax accounting, and increase uncertainty about the direction this Government is taking. As was said by Mr Eric Risstrom in a letter that all honourable members received the other day, these depreciation changes apparently date from 30 April. Because that is part of the way through the financial year-with only May and June to gothat means that all depreciation schedules will be about twice as large, while one rate of depreciation is claimed for ten-twelfths of the year and another rate is claimed for two-twelfths of the year. All of this is done in the name of efficiency and in the name of productivity, yet it is only creating more problems for the private sector, just as it is for many people in the public sector.

The Labor Opposition's approach to industry policy differs in three fundamental respects from the approCl.ch of the Government. Firstly, we believe that a degree of long term planning is essential for Australia. Clearly we need to establish our industry objectives and then apply them with the benefit of a clear understanding of the capital, labour and structural adjustment requirements of our industries. Australia remains one of the very few countries in which a long term indicative view is not taken by government and industry. We should emulate what the Japanese do in their work, with their economic planning agency. They have a medium and long term perspective in relation to their objectives. We should try to emulate what is going on in Holland, France and in

The tariff changes in this Bill display the same many other countries, even where there are non-

failure of rational planning. The Minister for Insocialist governments. They see the wisdom of

dustry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) is so forecasting and getting some unity when it comes

busy with the task of holding his ailing party to the objectives of the private and public sectors.

together and propping up his failing leader that Such an attitude is all the more important in a fed-

industry policy in Australia remains a backwater. eration such as ours where, at the same time as

Industry policy under this Government responds seeking that unity of objectives between the pub-

more to the ebb and flow of the electoral cycle lic and private sectors, we should be seeking to the

than it does to rational, forward looking strategy. greatest extent possible a unified approach to

2446 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

objectives on the part of State governments as well as the Commonwealth Government.
The second area where the Opposition differs from this conservative Government in power at the moment is in seeking a co-operative approach towards the formulation and implementation of economic strategies. We believe that consultation with industry is essential and that organisations of labour must also be directly involved in these planning processes. At the moment we are witnessing once again, as a result of the activities of the infamous razor gang, a diminution in industry consultation. The number of industry advisory councils is decreasing and there is less likelihood of business people involving themselves in the consultation than has happened hitherto, even though that activity of consultation to this time has been inadequate.
Thirdly, the Opposition believes that in a small country such as ours market forces alone are not adequate to determine either prices or patterns of output. We realise that the fight against inflation and the task of expanding investment in manufacturing require substantial government participation and leadership. In come cases, regulation is essential; in many other cases, positive incentives must be provided to ensure that appropriate expenditures in such areas as small business development, industrial research and development and export market development are carried through. This Government does not believe in forward planning; it does not believe in consultation; and it abdicates its responsibility to provide leadership to our industrial sector. As I said earlier, at the moment it is so pre-occupied with the divisions within its own ranks that it is not giving any sort of leadership in any direction. Instead, it makes one ad hoc decision after another in the course of each year and uses devices such as this Customs Tariff Amendment Bill to give legislative authority to its actions.
I wish to give further examples of the lack of coherence in protection in industry policy as it exists at present. We find that the rates of protection for some goods have increased and for others they have decreased. There appears to be no logical pattern. Certainly the decisions are not usually the result of Industries Assistance Commission recommendations; they are in the face of those recommendations. For example, duty rates on carpet imports were increased dramatically without any reference to importers and retailers in the industry. That was an ad hoc decision; it was made at the last moment by this Government in 1980 when it was particularly electorally sensitive. Had that decision been made. I have no doubt that it would have been different. That is what I

mean when I refer to electoral expediency as the motive for some of these decisions.
Another example is the assistance arrangements in regard to steel. In its draft report the lAC initially sought a combination of limited tariff protection and export assistance. Nothing happened for over a year. The lAC, supported by the Broken Hill Pty Co. Ltd, then sought much the same tariff regime as in the draft report, supplemented by additional assistance for investment in the form of accellerated depreciation. This Bill implements the tariff changes, but the depreciation changes are left up in the air. The industry has invested little in new or more modern capacity over the past several years, despite the fact that demand for steel will grow strongly in the period of resource-based investment which is now under way. Here, I allege, is a classic example of a lack of forward planning on the one hand, and an absence of policy co-ordination on the other. The investment should have been under way by now. The company is still holding off because only half of the releyant policy decisions have been taken. Along with every other manufacturer in Australia, all that the steel industry has heard from the Government is that 2 per cent is to be shaved off depreciation and the investment allowance. That was the messdge it received in late April, and it is extremely concerned about what further messages there will be in August when the Budget is brought down.
Before closing my remarks and resuming my seat, I draw the attention of the House to the fact that three of the tariff proposals which are the subject of this Bill are more than six months old. Tariff Proposals 18, 19 and 20 of 1980 were introduced on 2 December last year and, accordingly, the six-month period during which the Customs Act provides protection for the collection of duties has now expired. These proposals have not been subject to a validation Bill, and the collector of customs duty is not at present protected by legislation. Of course, this situation will be rectified by the passage of this Bill, and it will have appropriate retrospective effect. However, it should not pass without notice that it is only because the courts of law in Australia typically suffer considerable delays that the Government is not today in a very embarrassing situation. It is also worth recording that in this case we have an example of the sloppy government of which we have seen so many examples recently. The Government is so busy defending itself from its own back bench and from disaffected former Ministers that the good and proper government of this country is allowed to take second place. This is a shabby, indeed contemptuous, way, to treat

Customs Tariff Amendment Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2447

the Parliament. The six months validation period Mr LLOYD (Murray) (5.11)-The section of

for tariffs has been all but ignored.

the general debate on which I want to concentrate

In summary, not only is there that mistake in this Bill, but also there is the sad fact that in spite of it being drawn to the attention of the Government on a number of occasions that there should be more detailed attention given by the Parliament to the various proposals gazetted, indeed, no movement has been ascertained on that subject.
We ask the new Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) to apply his mind to the concept of the Parliament scrutinising these proposals more carefully so that greater attention
is given by the representatives of the people to the important proposals that are given to the Parliament. There is an analogy in the Senate, where the Senate Standing Committee on Regulations and Ordinances gives detailed attention to ordinances
that are brought down. I believe that such detailed attention should be given to these proposals by a committee of this Parliament. The proposals come down; there is no delay of a week while they are studied, and no time is given by the Leader of the House for each of those proposals to be debated. We wait virtually for six months, until

this afternoon is the Industries Assistance Commission report on cheese. It was published on 15 March 1979, so we are now talking about a report which was completed two years ago. This final debate in Parliament ends seven years in which the dairying industry of this country has been subjected to almost continuous lAC hearings. There were three hearings in all, two general and one on cheese. The first hearing was required by the Labor Government when it phased out the old dairy bounty and removed all support for the dairying industry at a time when that industry was going through a trauma following the entry of Britain into the European Economic Community. Seven years and three lAC hearings, I suggest, is too long, costly and uncertain for any industry in this country to be subjected to, and I hope that the dairying industry, or any other industry in Australia for that matter, is not again subjected to such a process. I am pleased that one of the lAC recommendations is that there should be no further lAC inquiries into the dairying industry for a period of five years.

either a validation Bill comes in at the end of the calendar year or a Bill such as this one comes in near the end of the financial year, before the proposals are debated. They are then a fait accompli. Debate on the individual proposals is a waste of
time.

In its inquiries into the dairying industry the lAC has always recommended that the industry is
deserving of assistance. We should compare that
with the great majority of lAC reports on manufacturing industry, which generally recommend a reduction of protection. It is unfortunate that gen-

All one can do, leading for the Opposition, is what I have done-draw attention again to the need for better procedures, draw attention again to how important it is that proposals such as the 21 or so covered by this measure should be part of a coherent industry policy which looks at the me-

erally the lAC does not report on tertiary industry, which has the greatest level of protection of any of the three forms of industry in this country. It is obvious, reading through the lAC reports on the dairying industry, that the lAC had some difficulty in mastering its brief.

dium and long-term objectives of the country. There is no greater objective than that secondary industry should be very healthy. Our resource-- based industries will provide only about one-third of the extra 1.5 million new jobs that we need in the 1980s. We need secondary industries and their related tertiary industries, the services sector, to provide the extra jobs if we are to get back to full employment. Bills such as this one should be seen in that context. They will be so seen when there is a change of government and the Australian Labor Party is able to apply its medium and long term planning attitudes to the government of this
country.

In regard to cheese, the delay in tabling and now the debate on the report follow the Multilateral Trade Negotiations and the New ZealandAustralia Free Trade Agreement arrangements. The recommendations came at a time when the Multilateral Trade Negotiations were under way, and there are provisions in NAFTA which can and do prolong a final decision. The final lAC recommendations on cheese were different in some degree from the draft recommendations, particularly in regard to bounty if the $200 per tonne which it recommended as a tariff for all cheese coming into Australia could not be implemented against New Zealand because of Schedule A of

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Ian NAFTA. It also dealt in greater definition with

Robinson)-Is the amendment seconded?

other matters including the cheese quota in re-

lation to New Zealand than it had in the draft re-

Mr Howe-I second the amendment and report. The report states that cheese should be duti-

serve my right to speak.

able at $200 per tonne from all sources; or, failing

2448 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

agreement with New Zealand on this recommendation, assistance through the tariff being replaced by a bounty equivalent to $200 per tonne on all goods under reference produced and consumed in Australia.
I want to make two points in relation to the report. The first relates to the lAC recommendations and to government action in general on those recommendations. In all the lAC investigations into various rural industries in this country the lAC has always stated, to my knowledge, that there is very little or no protection-in some cases minus protection-and therefore some protection or assistance is deserved. Secondly, generally speaking, the manufacturing industries are not efficient by world standards, in contrast with rural industries, and therefore there should be a reduction in protection rather than an increase. It is of interest that usually the Government has not accepted the full recommendations of the lAC in relation to the rural industries. The level of support quite often is less than that recommended. That is so in the case of the lAC report on cheese.
If one looks at the lAC report on the superphosphate bounty, which the Australian Labor Party likes to quote from time to time, one will sec that the recommendation is for a bounty of 20 per cent of the cost. If the superphosphate bounty was now 20 per cent of the cost it would be about two-thirds higher than it is at present. One of the few lAC investigations into the non-manufacturing or non-rural industries-the one into the performing arts-was very interesting because the lAC made some recommendations as to how government money or support should be provided which did not meet with the approval of quite a few people who thought they were free traders in relation to manufacturing and primary industries and were always demanding that we should follow the lAC reports. When this report hit the deck they were so upset that they said that there should not be a final government decision because the whole thing was unacceptable to them. It is marvellous how principles can be very flexible with some people.
As to the Multilateral Trade Negotiations and the European Economic Community, the EEC basically said that it would provide greater access for a variety of meat products. Australia was shut out of the European market for cheese when Great Britain joined the EEC in 1972-73 but heavily subsidised EEC cheese was allowed untrammelled entry into Australia at that time following Senator Murphy's removal of the anti-dumping provisions against European cheese which were in force when the Labor Government

took office. The EEC was allowed to increase rapidly its penetration of the cheese market in Australia at a time when we were not allowed access to the European market. The MTN arrangement was that 3,000 tonnes of Australian cheese could be imported into Europe and in return we would guarantee the entry of duty free cheese into Australia provided there was no export subsidy from Europe-I can assure the House that the export subsidy is only one of quite a range of subsidies that come into their support system-and also the current duty rate of $96 per tonne for certain types of cheese at fairly generous tonnage rates. Other arrangements were made for some other products. For example, with canned pears it was stated that there could be no reduction from 24 per cent in the common external tariff, but there was a promise that nothing else would be done concerning access to that market for Australian canned pears. Within six months the EEC introduced a subsidy to encourage the canning of pears in Europe at a value which was twice that which Australian canned pear producers received. In other words, it was the equivalent of a dramatic increase in the tariff' against canned pears going into Europe. The EEC tried to renege on the MTN arrangement on increased access for Australian beef. Hence the threats and demands that were made by the Australian Government.
What I am saying is that when we are dealing with the EEC we are dealing with people whose word cannot be trusted, who are tough operators, and who do not hesitate to subsidise and double subsidise. I believe that we have been very generous in relation to cheese to the EEe. There are other countries which highly subsidise their cheese exports to this country and which do not belong to the EEC. Australian producers of cheese will suffer because the lAC recommendation of a $200 per tonne tariff or bounty for cheese was not accepted. The tariff or bounty will remain at $96 per tonne. I am referring to Norway, Austria and so on. The Government's decision on access for New Zealand cheese was a rejection of the specific lAC recommendation of a $200 per tonne tariff or bounty. The Government's announcement, which I have already quoted, was that it should be one or the other, depending on whether cheese remained on Schedule A. I wish to quote from the media release of the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) concerning the Government's attitude to New Zealand cheese. The Press release
stated:
It was also announced that a decision on the question of assist-
ance to the Australian cheese industry would be deferred to enable consultations to take place between Australian and

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2449

New Zealand industry representatives and Ministers regardaside and did not argue against the special proing New Zealand's cheese marketing objectives in Australia. visions or access for the New Zealand dairying in-

As a result of those consultations agreement between the N.Z. Board (NZDB) and the Australian industry was reached in August 1980 to establish a Joint Dairy Industry Consultative Committee and the NZDB undertook to limit its exports of cheese to Australia in 1980 to the same level recorded in

dustry, which has helped the industry dramatically in the returns to its producers and has allowed it to avoid the restructuring hell that our dairying industry had to go through, when the

1979. The Industry Consultative Committee held its first meeting in December 1980 and is expected to meet again in May this year-

Australian Government's decision was for less than the lAC had recommended for protection against New Zealand cheese.

That is, 1981-
with a view to agreeing on the level of exports by the NZDP to Australia in 1981.
I now wish to quote from the response of Mr John Bennett, the President of the Australian Dairy Farmers Federation, to the Government's decision. In relation to the lAC, Mr Bennett is reported to have said:

I was very pleased with the Cabinet decision taken by the Australian Government earlier this year in relation to closer economic relations with New Zealand. I believe from the published reports that I have read that the attitude is far more balanced. It stated that genuine two-way trade has to be negotiated, that all industries have to be involved. Basically the arrangements agreed to

. . . 'the greatest waste of time. I have ever been following the lAC report on cheese and the

associated with.'

proving of the dumping of cheese against New

Zealand must stand. I emphasise the point that

'The Government seems to be practising a double standard this Government must stick to that position in its when dealing with lAC reports on rural and non rural negotiations with New Zealand for closer econ-

industries'.

omic relations. Any further concession at the ex-

'Within the manufacturing sector, the lAC is criticised for pense of the Australian dairying industry would

being too harsh in its recommendations for restructuring heavily protected industries. By contrast, the cheese industry which receives very little Government assistance, has the unique distinction, as the only industry where tariff assistance had been reduced by the Government following an lAC rec-

be grossly unfair to an industry which, unlike the manufacturing industry, has been granted far less protection than that recommended by the Industries Assistance Commission.

ommendation for higher tariff levels'.
In conclusion, I wish to make a couple of further points. First of all, New Zealand and the EEC have been very well treated. They have been treated in a fairer manner than they deserve. I have already given some details regarding the EEC. A case of illegal dumping of cheese in this country was proved against New Zealand but, by the skilful use of the special provisions of NAFTA, the New Zealand industry and Government were able to prolong and postpone the final decision on New Zealand cheese coming to this country, during which time New Zealand dramatically increased the amount of cheese coming in, so it had a higher base from which to negotiate when the final decision was reached. That decision was reached and, incidentally, has been

Mr HOWE (Batman) (5.26)-ln some respects the honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd) has made a very good speech in support of the amendment. He argued that we ought to be much more aware of decisions that are made in relation to particular industries and that decisions need to be based on a full recognition of all the factors involved, not on narrow grounds. Whilst I am not in any sense trying to draw a dichotomy between the rural and manufacturing sector, I want to concentrate my remarks in relation to the Customs Tariff Amendment Bill around the question of industry policy. In some respects what I will say is complementary to the remarks made by the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford).

working quite well. No sooner had the argument The Bill, in referring to levels of protection in a

between Australia and New Zealand on access for wide range of industries, for example, within the

cheese been settled, following the lAC inquiry, manufacturing sector, provides an opportunity to

than the New Zealand Prime Minister, in what I discuss the issues of protection and industry policy

consider was a very one-sided proposal for within Australia. I want to refer in particular to

expanded Australia-New Zealand trade, dethe situation in the manufacturing industry. The

manded more concessions of the Australian dairysharp decline that occurred during the 1970s-a

ing industry. The New Zealand dairying industry decline which to some extent has been arrested

is far more heavily subsidised than the Australian but not reversed-has placed in question the

industry. In fact the Australian dairying industry future of manufacturing industry in Australia.

is the least subsidised of any dairying industry in Undoubtedly, there is a possibility that if present

the Western World. Our dairying industry stood policies are continued, within a period Australia

2450 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

will cease to be a country with a strong manufacturing base. The Opposition has consistently supported manufacturing industry essential to the health of the Australian economy. It is crucially important to Australia's independence and security.
The House does not need to be reminded that the decision to expand the manufacturing industry in Australia was integral to the Chifley White Paper on full employment published in 1945 and the approach taken by that Government to postwar reconstruction. During the war it was recognised that Australia not only had the human resources but also the natural resources necessary to become a strong manufacturing country. The government of the time sought to provide the framework for that growth to take place. The principal emphasis of the Chifley Government with respect to manufacturing industry was followed by successive governments until, I believe, the advent of the Fraser Government. However, there was no doubt that by the middle 1960s the Australian manufacturing industry was moving into a situation of crisis-a deep malaise which was the burden of the Jackson report on manufacturing industry commissioned by the Whitlam Government. The reasons for the malaise which affected the manufacturing industry are certainly not simple. They are complex and relate to a range of government policies, the parlous state of management within Australia, as well as to new strategies being adopted by international capital.
I believe the most important reason for the decline of manufacturing industry was the decision taken during the late 1960s for international capital to begin to restructure its international operations away from the emphasis that had been placed on securing industrial bases and access to markets within countries such as Australia which operated policies on an import replacement basis. During the post-war period the Australian Government accepted substantial foreign investment in return for the development of manufacturing industry, such as vehicles and chemicals, on the understanding that some of these industries would require protection, but that they would contribute to the development in Australia of what I would describe as an independent industrial base. I stress that the reason for the develoment of this industry was primarily for political and not economic reasons.
Over the past decade we have seen a movement of international capital towards strategies which are designed not to concentrate industry in particular countries but to seek maximum diversification, the achievement of greater economies of scale by the breaking up of the final product into

component parts which may be made in different parts of the world and, in particular, the concentration of labour-intensive production in Third World countries which have cheap labour readily available. Often these countries have not only that characteristic but also they often have an absence of any free trade union structure, repressive labour laws, and a number of government incentives to capital not available in Western countries. Restructuring of capital has now reached a stage where Australian manufacturers are competing with multinational companies, often Western owned or based, operating in low wage countries with Western capital and technology and substantial incentives from the host governments. The reality of the matter is that it is impossible for Australia to compete with these corporations without achieving substantial reductions in living standards.
A central thrust to the Crawford report was that the Australian economy should be restructured to allow for the development of that economy around highly capital intensive resourcebased industries and also high technology industries. Australia's secondary industry would be fined down with a principal emphasis on the manufacture in Australia of only separate parts of total production, such as cars and those parts manufactured under complementation schemes which are highly capital and energy intensive. It has been argued by a number of honourable members on the Government side that Australia needs to pay less attention to protecting Australian industry and more attention to developing new industries in line with the kinds of industries described in my reference to the Crawford report. It has been argued that we need to accept the trends occurring in the international economy, adopt more outward looking strategies, and accept the fact that national interest ought to play a secondary role in relation to economic policy. It has been argued at international forums that Australia is committed to reducing protectionism at least in the longer term and that it is prepared to accept a role for itself which would increasingly stress its primary produce, minerals and mineral processing industries. A reduced role for manufacturing would be accepted as Australia would be forced to import more and more manufactured goods for balance of trade reasons.
I wish to refer briefly to some of the remarks made by the honourable member for Murray where he tended to set the interests of rural industry against the interests of the manufacturing industry. I am well aware that often that has been a characteristic of debate within this Parliament. But I think one ought to recognise that whilst the

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2451

contribution of rural industry is extremely important in terms of creating the wealth of this country, the reality is that in the post-war period we deliberately pursued a strategy of developing a manufacturing industry which has come to be a very large employer indeed. Whilst there may be problems in terms of particular sections of industry-l certainly do not want to deny that there are very serious problems in the way in which Australian secondary industry is structured-the reality is that the protection of living standards and the survival of a very high proportion of the Australian population actually employed or dependent upon people employed in the manufacturing industry, makes that subject extremely important in a very direct sense. I do not want to compare those two matters but I think one has to understand when one is talking about manufacturing industry, that on many occasions people whose interests are perhaps more identified with the rural sector have spoken out very strongly about the protection that has been developed for manufacturing industry in Australia. In defence of that I would have to argue that Australia has deliberately gone ahead and developed a policy which I believe the Government is seeking to desert.

situation. As the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) is at the table, I mention again the example-not that I think it is particularly relevant to the issue of protection-that I mentioned yesterday during Question Time in relation to aluminium prices. The Minister has made some noises about market forces. The reality is that the price of aluminium ingot in Australia for each of the three major producers is exactly the same-$1,545 a tonne. When that price changes it changes at almost exactly the same time for each of the three producers. From the point of view of the manufacturers who are purchasing that ingot, they are completely certain that they are not operating in a free market. The price is, in turn, based on a producer price on the Hong Kong-Alcan producer price. It is a price which has not been particularly sensitive to movement. Other producer prices have seen and, of course, the spot price markets have seen dramatic changes. Those changes, being downward in terms of international prices, have not been reflected in Australian aluminium ingot prices at all. If anything, the Australian price might be regarded as having gone up in relation to the Hong KongAlcan producer price rather than having gone down.

I have already made some reference to the international restructuring that is taking place. I suggest that if this restructuring continues there almost certainly will be an inevitable reduction in effective rates of protection within Australia. For example, it has been estimated that over the past year or so a revaluation of currency has occurred which has resulted in a reduction of 8 per cent iri the effective rate of protection. Further, a revaluation of the order of 10 per cent could result in wiping out all protection for half of all manufacturing industry. It is true also that as a result of the restructuring which is occurring we are seeing more and more of the goods which are imported specifically related to the needs of the so-called resource-based industries. It has been estimated that as much as half of our current imports are for capital goods and transport equipment which are directly or indirectly related to resource-based industries.
Often the assumption has been made that by reducing the effective levels of protection one effectively reduces prices. That assumption, of course, is a naive one. The reality is that prices are increasingly being determined in a way which reflects the power of producers operating in a monopoly situation or, at least, in an oligopoly

We are increasingly in a situation where prices are not determined by market forces. They are determined by a few producers who control a particular product. We know that the most dominant industries within the Australian economy are, in fact, those industries in which there is the greatest concentration of economic power, the greatest degree of oligopoly. To suggest that if one removes protection somehow one is about to create a situation where prices will move downwards is to ignore the fact that we have within this country very imperfect economic competition and that price is, in fact, much more determined by the cost structure of the producers and by the goals of producers than it is by any market forces. So the assumption that, if we somehow reduce levels of protection and expose the Australian economy to international forces, somehow we will get a miraculous reduction in prices and consumers will get the benefits of the gains that might be achieved, is, I believe, very doubtful.
I think it is important to stress that, at a time in which many honourable members in the Government are increasingly talking in more enthusiastic ways about so-called market forces, what they are talking about is essentially what they would like to be the case rather than what the contemporary economic reality might be. Now, if that is true in terms of the domestic Australian economy, of course, it is also true internationally. When we

2452 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

talk about what is happening in terms of the international economy, particularly what is happening in terms of the countdes that might export to Australia, we are not talking about a situation in ASEAN where there is necessarily massive competition everywhere. We are talking about developing economies even within the Third World where the development that occurs very often occurs within large transnational corporations operating perhaps through subsidiaries and very often trading with themselves. One can imagine that the more the Australian economy becomes open, for example, to the ASEAN economy, the more we are simply going to have transnational companies being able to export into Australia certainly taking advantage of perhaps cheaper inputs within those countries but not necessarily operating within an internationally competitive market. I think it is extremely important to stress that point. There is a great deal of mythology about competition. It has been a strong ideology within the Liberal Party historically. The reality is that there is not a great deal of competition within the economic world today; there is increasingly less competition.
I referred to the fact that in recent weeks debate in this House has tended to sharpen somewhat. It has been made quite clear that the two sides of the House have been talking about two things-commitment to a free market economy and commitment to a planned economy. Continuing protection, where it is provided by this Government, in my view represents, as the honourable member for Adelaide pointed out, nothing more or less than sophisticated political opportunism. It is not part of any long term strategy to build an effective industrial base for the Australian economy.
The Opposition on the other hand wants to talk about planning and about a planned economy. The rejection of the Liberals of planning in the post-War period has been one of the greatest disasters of modern Australian industry. The reality is that modern capitalism is dependent now for its survival on the support of the State. There is no doubt that modern industry is dependent on subsidies. The logical outcome of free trade market orientated policies would be the destruction of the capitalist system. There is even an argument here for socialists to support the Industries Assistance Commission approach because that would hasten the demise of capitalism. On the other hand, the suffering caused by Friedmanism would be enormous and no socialist could ask his people to bear that suffering if it could be avoided. The solution is a planned economy.

Australia is the only country in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development which has no commitment to overall planning. We are not talking about socialists on-the one hand and free market economies on the other. Almost every country in the OECD-many of them are mixed economies-is committed to planning. Conservative governments repeatedly throughout the post-War period have rejected the concept of planning. That is absurd. What would a planned economy be within the context of this debate? We need to start with some view, as the honourable member for Adelaide suggested, of what the overall profile of Australian industry should be. Clearly, that profile needs to be based on a number of factors and not simply on narrow concepts of ecOnomic efficiency. We need to look. for example, at the overall effects of the development of a particular industry not merely in terms of profits. We have to look at the costs and benefits and to whom they would go with respect to particular industries. We have to look at industry not only in terms of its aggregate effects but also in terms of the economy and particular regions-something that the lAC was never very good at. The lAG, indeed, appears to have been quite insensitive to the social component of industry planning.
We need, I believe, to have some kind of selected industry or leading industry strategy. Not all industries will be equally important. Some industries are more important than others for various reasons. These reasons need to be spelt out and need to be debated. It is unfortunate that some of these issues opened up by the Jackson report have not really been pursued. Quotas and tariff protection should not be handed out as a licence to print money. Support ought to be given in return for specific commitments. There ought to be commitments to maintain levels of employment in an industry. There ought to be agreements about the type of investment powers to be pursued which involve consultation with the workers involved. 1believe that there is a lot to be said, as Jackson suggested, for the establishment of effective industry planning councils which are not merely advisory but which might replace the lAC as a planning body. They might be able to enforce agreements with respect to the way that industry should be developed. The investment of public money in industry in my view ought to be accompanied by public equity. There is no doubt that the Australian industry is still uncertain about its future and that large sections of it will wither on the vine, more or less, independently of levels of protection.

Customs TariffAmendment Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2453

The answer to this situation, in my view, is to those which act in a democratic sense that we

introduce into industry a much greater degree of have preferred to those in the great socialist ex-

planning than currently exists. I fully support the periment in Great Britain. There we have a mag-

amendment moved by the honourable member nificent array of industry planning. British Steel

for Adelaide. There is no doubt in my mind that was a great contribution to the economy of Bri-

this Parliament needs to be more involved in tain! Britain now loses a billion dollars a year.

industry planning. Let the members of the back What a great contribution! 1 shall move on to Bri-

bench economics committee say what they will tish Leyland, once a mighty car firm, subject to

but ultimately, I. believe, there is more chance of government planning, now it is in ruins.

decisions being made democratically if we can establish a planning basis in this country than if
those decisions were made within the market situation. Finally, the President of France, Premier Mitterrand, won a great victory against the forces
of free market economics. The French people

Mr Howe-Ah, come on. It was in ruins well before it was taken over by the Government. Don't be a liar.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Ian Robinson)-Order!

were not required to wear the continuing divisions Mr MOORE-Well, I think that is not a bad

and inequities of free market economics. That comment. I do not mind the honourable member

Government has placed the strongest commitsaying those things. But then socialists are not too

ment to planning. We need a similar commitment good at keeping--

in this country.

Mr HoweMr Speaker, I raise a point of

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Ian Robinson)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (5.46)-1 wish to respond to some of the comments made in the debate so far. It has been an interesting debate, particularly the speech made by the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe). 1 recall his dedication to socialist objectives but I think this afternoon we heard a splendid rendition of how a left wing

order. I think it is quite unfair for the Minister deliberately to misinterpret and to misrepresent my remarks to this Parliament. 1 am quite happy to debate with him, but 1 think we ought to do it on the basis of a bit of honesty.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no point of order. I call the Minister.
Mr MOORE-I was referring to the problems associated with socialist governments interfering in the market-place. 1 was also referring to the disasters of British Steel and British Leyland. 1 will

Labor Government would govern Australia. It would set out to create a planned economy. It would not talk about a mixed economy but would go straight for planned economy in which it would make all sorts of decisions relative to industry in Australia. Those sorts of criteria were not spelt

now refer to one other great effort that the British Government decided to make-the British Food
Corporation which came to Australia. The policy was: Let's spread the goodwill! So it came here
and established a significant State-owned show in
Queensland.

out and we do not know exactly what the planMr Lloyd-To grow peanuts.

ning would be aimed at.

Mr MOORE-To grow all sorts of things.

From what he said, one can only assume that What is left of that Corporation today? Not even

the planning would be aimed at worker control, a grunt! All those corporations have gone. What a

which is one of the terms. he threw around quite great contribution to planned economy! I will

readily. He did not say anything about labour leave that aspect now although it is enlightening

planning. He did not say anything about the directo hear the left wing in action.

tion of capital, which was implied. He did not say
anything about the nationalisation of industry in Australia. He did not say anything about the di-
rection or the limitation of profits and he did not say anything about the limitations or, shall we say,
capital tax or capital control. But a planned economy was very much what he was talking about.

Mr Howe-Get on to cheese.
Mr MOORE-Actually I was going to refer to the speech made by the honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd). The honourable member for Batman has read my thoughts. I can only say in that respect that he is a member who does an enormous amount of work and knows his subject

On top of that, we ought to look at one or two thoroughly. However, I have to defend the Indus-

of the great renditions of the planned economy. I tries Assistance Commission as I think honour-

do not leave aside the socialist states, or those able members will expect me to. I think the lAC

states which claim to be socialists but do not really in Australia is an integral part of economic policy.

practice what they preach, but let me look at It certainly goes out, I hope, as an independent

2454 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Wool Industry Amendment Bill

force to give its views, sometimes very hurtful to government and sometimes abrasing to individual members with individual interests. I hope that the lAC maintains its economic integrity and, without fear, comes forward with propositions or views on the economy which ought to be debated or drawn to the nation's attention. We are not saying that the Commission is always right, but it should be there. It serves a great part in the economy and makes a great contribution to the Government's economic stance.
Finally, the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford), who moved the amendment, spent some time talking about the need for greater care and attention to detail and a number of other matters. These included the proposition that a change of government would in his view bring about greater long term planning and those sorts of things. In the course of his dissertation, he said that I was somewhat negligent for not bringing this Bill on before, that all these Acts have to be amended each six months to validate the proposals. Now that shows great care and attention to detail! As he said, the difficulty is that the proposals were brought in on 2 December. He says that we are now past 2 May; therefore we have passed the six months. That is how good his attention to detail is. Six months would take us to 2 June, so when the honourable member pays attention to detail in the future he might pay it to that particular matter.
Mr Kerin-Mr Deputy Speaker, with your indulgence I indicate that to facilitate debate in this House, the Opposition does not propose to divide on this measure. The honourable member for Adelaide has made the Opposition's position clear on this amendment.
Amendment negatived.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Moore) read a third time.
WOOL INDUSTRY AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 7 May, on motion by Mr Nixon:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (5.52)-On behalf of the Opposition, I move the following amendment:

That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not denying the Bill a second reading, the House calls on the Government not to proceed with the sale of the Australian Wool Testing Authority as announced in the Review of Commonwealth Functions'.
I wish to comment on several matters during this debate, but mainly the proposal to revolve the Market Support Fund, to which most of the Bill is directed; secondly, the question of the expansion of the membership of the Australian Wool Testing Authority, at the same time when the Government is intent on selling that Authority; and, thirdly, the proposition also within the Review of Commonwealth Functions to sell certain wool stores. Addressing myself first of all to the major. part of this Bill, I say at the outset that it was the Australian Labor Party in government which introduced the reserve price scheme and it was the Australian Labor Party Government which. also set up the Australian Wool Corporation and it has put that industry on a very firm footing indeed. But again we have a situation where it is the Australian Labor Party which has to come to the help of the Australian wool industry.
Let us look at the matter of stabilisation because the revolving of the Fund is the very basis of stabilisation. Quite simply the principle is that some years growers pay in and some years the Fund pays out. There is an equity appeal in the provision before the House. The Australian Labor Party supports the principle of equity. The 5 per cent levy is now accepted. To vary the levy would be difficult because this would require an amendment to the Wool Industry Act and it would also be politically difficult given that the pressures to raise the levy would be most intense when wool prices were low. It is given that there are valid arguments saying that revolving of the Fund, giving the lapse between the pay-in period and the payout period, is administratively difficult. 1 would like to say here that once the mechanism is established, future pay-outs may be achieved more smoothly. The amount to be paid out is about $46m. This amount represents on average less than $600 a grower.
We must remember that the refund will relate to the level of contribution, so some growers will receive substantially more and others substantially less. In a drought year, cash in the hand will be welcomed by most, if not all, growers. Because incomes are down this year, few should be troubled by the need to pay tax on the refund. The wool brokers, who will have to bear the brunt of the burden of administering the refund, .have a legitimate complaint. There have been substantial negotiations between the Government, the brokers and the Australian Wool Corporation.

Wool Industry Amendment Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2455

Arising out of those discussions, the Government has agreed to recompense the brokers to the extent of $1.21 a client. For this money the brokers need to establish a list of eligible clients and the amount to be refunded. When this list is validated it is the responsbility of the wool brokers to bulk bill the Australian Wool Corporation and then to refund grower clients. The responsibility for tracing clients is to be carried by the brokers. If, after investigation, the client cannot be traced, the money will be returned to the Australian Wool Corporation.
The amending Bill acknowledges some admin istrative difficulties~for example, the ditftculties with growers who no longer operate and with the determining of the eligibility of growers who have engaged in forward selling. This problem is set out in the second reading speech of the Minister for Primary Industry, the honourable member for Gippsland (Mr Nixon). But it does ignore other potential ditftculties. The problem relating to estates which have been wound up still exists. What will happen in that case? People will also scek to make claims on behalf of deceased growers. I am pointing out that there are still some problems. The wool brokers tried to persuade the Government to reconsider this proposal, but to no avail. I consider that this action is based very much on a promise made by the right honourable member for New England (Mr Sinclair) to Mr von Bibra in 1974. Even so, the governments of the day have definitely been very much in favour of the stabilisation arrangement and the need t.o revolve the Fund. The Opposition is not opposed to that. We accept the equity argument. Promises made at that time must be adhered to. It is unfortunate that so much work has to occur, but I think this is the way it has to be.
The second point is the most important point we have to discuss in respect of the wool industry at this time and it relates to the sale of the Australian Wool Testing Authority. The Bin before the House includes a proposal to expand the membership of the Australian Wool Testing Authority at the very time that the Government is proposing to sell it. I will read from page 6 of the report now known as the razor gang's rcport. [t states:
We propose to offer for sale as a going concern . . . the Wool Testing Laboratory and some Commonwealth equity in the wool stores.
This decision, quite frankly, is in keeping with the blind ideology of the report as a whole. Lel us consider reports to government of other reviews. At least we can say that the report of the Coombs task force was designed to eliminate lurks and perks. It was designed to rationalise government

administration, to give the government of the day the reason for programs, and to determine whether the aims had been met and on what criteria the programs should be continued or stopped. In other words, it was an analytical approach to continuing programs of assistance to industry.
The razor gang's report, in contrast, is antiintellectual. It is not based on reason or analysis. It is based on prejudice, cynicism and materialism. One can look into this report for various quotes to get somc idea of the motivation behind it. The very first sentence in the very first paragraph slatcs that the review is the most significant undertaking of its kind ever undertaken. I suppose that is the phraseology of the right honourable member for New England. But more importantly on page I I it states:
The more government intervenes to change the impact of consumers' decisions through regulation and subsidies. the more control over the economy passes from the many to the few.
This proposal will again put the sovereignty of the many-the wool growers of this nation-into the hands of one private entrepreneur. That is the absolute reverse of the Government's criteria in terms of the whole approach of the razor gang. The Australian Wool Testing Authority meets all the criteria that the Government set down. It seems nonsense for the Government to propose its
sale. r think it is very obvious that the Minister
had no idea whatsoever of what the Australian Wool Testing Authority was. He had no idea of its history, of what its technological competence was and is, or of what its role was and is and of what its functions are. There are no valid non-ideological reasons or arguments for the sale of the Australian Wool Testing Authority, and al\ the people in country electorates know that well.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Mr KERIN~Before the suspension of the silting 1 was saying that the decision by the Government to put up for sale the Australian Wool Testing Authority was a supreme example of its ideology. In many ways it is ironic that the Prime Minister, the honourable member for Wannon (Mr Malcolm Fraser), is almost an old fashioned Marxist. He seems to think that the person or firm that owns the means of production, distribution and exchange is more important than what task is done, how it is carried out, to whom the benefIt accrues or how the costs are distributed. In general economic terms one would have thought that the balance and direction of investment and lhe economic and social efficiency of functions were more important than ownership. It is the supreme

2456 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Wool Industry Amendment Bill

irony that the Prime Minister and the Government seem to think that by selling something they actually change its function and make it better. That is crazy.
The Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) and the Government are making a pathetic attempt to justify this crazy decision. Yesterday, in answer to a question from me the Minister dug himself in and said that all was okay. He referred to New Zealand which has private test houses. In doing so he again revealed his ignorance. In New Zealand the wool tested is mainly cross bred wool. Only about 50 per cent of the wool is pre-sale tested, not 97 per cent as in this country. Absolute accuracy with respect to cross bred wool is not so important as it is with Merino and fine wools where every additional decimal fraction counts. After all, the Australian wool industry is the biggest in the world. Today the Minister, in answer to a question from the honourable member for Casey (Mr Falconer), retreated to a limited degree. He talked about an independent foundation being set up to take over the Australian Wool Testing Authority as a whole. Why do this? Is the Government so blinded by its ideology that it must sell everything that may pay? There is no sense in the Minister's saying that people have not asked him how the sale will be carried out. It is up to him to inform the House and the industry of the details of the Government's crazy decisions. So far we have seen two lines in the infamous razor gang report.
In the Senate today Government spokesmen indulged in an ideological show of force. Senator Tate asked Senator Chaney a question. Senator Chaney said that the important thing was ideology. He said that it showed the difference between the Government and the Opposition. The situation was peculiar. The Minister put up some obscure political reason. He said that the Government has to show off the difference between itself and the Opposition. If that is so, we on this side of the House are very happy to show where we are different on this issue. The Government and the Minister do not know what they are doing. If the Government can sell this body and increase the cost to the wool industry and the 80,000 or 100,000 wool growers, why does it not sell every other measurement and scientific body in Australia? What about the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation's National Measurement Laboratory? It is an official institution that engages in measurement. It has to be objective and its measurements have to be impeccable and stand up to scrutiny. To suggest selling off the CSIRO National Measurement

Laboratory would be just as crazy as what the Government is doing.
The simple fact is that the Government did not look at the functions of the Australian Wool Testing Authority. It does not seem to realise that this Authority has to be completely objective. The Government was simply intent on selling off the AWTA to some of the personal friends of Sir Phillip Lynch-at least that is what is being bandied about within the industry. I have no proof of that but one of the parties who are supposed to be wanting to get hold of the Perth Laboratory is the Westwools company. How could that happen when it is both a buyer and a seller? It is absolutely crazy. Of"course the Government is a rabble of people with conflicting views and interests on this issue. Some of the members are keeping rather quiet about it but I understand that there is a meeting tomorrow night or some time over the weekend, at Molong in the electorate of Calare. Members of the livestock and Grain Producers Association will be there. I know what their view is on this issue. Perhaps members of the National Country Party w:l! run a counter line. They seem to be able to divide the coalition on an issue, whether it be flat tax, Trans-Australia Airlines or the parliamentary secretary to the Minister for Primary Industry on the pig issue. They can run two lines at once, even within their own party. Let us look at the members who represent the great wool seats of this nation. Let us look at the wool industry organisations of this country whose members are not wide-eyed people or innocents but people who know exactly what they are talking about. Let us look at some of the groups in this country who are dead set opposed to this move by the Government. For example a Press release from the Australian Wool Testing Authority contained a unanimous resolution. It recommended that:
(i) the statutory status of the AWTA be preserved in view of its fundamental importance to the maintenance of confidence in international trade in Australian wool-its Certificates having become the cornerstone of the wool industry;
I will not read out the rest of the resolution but it is very strong, biting and opposed to the Government's move. Who were the bodies represented at this meeting? They were the National Council of Wool Selling Brokers of Australia, the Australian Council of Wool Buyers, the Wool Scourers and Carbonisers Association of Australia, the Federal Council of Private Treaty Wool Merchants, the Wool Textile Manufacturers of Australia, the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, the Australian Wool Corporation and the Australian Wool Council, !he United Farmers and Stockowners of South

Woollndusuy Amendment Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2457

Australia, the wool section of the Primary Industry Association of Western Australia and even the journals such as the Primary Industry Newsletter. An article in that journal stated:
The Federal Government's decision to sell the Australian Wool Testing Authority, the world's largest and most successful wool testing house, represents an incredible blunder. It is puzzling how AWTA fell within the razor gang's sights, and even more baffiing why it felt the full blade of the razor slash.
The most disturbing aspect of the affair is that neither the Australian Wool Corporation nor the Authority was consulted prior to the decision being announced. This seems to suggest that the case against AWTA was concocted by the Minister for Primary Industry and his departmental advisers.
Hardly anyone in this nation will stand up for the Government's decision. The back benchers will not stand up for it. Why is it that the Australian Labor Party, once again, has to speak up for .the Australian wool industry? Who on the back bench has said one word in favour of the Government's crazy decision? Cabinet Ministers tend to represent the wool seats. The razor gang could be said to be dominated by the shearer gang. The honourable member for Gippsland, the right honourable member for New England, the right honourable member for Wannon, the honourable member for Gwydir (Mr Hunt), and the honourable member for Corangamite (Mr Street) all hold key wool seats. The honourable member for Farrer (Mr Fife), the honourable member for Bass (Mr Newman), the Marxist-feminist honourable member for Denison (Mr Hodgman) and the honourable member for Darling Downs (Mr McVeigh) all represent great wool seats and some of those Ministers are in the Cabinet. We can expect that they will not say anything in opposition to the Government. We can forgive the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) because there are not many sheep in his electorate. The Cabinet is solidly behind the Government. It is only the Prime Minister, apparently, who can break Cabinet solidarity with impugnity.
Mr Young-Or the Minister for Communications--- the undertaker.
Mr KERIN-That is right. [ saw in a story from the Agricultural News Bureau today that the Government has already decided to back off on the one per cent increase in the interest rate for the wheat subsidy scheme. This is sensational news. If it is true it is the first time the Government has backed off. The article stated:
It is understood that legislation being framed by the department is for the commercial rate to be notionally reduced by one per cent for the purposes of subsidy calculations.

God knows what the banking industry will say jf that report is true. I return to the Wool Industry Amendment Bill. Where are the back bench members? Where is the honourable member for Hume (Mr Lusher), the honourable member for Kennedy (Mr Katter), the honourable member for Calare (Mr MacKenzie), the honourable member for Wakefield (Mr Giles), the honourable member for Maranoa (Mr Ian Cameron), the honourable member for O'Connor (Mr Tuckey), the honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd), the honourable member for Mallee (Mr Fisher), the honourable member for Eden Monaro (Mr Sainsbury), the honourable member for Bendigo (Mr Bourchier), the honourable member for Wilmot (Mr Burr), or the honourable member for Riverina (Mr Hicks) '? Those members represent the wool seats of this country. Why are they not saying anything against this proposal?
The only man in this House who has had courage to say something about this collection of moves which affects the wool industry is the honourable member for Canning (Mr Bungey). He gave notice of a motion regarding the proposed sale of the wool stores. He quite rightly drew the attention of the House to the fact that the Government might not even own the wool stores that it wants to sell. Perhaps I will refer to that matter later. What is the Government selling? The Australian Wool Testing Authority could be regarded as consisting of eight members. Will the Government sell ofT those eight people? Does the Authority comprise the 450 to 630 people who actually carry out its operations? Is the Government going to sell them off or is it going to sell off the three test houses. Is it going to sell them off separately or is it going to sell them off together? Today the Minister said he was going to sell them off as one unit so maybe we can take his word for that.
But just look at it hypothetically. If we tried to sel! each off individually, what the heck would happen? What would happen if we sold it off as one unit somehow'? God knows what the Government would sell it for. The assets are worth $5m and the buildings are owned by the Australian Wool Corporation. We do not know what sort of price will be appropriate. But just think of this transition arrangement, whether or not the test houses are sold separately. A central administration and central laboratory service from Melbourne apply to the other two test houses. What will happen to the people who work in these establishments? Does the Government really think

2458 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Wool Industry Amendment Bill

it can transfer sick pay, accrued leave and superannuation? Does it think the present wage determination will hold up? The storemen and packers would be irresponsible if they did not immediately go in and renegotiate the agreement that covers workers in the test houses. What will happen then to sales? There will be a heck of a problem with the transition.
Where is the gain? The Australian Wool Testing Authority costs the Government nothing; it costs the Australian Wool Corporation nothing; it costs the taxpayers nothing. So where is the gain? The only gain is perhaps for someone in private enterprise who will take it over. Already the Minister is speaking about a trust or some foundation taking it over. So why make a change at all? What will happen if the Government sells it to some private organisation which has a taxation liability? Let us just say that its value is $1 Om. One needs to get some return on one's capital. If its value is $10m one would need to make at least 10 per cent or 12 per cent. I think the present overdraft rate is 15.9 per cent. If follows that there is going to be at least a 50 per cent increase in test charges.
There is a need for absolute accuracy in this business. Every decimal point counts with respect to micron. It is absolutely important that yield and vegetable content is measured properly. What has been the performance of this testing authority? First of all, it has kept cost down. Let us look at comparisons between other test houses throughout the world on the basis of a 50 bale lot post-sale. To get decent comparisons we have to look at post-sale. The cost for that in Australia is $58.60. All of these figures relate to September 1980. In the United Kingdom the cost for the same job, allowing for exchange variations-I have worked this out carefully-is about $135.47. For Europe it is $200.06 and for New Zealand it is $95.50. If we could get a comparison we would see the same sort of difference in pre-sale testing. In Australia an average eight bale lot is tested for about $18 and no one in the world comes near that.
So I just cannot see the rationale for the Government's action on this matter. Even the razor gang's criterion is met by the AWTA. There is no cost to the Government, the AWTA is not inefficient and the costs of tests now are 4 per cent below the 1974 costs in nominal terms. The AWTA has a magnificent record. What if this authority is sold to the mates to whom they seem to think they are going to sell it? Ifthis happens an allegation of lack of impartiality will be able to be made. It depends on who gets control of this body.

Unless we have a body that is official, independent and impartial-we are operating in a commercial environment-allegations of lack of impartiality will be able to be made. Such a body has to be official, independent and impartial. There has to be absolute confidence in the trade on this matter.
Two private test laboratories have already gone broke due mainly to the fact that some of their tests did not stand up. The firms involved were the Wool Testing Service and the CIL company. What if the Government put the Authority into the hands of some private entrepreneur? How would technological innovation flow from such a body? What if it goes broke? The whole progress of technological innovation with respect to objective measurement in the wool industry will go down the gurgle-hole. This is a very serious situation indeed.
There is bound to be competition from other people if the Authority is sold in three parts. If it is sold to wool brokers, other wool brokers will come in. If it is sold to a consortium of brokers, where is the advantage to them, apart from making a little bit of money? But will buyers really trust someone else-someone who is also selling the wool? It is absolutely essential that the test data used by the Australian Wool Corporation to set the reserve price limits-the bareme-be set by an independent organisation whose credentials are impeccable. If it is sold to an independent collection of scientists, a trust or a foundation, what is new? I cannot see why the heck the Government wants to do this at all. The money from the sale of the AWTA would go to the Australian Wool Corporation, not to the taxpayers but the growers would have to pay more because of this frugal Fraser fiscal philosophy of opposition and hatred of public enterprise and in a situation where all private entrepreneurs have failed. So I think the whole rationale of the Government is absolutely crazy.
Let us look at the AWTA itself. Let me read to the House the membership of the Authority. The chairman is Mr Yeo. He is an independent member. Dr Andrews who represents the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation is another independent member. There is Mr Davidson representing the Australian Wool Corporation, Mr Nevile representing the Wool Textile Manufacturers of Australia, Mr Stuart representing the Wool Scourers, Carbonisers and Fellmongers Association of Australia, Mr Westmore representing the Australian Council of Woolbuyers and Mr Williams representing the National Council of Woolselling Brokers of Australia. They are all people with

Wool Industry Amendment Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2459

commercial, scientific or industrial experience whose credentials are impeccable. AWTA is a proper scientific body. If we look at the most recent report of the AWTA we can see how successful this organisation is. The people on the Authority are not wild old ideologues; they are people who know what the industry wants, they are people who have been part of the development of the AWTA and they know that they can do the job most efficiently for the Australian wool industry.
The Australian Wool Testing Authority was created as a separate statutory body by the Australian Wool Testing Authority Act in 1957. From the outset it was fully autonomous with control over its own assets, finances and staff. In 1963, in accordance with Part III of the Wool Industry Act 1962, it was reconstituted as a body corporate responsible to the Australian Wool Board. So it has progressed. For example a relatively minor statutory revision was effected in 1970 and, in 1973, the Australian Wool Board was formally subsumed into the Australian Wool Corporation by the Wool Industry Act 1972. From 1976 the Australian Wool Testing Authority has paid for itself all the way down the line and has been totally independent and free from the Australian Wool Corporation. There is absolutely no reason to sell this magnificent body. Any organisation that we have in this country which will carry out the functions and objectives of the AWTA has to be carried out by an official, independent and impartial body.
The current functions of the Authority as defined in section 57 of the Act are:
. . . to carry out tests by means of facilities provided, and equipment and materials supplied, by the Corporation, of wool and other fibres, whether natural or otherwise, and wool products and similar products made wholly or partly from other fibres; and to issue certificates and make reports in respect of tests carried out by the Authority.
In carrying out these functions the AWTA provides services to a number of key client groups, namely, wool growers, brokers, buyers and merchant topmakers; wool scourers, carbonisers, fellmongers and combers; textile processors, manufacturers, retailers and importers; and architects, builders and public purchasing institutions. The AWTA has fulfilled those functions. It has carried out its functions to provide services to the wool industry and the processing industry, from the grower right through to the final source in an impeccable, scientific and rational manner. It has been an excellent body. It is absolutely essential that this body continue.
I know that some of the back benchers might be unhappy with it because it is staffed by people on

the public payroll in some way. But it costs the taxpayer nothing. For example, I was quite surprised to hear the honourable member for Wilmot (Mr Burr) in a speech the other night ask why only 17,000 public servants are to be got rid of and why not get rid of the whole lot of the dead wood in the Public Service? I would have thought that he, with the fine wool that is grown in his electorate, at least would have been sticking up for wool growers in his electorate and saying that the AWTA should not be sold.
In the few minutes available to me, I will reflect on the notice of motion given by the honourable member for Canning with respect to the ownership of wool stores. The matter relates to the ownership of wool stores which passed from the Joint Organisation in 1953 to the Australian Wool Board and then to the Australian Wool Corporation. Again, the Minister has not given us any details. In going back through the Hansard reports and the history of the Wool Corporation, I was very interested to read a speech by Sir Earl Page made on 27 November 1953. I do not know what the Wool Corporation will do or what criteria it will use to sell off some of the wool stores. I do not see the rationale behind this sale at all. Will the stores be sold to another statutory corporation or will they be sold on the private market? Will the opportunity be taken to get rid of a few surplus stores? I guess that is fair enough. But the confusion arises in the minds of growers because in a very simple sense the growers could regard themselves as the buyers way back in 1953. In other words, the Government does not really have any equity in the wool stores any more to require them to be sold. It is the growers themselves who since 1953 have owned the wool stores. The stores were built during the Second World War to house accumulated stocks which were transferred to the Joint Organisation in 1945. In 1953 the Government purchased the wool stores from the Joint Organisation. The funds used to finance the purchase were drawn from the unspent balance of the wool contributory charge trust account. Growers had paid into this account principally for the purpose of providing operating expenses for the Joint Organisation. Hence, this is the basis to the growers' claim of ownership.
I think that with sophisticated argument one could get around that problem. The doubt remains, however, and the Minister has to clear this up. To sum up the Opposition's case, we agree with the revolving of the growers' levy and the market support fund-because we set them up. The decision to sell the Australian Wool Testing Authority is one of the craziest that any government in this country has carried out in respect of

2460 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Wool Industry Amendment Bill

the wool industry. I repeat that we have an orSince we have been in government we have res-

ganisation which is objective, official, independent tored a number of provisions, for example, tax-

and impartial. [t is essential that the Authority reation concessions for the provision of fodder and

main that way. What the Government is trying to water as well as granting other concessions. We

do is cause the Authority's integrity to collapse. I have given a certainty to promotion funds for a

am pleased to move the amendment.

number of industries which include the wool in-

dustry. We have provided a Primary Industry

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Is the amendment Bank which is of inestimable value to the primary

seconded?

industry sector. In this legislation we are honour-

Mr Campbell-Mr Deputy Speaker, I second the amendment and reserve my right to speak.

ing the promise to provide a revolving fund whereby the contributions of previous wool growers will now be returned. We have also

Mr BUNGEY (Canning) (8.22)-J say at this stage that I oppose the amendment proposed by the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin). Firstly, the content of the Wool Industry Amendment Bill relates to changing the membership of the Australian Wool Testing Authority and refers

introduced a system of income equalisation deposits which have allowed primary producers to average their incomes over good and bad seasons. As well, we have restored the superphosphate and nitrogenous fertilisers subsidies which were abolished by the previous Labor Government.

to provisions for a revolving fund for the contriI have mentioned only a few of the things this

butions made to the wool support trust fund. In Government has done; I have not mentioned the

that case, I think the amendment moved by the great damage to the rural industry done in the

Opposition is not relevant to the Bill before the period 1972-75. In looking at the wool industry

House. I will point out later certain factors which and after listening to the nice statements of the

I think support the amendment moved by the Ophonourable member for Werriwa, we realise that

position. However, I point out very clearly that probably the greatest damage to the wool industry

the amendment is not relevant to the legislation was done when the Labor government proposed

we are debating at this stage.

to reduce the reserve price level for wooL That

J noted with some surprise that the Opposition spokesman claimed that members of the Australian Labor Party had been supporters of the wool industry for so long. As far as rural industry is concerned since this Government came to power many improvements have been made. During the period 1972-75 the Labor Party did its best to demolish rural industries in this country. Honourable members will remember that at that time the Labor Party removed all incentive for stock, fodder and water conservation. We remember very well. (Quorum formed). The Labor Party pretended to support agricultural industries. That was very far from the fact. The record of the Labor Party in the period 1972-75 proves this quite conclusively. In every case, the promises of the Labor Party have proved to be rhetorical rather than giving performance.

had a disastrous effect on the wool growing industry. I ask honourable members to compare that action with the constancy, regularity and certainty of this Government in relation to the reserve floor price plan for wool.
I pointed out earlier that the amendment is not relevant to the legislation. Quick frankly, I have some sympathy for the amendment. If it were in a relevant place, probably [ would support it. It is not in a relevant place at this stage because we are looking at a Bill containing one set of amendments to the Wool Industry Act. The Opposition amendment proposes to go further and review administrative functions within the whole Public Service. I will look at certain of those aspects and in particular at the recommendation that the Australian Wool Testing Authority should be sold. In this regard I support the comments and the argument put foward by the honourable member for

In 1972 Mr Grassby, a former member of this Werriwa. As I pointed out before, this is not the

House and a member of the Australian Labor time to vote on the amendment but it would be a

Party, promised to create a Primary Industry matter for further study at a later date when the

Bank. Who has provided the Primary Industry legislation comes up for examination. I accept

Bank? The Liberal and National Country parties that there is a need for an independent board to

currently in government have provided that bank. control wool testing in Australia. I believe that the

That bank was promised five years previously by a Australian Wool Testing Authority has proved its

Labor Government. It is no use the honourable performance in its present state. I seek leave to

member for Werriwa pretending that he is a suphave incorporated in Hansard a certain seption

porter and protector of farming industries. Everyfrom the report of the Wool Testing Authority

one knows well and truly that that is not the case. headed 'Review of Operations 1979-80'.

Wool Industry Amendment Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2461

Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
The AWTA is a body corporate responsible to the Australian Wool Corporation, but must be rccognised as being independent and objective in its transactions with all who use its services and who rely on its Certificates. Regulations issued and observed by members of the International Wool Textile Organisation, based in Brussels, require that testing houses such as AWTA must be independent of parties to the sales transactions. At I.W.T.O. Conferences in recent years, I have addressed the delegates on two occasions to give them assurances that, although AWTA is accountable to the Australian Wool Corporation, there has been no interference or direction. On the contrary, the Australian Wool Corporation has always dealt with AWTA on an "arm's length" commercial basis, ensuring that the AWTA is responsible for the management of its own affairs.
The Australian Wool Board originally capitalised the AWTA by way of loans, however, the AWTA is now financially self-supporting. The loans have been repaid, and assets totalling nearly $8,000,000 gross are now financed internally. We have no shareholders on whom to call for additional capital, so we must ensure that AWTA profits are sufficient to cope with inflation and its effect upon the cost of replacing plant, equipment and inventories.
Profits generated by the AWTA are ploughed back into the enterprise to keep it self-supporting and to maintain and improve service.
The AWTA is not required to pay "dividends", but its major contribution to the industry-apart from its leading role in implementing objective measurement of wool-has been its achievement in providing accurate, impartial and efficient testing services. The remarkable fact is that, since [974, the AWTA has been able to contain its charges to clients until recently, when certain anomalies were adjusted and price increases were made to bring charges into line with actual costs of individual services.
LINDSAY J. YEO, Chairman
Mr BUNGEY-I thank the House. I point out quite clearly that the Review of Commonwealth Functions, which studied the Commonwealth Public Service, did not logically and sensibly cover the activities of the Australian Wool Testing Authority. The history of the Australian Wool Testing Authority shows that it has been financed -originally, I admit, by loans by the Australian Wool Corporation, or the Australian Wool Board, its predecessor-----by growers' contributions and by the charges made in relation to it. It is staffed by the Australian Wool Corporation. Its assets in the way of buildings and land are owned by the Australian Wool Corporation. It has received no Government subsidy. It has never called on Government funds in any way. It is quite clear that it is an asset of the wool growers of Australia. I point out that yesterday the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) confirmed that any proceeds of the sale of this body should go directly to the Australian Wool Corporation, as the representative of the wool growers of Australia. This proves conclusively that in no way does the Australian Wool Testing Authority rely on

Government support or Government funds, nor in any way does it increase the contribution of the public sector. It is effectively an organisation financed, representative of and acting on behalf of wool growers. I point out also that there is international concern over the decision to sell the Australian Wool Testing Authority. I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard a telex which was forwarded from the International Wool Secretariat meeting in New Zealand about one week ago.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
I.W.T.O. is deeply concerned at the proposal that AWTA may be sold to commercial interests. Members of AWTA are strongly of the view that in its unique function between sellers and buyers AWTA must be and be seen to be an official independent and impartial body.
Mr BUNGEY-This motion was passed by II countries to nil, although there were eight abstentions on the ground that people did not know what the matter involved. It expressed very clearly the International Wool Textile Organisation's concern about the proposed sale. Additionally, I understand that the Government has received a protest from the Government of India because India uses the official tests of the Australian Wool Testing Authority for determination of its duty assessment arrangements. I understand a similar situation applies in relation to Taiwan and South Korea. The fact is that, as a statutory organisation, it is recognised by other government bodies. [ point out in passing that the three areas I have mentioned are areas of increasing importance for raw wool marketing so far as Australia is concerned. The Australian Wool Testing Authority also looked at the sale and, in a Press release of 8 May 1981, it expressed its opposition to it. That opposition was expressed as being representative of all sections of the Australian wool industry-growers, dealers, brokers, processors and exporters. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard the Press release of 8 May 1981.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
8th May 1981
PRESS RELEASE:
Members of the Australian Wool Testing Authority, representing all of the private sectors of the wool industry as well as associated textile and technical interests, met in Melbourne today to discuss the Government's decision to sell the Authority to the private sector.
It was resolved unanimously that:
Members of the Australian Wool Testing Authority recommend, through the Australian Wool Corporation, to the Minister for Primary Industry that:

2462 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Wool Industry Amendment Bill

(i) the statutory status of the AWTA be preserved in view of its fundamental importance to the maintenance of confidence in international trade in Australian wool-its Certificates having become the cornerstone of the wool industry;
(ii) the AWTA not be sold to vested sectional interests, as this would impeach the independence of its wool testing laboratories, whose Certificates presently receive international recognition as the impartial basis for trading between buyers and sellers of wool;
(iii) a delegation comprising representatives from the Authority, the Australian Wool Corporation, the International Wool Textile Organisation, the Wool Council of Australia and the Federated Storemen and Packers' Union wait on the Deputy Prime Minister, the Minister for Primary Industry, the Chairman of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions and other appropriate Ministers; and that
(iv) the delegation be asked to impress upon those Ministers the urgent need for a thorough inquiry into the implications of the sale of AWTA to the private sector before implementing any move to change the status of AWTA.
Bodies represented at the Meeting included:
The National Council of Wool Selling Brokers of Australia
The Australian Conncil of Wool Buyers The Wool Scourers' and Carbonisers' Association of Australia The Federal Council of Private Treaty Wool Merchants The Wool Textile Manufacturers of Australia Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation The Australian Wool Corporation
Through its membership, the Authority was also able to receive the views of the international Wool Textile Organisation.
Mr BUNGEY-I thank the House. Also, there has been substantial local opposition to the proposal. A number of farmer organisations and a number of branches of the Liberal Party of Australia which are aware of country problems have opposed the proposal to seII the Australian Wool Testing Authority. For instance, the Western Australian Primary Industry Associationformerly the Farmers Union and an organisation with which I was very closely associated before my membership in this House-has always been a prime mover in wool marketing improvement and innovation but it has expressed its opposition to the action. There have been a number of other expressions of opposition from the Live Stock and Grain Producers Association of New South Wales, the Farmers and Graziers Organisation of Victoria, and so on. I think their opposition is based on the fact that at no stage prior to this announcement has there been consultation with the Wool Corporation.
There is one very basic point of opposition to the proposal, and that is that wool testing is the cornerstone of the marketing of the Australian wool clip. It is absolutely basic that wool testing

and wool marketing go together. We cannot pretend otherwise but, if we look at the performance of private enterprise in regard to innovation in wool marketing, the number of innovations is very scant indeed. Probably only two organisations have made any real contribution to innovations within wool marketing, and these are the Economic Wool Producers Organisation and the Grazcos organisation, both of which are semi-cooperatives. The private industry within the wool industry handling and marketing system has had a dismal record as far as innovation and improvement are concerned. What has been achieved has been achieved despite their efforts.
I point out also that most of the improvement in wool selling, such as sale by separation and the universal use of objective measurement for wool sale and wool transactions has been achieved by the efforts of the Australian Wool Corporation and the Wool Testing Authority. We can still expect further amendments and innovations, and these will be based very largely on the need objectively and trustworthily to judge and grade wool. It is not a thing that we can pass over to private enterprise or to some unofficial organisation.
I noticed that in answer to a question several days ago the Minister for Primary Industry referred to the performance of private wool testing houses in New Zealand and the United Kingdom. 1 noticed he very wisely refused to look at the experience in Australia where, until at least 1976, we had independent and privately owned wool testing services. They attempted to take short cuts so the test results were not conclusive or reliable. The whole effect of that was that it damaged very much the validity and the certainty with which buyers of Australian wool could assess grading performances. It is very important that we have a statutory authority to do these things properly. If the Minister looks very carefully at the history of the wool testing services which operated some time ago he will see that the taking of short cuts by private enterprise just does not work in this area. I point out also that, although a private organisation does work in New Zealand, there is still an official wool testing organisation under the New Zealand Wool Board. It carries out testing in that country. Our other major International Wool Secretariat partner, South Africa, has an organisation also which works under the auspices of the South African Wool Board.
Perhaps one of the arguments we could advance for selling the organisation is that it is not efficient but that argument cannot be sustained in any way. For the past 10 years, the net charges by the Australian Wool Testing Authority have been no more than 2 per cent to 3 per cent. That is over

Wool Industry Amendment Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2463

a 10 year period. The Authority has really tried to keep costs down. It is a dedicated group that is doing a great job for the wool industry. It has earned trust internationally and nationally. Admittedly its costs are minimised by the substantial lift in the volume of wool being tested. Currently some 93 per cent to 95 per cent of the Australian wool clip is tested in certain ways at least at a pre-sale stage. The current authorisation for the Wool Testing Authority also requires it to carry out a number of other tests, such as post-sale testing and flammability tests. To a large degree these things are not necessarily economical but they are being done at this stage.
The Australian Wool Testing Authority is run in every way by the charges made on wool growers. Its assets have been built up by wool growers' funds. It is not staffed by public servants. It is in no wayan indication of bigger government. It is the result of an agreement between the wool industry and government that there should be a statutory authority doing this testing. I ask the Minister to answer at some stage the questions I am about to pose. I do not think they are relevant to this Bill but I think they are relevant to further discussions on the wool industry. I ask: What benefits will the Government derive from the sale of the Wool Testing Authority? What benefits will the Australian Wool Corporation, the wool growers, the wool users, the International Wool Textile Organisation and the International Wool Secretariat derive from the sale of this Authority? If the Minister looks at this matter clearly and honestly he will see that there will be very little benefit in any way. I think that the decision to sell the Authority was made in good faith. I think that it is a bad decision and should be reviewed immediately.
The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), in introducing the report of the Review of Commonwealth Functions committee, suggested that a joint parliamentary committee ought to look at the functions of statutory authorities. I think that there is sufficient doubt at this stage on the national, international and local scene to justify the referral of the sale of the Australian Wool Testing Authority to that committee. I recommend that the sale of the Authority should be the committee's first reference. I believe that the decision was made in good faith but I believe it needs review. I feel that a joint parliamentary committee would be the best organisation to look at it fairly and without politics. I support the Bill but I have the reservations I have expressed about the sale of the Wool Testing Authority. At this stage I will not support the amendment moved by

the Opposition because I do not think it is appro" priate to this Bill.
Mr CAMPBELL (Kalgoorlie) (8.42)-Given the excellent case made out by the honourable member for Canning (Mr Bungey), I am at a loss to understand why he will not support the Opposition's amendment to the Wool Industry Amendment Bill. Clearly the amendment is relevant. If the amendment were carried it would make it very hard for the Government to go ahead with its crazy plan to sell the Australian Wool Testing Authority. I have pleasure in supporting the amendment. I have no strong feelings about the Bill. I do not wish to oppose it. Trecognise the administrativedifficulties in revolving the Market Support Fund. No doubt this Bill will attend to certain anomalies. I wish to dwell on clause 14 (1). I believeit is extremely important. The clause refers to the membership of the Australian Wool Testing Authority. The Bill seeks to amend section 46 of the principal Act to increase the membership of the Authority from eightto 10. The explanatory memorandum circulated in the name of the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) states in relation to clause 14 (1):
The Wool Council of Australia is of the view that, as growers pay for the bulk of wool testing, the Council should be represented directly on the Australian Wool Testing Authority. This section provides for their representation. Additionally, the section provides for the Private Treaty Merchants also to be represented on the Authority, and for the change of name of one of the member bodies of the Authority.
The Australian Labor Party certainly concurs in the view of the Wool Council of Australia. Those who grow the wool and pay for the bulk of the testing should be represented on the body that makes the decisions regarding that testing. The Minister is to be commended on this occasion. He has bowed to the overwhelming logic and equity of the case. However, we have here a classic catch-22 situation. The Minister is moving to implement the wishes of the industry while simultaneously he is presiding over the sale of some of its assets. The proceeds of the sale of these asets will not go into Consolidated Revenue. They will go to the Wool Corporation. In the words of the Minister in the House yesterday, they will be returned to the growers. The Minister has collossal ignorance and monstrous nerve. The Wool Testing Authority was set up by the growers in what they perceived to be their best interests. The Authority has kept down the cost of providing the necessary services that have helped the wool industry so much. I point out to the honourble member for Canning that in 1971 I sold wool at 18c a kilo because the heroes of the National Country Party and the Liberal Party would not put a floor price on wool at the time.

2464 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Wool Industry Amendment Bill

Mr Lloyd-There was a floor price for wool at the time.

Mr CAMPBELL-There was a voluntary floor price but the pool ran out of money. That is what happened. I sold the wool. I should know. The trouble is that most members of the Government parties have never been engaged in the industry.

Mr Lloyd-I was selling wool at exactly the same time, so be careful with what you are saying.

Mr CAMPBELL-The honourable member did not sell his wool in Fremantle. The Australian Wool Commission has made a profit from the operations of this Authority. This golden crown of the free enterprise philosophy has made a profit. In 1976-77 it made $0.92m; in 1977-78, $1.8m; in 1978-79, $0.66m and in 1979-80, $1.25m. That is a return of about 12 per cent on the capital employed. The Minister is saying to the wool growers that, for the sake of Liberal Party ideology, they must hand over to the private sector this profitable business. The private sector would not tolerate such high-handed interference and neither should the free enterprise wool growing industry of this country. Even members of the National Country Party should be able to see that the Australian Wool Testing Authority is merely a tool of the great free enterprise wool growing industry. Yet they rest content to see the Government steal the tools that these people believe are necessary to protect their interests. The Government is throwing away the tools that this great free enterprise industry feels it needs. I was amazed to hear a member of the National Country Party greet this decision with enthusiasm when it was first mentioned during the statement of Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) on the Review of Commonwealth Functions. I hope he has given the matter more thought since then.

What does the industry think about this matter? Let us see what it thinks about it. A Press release wsa issued by the Australian Wool Testing Authority. It is worthwhile considering this statement. it reads:

Members representing

of all

the Australian Wool of the private sectors of

Testing the wool

iAnduuthstorryitay~

well as associated textile and technical interests, met in Mel-

bourne today to discuss the Government's decision to sell the

Authority to the private sector.

It was resolved unanimously that:

Members of the Australian Wool Testing Authority recommended, through the Australian Wool Corporation, to the Minister for Primary Industry that:

(i) the statutory status of the AWTA be preserved in view of its fundamental importance to the maintenance of confidence in international trade in Australian wool-its Certificates having become the cornerstone of the wool industry;

(ii) the AWTA not be sold to vested sectional interests, as this would impeach the independence of its wool testing laboratories, whose Certificates presently receive international recognition as the impartial basis for trading between buyers and sellers of wool;
(iii) a delegation comprising representatives from the Authority, the Australian Wool Corporation, the International Wool Textile Organisation, the Wool Council of Australia and the Federated Storemen and Packer's Union--
There are some strange bedfellows there--
wait on the Deputy Prime Minister, the Minister for Primary Industry, the Chairman of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions and other appropriate Ministers; and that
(iv) the delegation be asked to impress upon those Ministers the urgent need for a thorough inquiry into the implications of the mle of AWTA to the private sector before implementing any move to change the status of AWTA.
Let us look at the bodies which were represented at the meeting. They were the National Council of Wool Selling Brokers of Australia-a body which, no doubt, is in the forefront of socialism; the Australian Council of Wool Buyers-more dreaded socialists; the Wool Scourers and Carbonisers Association of Australia; the Federal Council of Private Treaty Wool Merchants-more Marxists, ] suppose; the Wool Textile Manufacturers of Australia; the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation; and the Australian Wool Corporation. They are all exalted bodies and bodies in which] am sure honourable members opposite would have the utmost faith. The industry has clearly informed us as to what it feels about it, yet the Government intends to go ahead. Let us see what Noddy's mate had to say. I refer to Hansard of 22 May 1957. The then Minister for Primary Industry, the right honourable member for Lowe (Sir William McMahon), in his second reading speech on the Australian Wool Testing Authority Bill stated:
The purpose of this Bill is to establish an Australian Wool Testing Authority to control and administer a wool-testing service in Australia. The legislation is the result of many months of investigation by a committee of wool-buyers, brokers, scourers, fellmongers and carbonizers, representatives of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization, and officers of the Department of Primary Industry. The committee examined in detail the possibilities of starting a testing service in Australia, the need for which has been felt for many years. The Australian Council of Wool Buyers was largely instrumental in the formation of the committee, and wide support for the proposals has been evident all through the negotiations.
That is what the then Minister for Primary fndustry said in 1957. The Chairman of the Wool Board, Ian McLachlan-anyone who knows the McLachlans will know that they are probably the most successful pastoralists in Australia; certainly the biggest-is very closely related to that organisation and he is certainly a man of very hard-nosed

Wool Industry Amendment Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2465

business principles. Yet he has said unequivocally not be disadvantaged'. He repeatedly referred to

that the Government is doing the wrong thing. He the industry as not being unduly disadvantaged.

said quite clearly that when this function was in He did not talk much about its being advantaged.

the hands of private industry it was a disaster. It There was no positive mention of the aspects that

was such a disaster that the private interests went would be of advantage to the industry. All

broke. They did no good for themselves and they honourable members opposite can talk about is

did no good for the Australian wool industry. If the industry not being unduly disadvantaged. I

the Chairman of the Wool Board makes a statesuggest to honourable members opposite that the

ment like that it must have some weight to it. Cerindustry does not want to be unduly disadvan-

tainly, members of the Liberal Party and their taged, or disadvantaged in any way whatsoever. It

National Country Party colleagues should give is all very well for the gentlemen farmers opposite

some credence to that statement. Often we hear to adopt this high-handed attitude. At least one of

honourable members on the other side of the them has been able to offset his lack of rural ex-

House quote the well-worn cliche that the busipertise by the use of somebody else's money-a

ness of business is business. I thoroughly agree sort of book entry, body snatching, one might say.

with them. I think it is a very good adage. We should be looking towards how the industry could better be served by an organisation that has as its main task the maximising of profits. Of course, that is what any private industry would have to do. How will this serve the interests of the industry better than an organisation such as the Australian Wool Testing Authority, which has as its objectives:
(1) to maintain a national and international reputation for technical expertise and commercial independence.
I ask whether this could be done by the private sector. The answer is maybe. I have no doubt that maybe it could be done. It is most unlikely that it would be done. Certainly it has never been done in Australia. Could it be done any better by the private sector? Obviously not and nobody seriously suggests that it could. Let us have a look at the second objective of the Australian Wool Testing Authority. It states:

It must be self-evident that the sale of the Australian Wool Testing Authority is most likely to lead to a reduction of service to the industry, or a reduction of standards to the industry. It certainly will lead to an escalation of costs. We are talking about the great free enterprise wool growing industry. I do not think anyone seriously suggests that wool could be grown any better or any more efficiently than it is done at present by the free enterprise system. There is no argument about that at all. This Government's present policy proposes to take away the very things that the industry needs to keep efficient. This Government is taking away the very things the industry needs to become a viable force in the world. We are faced with a situation in which we will probably have a relative decline in oil prices in the next five years. This will lead to an upsurge in the sale of synthetics. Undoubtedly we will have another attack on the wool market at the same time that the

To provide accurate, impartial and efficient testing services, as required by the wool industry and textile industry, at a minimum cost.
I ask: Could it do that? Obviously, it cannot do it

Government is curtailing funds to the industry and doing all sorts of things to make it much more difficult for the industry to prosper.

at a minimum cost because it would have to maxiMr Tuckey-The Wool Corporation says it is

mise its profits. This is the principle on which the very bullish.

free enterprise system works about which those honourable members opposite who understand this principle are always telling us. The third

Mr CAMPBELL-What did the honourable member say? I like to respond to interjections.

objective states:

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)-

To maximise nett income to the Australian wool growing Order! The honourable member will ignore the in-

industry, by encouraging the optimum application of objec. tive measurement by wool growers, brokers, buyers and both

terjections and address the Chair.

local and overseas processors.

Mr CAMPBELL-Mr Deputy Speaker, you

How will a private enterprise function maximise break my heart. The Government has been mon-

the net income to Australian wool growers when strously overbearing in its attitude. It has moved

its function must simultaneously be to maximise its calculator to stifle initiative and it has imposed

its profits? Of course, that is arrant nonsense. Noon the Australian Wool Testing Authority an ill-

body seriously believes that it can do that. We conceived ideological meddling such that the pri-

have been presented with a bit of ideological vate sector in this country would not tolerate and

buffoonery. Everybody recognises that. The Minshould not be expected to tolerate. Let us look at

ister recognised that this morning when answering some of the service commitments of the Aus-

a question. He used vague words such as: 'it will tralian Wool Testing Authority. These are:

2466 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Wool Industry Amendment Bill

To ensure that service commitments are realistic, clearly defined, monitored and achieved by-maintaining regular liaison with clients in Australia and overseas,
Surely we need an impartial authority such as the present Australian Wool Testing Authority with its unimpeachable integrity to be able to do that. If it is sold to the private sector it will take years or forever for it to achieve that sort of trust and recognition. Going on past performance obviously it will never be able to do it. Costs should be held constant for as long as possible recognising that raw wool testing charges are borne either directly or indirectly by the wool growers. Will the private sector give any recognition to that? Of course it will not. It will not be able to. It will have to maximise its profits in order to survive. It cannot possibly do this, yet this Government is prepared to go ahead for its own inane ideological reasons and impose these sorts of imposts on the industry at a time when the industry should be able to look forward with some confidence to the future. I commend the amendment to the House and suggest that the honourable member for Canning give some serious thought to his position.
Mr HICKS (Riverina) (8.57)-1 have pleasure in supporting the Wool Industry Amendment Bill, which is designed to amend the Wool Industry Act 1972. As the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) and previous speakers have noted, this Bill provides amendments which are designed to correct anomalies related to administrative procedures for refunding market support funds to wool growers which were not foreseen when the Act was last amended in May 1980. I commend the Government on its introduction of this Bill. 1know I would be expressing the views of most honourable members in this chamber in congratulating the total wool industry. 1 feel this congratulation is due because of the way in which the wool industry has learned to help itself perhaps more than most sections in either the primary or secondary industries.
Since 1970 a reserve price scheme has been in operation for wool which is sold at auction and this amounts to approximately 80 per cent of the Australian wool clip. This scheme is administered by the Australian Wool Corporation which is a Commonwealth statutory body. The scheme ensures that auction prices do not fall below a predetermined minimum for reserve levels. Although at the time of the setting up of the floor price scheme wool prices were extremely depressed, wool growers opted to help themselves by paying a five per cent levy on their gross returns from wool. Wool growers also pay a three per cent levy on their income from wool to finance wool promotion.

Although substantial cGntributions come from the Commonwealth for wool promotion worldwide and for research the Australian wool industry is very much a self-help industry. However, it is facing a number of major problems at the moment. One of the most serious problems facing not only the wool industry but also primary industry as a whole is the drought situation. In relation to -the wool industry the drought can be most devastating because in most wool growing areas surface 'water is the first thing that dries up in a drought. We find that the flocks, particularly those of the Riverina, the area from which I come, are on semi-arid country. Of course, this depletes the flocks and makes a great difference to the wool grower.
Mr Fisher-it is magnificent wool, though.
Mr HICKS-The best wool in the world.
Mr Good luck-- Where is that?
Mr HICKSRiverina. Reference is often made to the drought of 1968 and its repercussions, but I have spoken to pastoralists who claim that they still have not got over the drought of the 1940s. It is to be hoped that in all States there will be a combination of State and Federal funds, together with a great deal of State and Federal cooperation, to help alleviate the strain on all sections of the wool industry and help those people immediately dependent on that industry. As most of us know, we have a situation in which the States are asking for the Commonwealth to pay the first lump sum in respect of drought relief. In the case of New South Wales, that amount is $10m and lower amounts are involved in the other States. The Federal Government comes in with a subsidy paid at the ratio of $3 to $1 for the rest of the expenditure on drought relief. (Quorum formed). I was talking about the drought relief provided by the Commonwealth and the State governments. I was saying that the Commonwealth Government provides a lump sum which, in the case of New South Wales, is $10m. This $10m is provided only in one financial year. Some thought should be given to allowing this lump sum to extend over more than one financial year because of the situation in which we now find ourselves. The present market indicator floor price for clean wool is 365c a kilogram clean. Because this amount is well below the present average which, I believe, is around 414c and because the pipeline is near enough to empty, 1 believe that there is a case for the floor price to be lifted to at least 400c a kilogram.
It was pleasing to note that in reply to a question on 29 April, the Minister for Foreign Affairs

Wool Industry Amendment Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2467

(Mr Street) stated that this Government had exof course, has necessitated the present Review of

tended credit guarantees of up to $40m of export Commonwealth Functions. Labor members also

credits with the Polish Government to enable the continue to claim that the Labor Government

continuation of Poland's traditional purchases of introduced the reserve price scheme for wool.

wool along with skins and hides from this country. Even if one were not a member of parliament at

Any amendments which will assist wool growers that time. I certainly was a member of parlia-

in obtaining their 5 per cent original investment ment before the coalition government lost office

which, no doubt, many thought they would never at the end of 1972-one should know that we

see again, is a helpful step, particularly for introduced the reserve price in 1970, at one stage

growers who are feeling the effects of this present a flexible price and also a fixed reserve price.

drought.

Mr Campbell-Without any money.

I will say now a few words on the sale of the Australian Wool Testing Authority. The honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) and the honourable member for Canning (Mr Bungey) had quite a few things to say about the matter. I think a lot of what they said was very relevant. Coming as I do from a great wool growing area, I have had quite a number of telegrams and protests on this matter. I read a statement made by the Minister for Primary Industry who said something which I think is quite relevant to the argument. He said:
There will be no rush into selling the AWTA. In fact, the final decision on the sale of the Authority will be determined by the Minister for Primary Industry in consultation with the

Mr LLOYD-For the information of the honourable member, that government was the only government which was actually prepared to put some government money into assisting wool growers at a time of low prices. The honourable member should check his facts before he starts pontificating in this place about wool. Let us look also at the reserve price issue when Labor was in power. I can clearly remember a certain day when Labor was in power in the early 1970s when a good percentage of the wool growers of Australia demonstrated in front of Parliament House. (Quorum/ormed). They were demonstrating because Labor was in the process of reducing the re-

Australian Wool Corporation.

serve price for wool. I remember that at that time

The Government's fundamental aim is to ensure that the the Labor members for Dawson and EdenAWTA continues to operate in precisely the same fashion as it Monaro were running backwards and forwards

does today.

between that meeting in front of Parliament

I know that the Minister has been having talks with leaders in the wool industry. I hope that, out of the talks and out of some of the thoughts that have come from honourable members, a satisfactory solution will be found to that problem. I support the amendments contained in the Bill. I look forward to their implementation.
Mr LLOYD (Murray) (9.5)-The honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin), when he was speaking earlier this evening on the Wool Industry Amendment Bill, compared the activities of the

House and the Labor Caucus meeting and pleading for the 250c figure, 1 think it was, to be retained. That indicates the feeling of the Labor Party_ I will quote the position for my friend, the honourable member for Kalgoorlie (Mr Campbell). I thank the honourable member for Hotham (Mr Kent) for calling a quorum because it enabled me to find the right spot in the Rural Industry Information Papers.
Mr Bourchier-Why don't you call some more?

razor gang, or as it is correctly named, the Review of Commonwealth Functions, with the rec-

Mr Kent-We will make you work.

ommendations and investigations of the Coombs Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)-

Royal Commission on Australian Government Order! There is far too much conversation in the

when Labor first came to power. His conclusion House as well as too many interjections. I ask

after comparing the two was that the Coombs rehonourable members to remain silent.

port was more beneficial. I cannot think of any greater indictment of the Australian Labor Party's attitude to the rural industry than to compare in any way the Coombs report with the Re-

Mr LLOYDI will now return to the Rural Industry In/ormation Papers and quote from page 109, which states:

view of Commonwealth Functions undertaken by Since 1970 a reserve price scheme has been in operation for

this Government. Coombs provided the opporwoolsold at auction . . .

tunity for the Whitlam Government to remove all forms of assistance f6r primary industry and to

Opposition members interjecting-

commence the mammoth increase in government Mr LLOYD-Just listen to this. Further on it

intervention and government bureaucracy which, states:

2468 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Wool Industry Amendment Bill

At the outset the scheme operated under a flexible reserve price policy, with reserve prices being altered at frequent intervals according to market trends. However, throughout 1971-
That is when our friend supposedly sold his wool-
the Government permitted the Commission to hold a firm reserve price level. This ensured that the market did not fall below an average of approximately 64 cents per kg greasy for the whole clip.
So if members of the Australian Labor Party sold their wool for 18c a kilo, all I can say is that they were not very good marketers. At that time the Government actually put money in, which the Labor Government was never prepared even to risk, because of that Labor Caucus meeting that I mentioned that was going on that day. I think this debate indicates a particular difference in philosophy between the two sides of this House. With the Government, if the private sector--
Mr Campbell-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. If we have to listen to something, I think the other side should listen to it too. 1 am calling a quorum.
Honourable members interjecting Mr Ian Robinson-Mr Deputy Speaker, the honourable member for Kalgoorlie was out of his place and he interjected incorrectly-Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! Mr Ian Robinson-He is trifling with the House. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! A number of members came into the chamber-Honourable members interjecting. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Bendigo will remain silent. Mr Bourchier-They were in the chamber. They were in the precincts. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! A number of members came into this House after a quorum was called. Mr Carlton-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat while I count. Will honourable members please just stay outside the House for a moment. Government members-No. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Please remain outside the precints of the chamber. Mr Kerin-Mr Deputy Speaker, ] raise a point of order.

Mr Sinclair-Mr Deputy Speaker, the members of this place are entitled to remain in this chamber. On what basis are you asking a member of this House to leave the chamber?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! A quorum has been called. I tell the Leader of the House that a quorum has been called. It is necessary to check the number of members in the chamber at the time when the quorum was called. At the time a number of members were just outside the precincts of the chamber.
Mr BourchierNo, they were in the House. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I ask that while we check the numbers in the chamberMr Holding-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Quorum required. Ring the bells. The bells being rung Mr Sinclair-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. On what basis are you calling a quorum? Mr KerinI raise a point of order. Honourable members interjecting Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The House will come to order. Honourable members interjecting Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Quorum present. I call the honourable member for Murray. Honourable members interjecting Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The House will come to order. Order! The House will come to order! The facts are these-Mr BourchierMr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member will resume his seat. The position is that when the quorum was called-and the honourable member for Kalgoorlie called the quorumthere were some members not within the precincts of the chamber. At the moment when the quorum was called they rushed into the chamber. At that time we had to count the number of members. Some members then also came into the chamber. Mr Bourchier-A point of order! Mr Deputy Speaker, I suggest that at the time when you counted for the quorum there was a quorum. Would you verify with the clerks whether there was or was not a quorum? Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Clerk advises me that when he and his assistant counted the

Wool Industry Amendment Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2469

numbers there were 31 on the Government side and eight on the Opposition side. That was 39 and it was nota quorum. I think that the honourable member for Murray, who is being deprived of his opportunity to speak, should now carryon.
Mr Falconer-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. When you announced that a quorum was present, had you asked the clerks for their count?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-After I had called the quorum and I had asked for the bells to be rung, we then found that by that time there was a quorum. Members had come into the House.

these: At the time when the quorum was called and including those members who rushed in from--
Honourable members interjecting Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! Honourable members will remain silent or I will have to take action. When the quorum was called, including those members who were in the alcove who rushed into the chamber a quorum was still not present. I suggest that the House now give the honourable member for Murray an opportunity to speak. I call the honourable member for Murray.

Mr Falconer-Had you asked the clerks for the count?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Yes. The clerks had counted the numbers.
Mr Carlton-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. I draw your attention to Standing Order 46A which says: '
F.or the purposes of assembling a quorum of Members, a Member who is in any of the lower galleries or officials' seats, behind the Bar of the House or in either of the side alcoves at the time when the attention of the Speaker or the Chairman of Committees is called to the lack of a quorum and who remains in any of those areas after attention has been so called, shall not be counted to determine whether a quorum is present.
I suggest that the count was done before those menibers, who were in the anterooms, had returned to the House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I will rule on that point. When the quorum was called, immediately a number of members from the anteroom rushed into the chamber. They were not in the chamber at that time. In any event even with those members inside the chamber and being counted, there were only 39 present, which is not a quorum.
Mr Holding-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. The point of order. I take is to assist both the record of the House and the Chair. When I arrived in the House not enough members were present to constitute a quorum. The Government Whip-
Honourable members interjecting-
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order!
Mr Holding-The Government Whip not only sat out of his place but also invited members of the Opposition to call a quorum, not once but on many occasions. Finally--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat. I will rule on the point of order. It is not a point of order. Without a doubt some extraordinary tactics were implemented at that time. The facts are

Mr LLOYD-This reminds me very much of the time when the Labor Government was in power and two Labor members were hiding behind the Speaker's chair out of the precincts of this House. It is all right for them to talk about being purer than snow now, but who did that at that time?
Honourable members interjecting Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The House will come to order. Mr LLOYD-They caused one of our members to be expelled. Let that be a warning to you in future. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Murray will address the Chair and not the members of the Opposition. Mr LLOYD-Mr Deputy Speaker, if you can restrain the honourable member for Kalgoorlie, I will be quite happy to address the Chair. I was referring earlier to the philosophic difference between the two sides of this Parliament. The Labor Party expects government to provide services even if the private sector can provide them better. Why does the Labor Party not wake up to the fact that the majority of Australians do not want governments running their lives? They want free enterprise and that is what this Government is giving them. In this debate tonight the Opposition has concentrated on the proposed sale of the Australian Wool Testing Authority simply because it has become aware of some opposition to the proposal from within the industry, opposition which has diminished as the industry has become aware of the intentions of the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) concerning the Wool Testing Authority. Hardly a word has been said by the Opposition about the basis of the Bill which we are debating, that is, revolving the Market Support Fund. The Opposition is making a weak attempt to show the rural community that it is interested in rural affairs. Every thinking person in the bush knows full well that Labor has no

2470 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Wool Industry Amendment Bill

rural policy. They also know full well what the Labor Party's 35-hour week proposals will do to rural industries in Australia. The decision to sell the Wool Testing Authority was one of a number of similar decisions which were announced by the Prime Minister as a result of the Review of Commonwealth Functions. It is also proposed to sell the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation, the Australian Government Clothing Factory and even the Canberra Hotmix Plant, to name just a few. The Government is also transferring many other activities of a commercial kind that can be best performed by the private sector.
Mr Ian Robinson-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. I draw your attention to the fact that the honourable member for Melbourne Ports, who is now returning to the chamber, signalled clearly to honourable members on his side of the House to withdraw from the chamber. It is obvious that his tactics were to reduce the numbers in this House so that once again a quorum can be called.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)- Order! The honourable member will resume his seat. That is not a point of order.
Mr Holding-l wanted to have a discussion with a colleague outside.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Is the honourable member for Melbourne Ports raising a point of order?
Mr Holding-J have been personally misrepresented. J ask the honourable member for Cowper to withdraw. ] asked a colleague to come outside so that I could discuss something with him. He was about to respond. I have been personally misrepresented.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! Does the honourable gentleman find the remarks of the honourable member objectionable?
Mr Holding-I find his remarks offensive. He has implied that I was concerned to abuse the processes of the House. I ask him to withdraw.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Melbourne Ports has stated that he finds the remarks made by the honourable member for Cowper to be offensive to him. Is the honourable member for Cowper prepared to withdraw?
Mr Ian Robinson-No, Mr Deputy Speaker. I request the Chair to indicate to me which of the words 1 uttered could be regarded as unparliamentary.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Melbourne Ports stated that he left the House for a conversation with a colleague and

not for the purpose of reducing the numbers present in the House. The honourable member for Cowper stated that the motive of the honourable
member for leaving the House was to ensure that there was no quorum present. The honourable
member for Melbourne Ports finds that offensive.
I make the point that I will not be too rigid on this matter, but the general practice in this House in
the event of an honourable member finding a remark offensive has been for Mr Speaker to re-
quest, as he has requested on many occasions, the honourable member who made the remark to
withdraw. If the honourable member is not prepared to withdraw the remark, I will leave it to his conscience and to the House.

Mr Ian Robinson-I feel that it is now incumbent upon me to make a further observation.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The
honourable member will resume his seat. I asked him whether he was prepared to withdraw.

Mr Ian Robinson-l am not prepared to with-
draw on the grounds that J heard members of the Opposition saying to one another that they were
to leave the chamber and go outside.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat.

Mr Ruddock-I raise a point of order, Mr
Deputy Speaker. The remarks of the honourable
member for Melbourne Ports constituted a personal explanation. He did not raise a point of
order. The matter he raised should have been raised at the conclusion of the speech of the
honourable member for Murray. That honour-
able member was entitled to conclude his speech without interruption.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable
member for Melbourne Ports was entitled to take a point of order at that point because he con-
sidered the remarks offensive. That is the normal
practice.

Mr LLOYD-J shall reiterate what the Minister for Primary Industry said. (Quorum formed).

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (9.27)-I rise to make a few remarks in this debate.

Motion (by Mr Bourchier) put:

That the question be now put.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes Noes .

. 58 . 42

Majority

16

Wool Industry Amendment Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2471

AYES
Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchicr,J. W. Bradfield, 1. M. Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H. lIurr,M. A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Ewen Carlton, 1. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D. B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Good luck, B. J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Howard,J. W. Hunt, R.J.D. Hyde, 1. M. Jarman, A. W.

Jull,D.F. Katter,R.C. Killen,D.J.
Lloyd,B.
Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, 1. M. Millar,P.C. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.J,
O'Keefe. F. L. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M.
Sainsbury, M. F. Shack,P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair,I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling,G. E.}. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. 1. White, P. N. D.

NOES

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E.
Child,J. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N.
Free,R. V.
Fry,K.L. lIawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C.
Howe, B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller)

Jacobi,R. Ienkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (TeUer) Jones, Barry lones, Charles Kelly, R.J.
Kent. L. Kerin, 1. C. McMahon, les Mildren, J. B. Milton,r.
Morris, P. [7. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G.
Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C.
UreD, T. West,S. 1. Willis,R. Young,M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Question put.
That the words proposed to be omitted (Mr Kerin's amendment) stand part of the question.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

59

Noes

42

Majority

17

Anthony, I. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. I. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M.
Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H.

AYES

Jarman, A. W.
Iull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Killen,D.J. Lloyd, B. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R.

AYES
Burr,M.A. Cadman. A. G. Cameron, Ewen
Carlton, J. J. Chapman,H.G.P.
Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean,A.G.
Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C.
Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Good luck, B. 1. Hall, Steele Hards,G.McD. Hicks, N. J. Hodges, 1. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J.M.

McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T.
Macphee, I. M. Moore, J. C. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Ke.fe,F.L.
Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E.
Shack,P.D.
Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, J. McC. Spender, J. M.
Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. f. White, P. N. D.

NOES

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N.
Bowen, Lionel
Brown,John Brown, Robert
Campbell,G.
Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E.
Child,J. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V.
Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. 1. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller)

Jacobi) R.
Ienkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry
lones, Charles Kelly,R.J.
Kent,L.
Kerin,J.C. McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L.
Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D.
Scott,J.!'.
Theophanous. A. C. Uren, T. West,S.J.
Willis,R. Young, M. J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Original question resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time,

Third Reading

Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.

Bill (on motion by Mr Nixon) read a third time,

PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Mr KERIN (Werriwa)Mr Speaker, I seek leave to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr KERINYes, Mr Speaker.
Mr SPEAKER-- He may proceed,
Mr KERIN-Thank you. The honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd) stated that I said the Coombs review of continuing government programs was beneficial to rural industries. I have before me the Hansard greens of what I said. I

2472 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Fish (Export inspection Charge) Bill

said no such thing and the Hansard greens attest to that. What I was doing was comparing the approach of the Coombs group of people with that of the razor gang. What I said was that the Coombs approach was based on reason and analysis whereas the razor gang's approach was based on ideology, cynicism and prejudice.
ASSENT TO BILLS
Assent to the following Bills reported:
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Bill 1981.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Bill 1981.
Designs Amendment Bill 1981. Trade Marks Amendment Bill J'181. Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Bill 1981.
FISH (EXPORT INSPECTION CHARGE) BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 7 May, on motion by !VII' Nixon:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House)-Mr Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill, the Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Bill, the Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Bill and the Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Bill as they are associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr SPEAKER-Is it the wish of the House that a general debate proceed? There being no objection I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (9.48)- Somehow the razor gang has brought the dried vine fruit industry and the fishing industry together at last. I do not know whether that has been an ambition of the Government for a long time but it has happened and we are discussing these two industries tonight in a cognate debate. Of course, what the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) said is truethere is a similarity because the legislation before us relates to charges. If I read the part of the razor gang's report which relates to these two industries honourable members will see the logic in the reasoning of the Leader of the House. The report states:
Wherever possible we intend to apply the 'user-pays' principle and introduce new or increased charges for Government services as the best possible determinant of the value of those services. Consistent with this we will be examining further the feasibility of requiring industry to meet the cost of membership of international commodity organisations. Charges will

also be introduced for actuarial and valuation services, archives services, the services provided to industry by the Australian Atomic Energy Commission, and for translation services and the assessment of overseas qualifications.
The program of export inspection charging, aimed at recovering approximately 50 per cent of total costs, is to he extended; in the case of fish and dried fruit from 1 July J981; of livestock, dairy products, eggs and honey from I July 1982; and of fresh, canned and processed fruit and vegetables from I January 1983.
So they are all going to cop it. The report further states:
A significant rationalisation of meat inspection services has already been commenced and will be finalised by the Australian Agricultural Council in August 1981.
That is very optimistic because 1 think the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) has already pretty well put the kibosh on the whole dual meat inspection fiasco. As I say, the Minister is rather optimistic if he thinks he will rationalise that matter by the next Australian Agricultural Council meeting. These measures rel1ect the Government's hypocrisy on the question of export charges and there recoupment. When the Australian Labor Party was in governmcnt and tried to get back some of the costs of inspection imposed on the beef industry which was enjoying a boom in 1974, the then Opposition yelled loud and long. Of course, it pulled the charges off when it got into government and then reimposed them. There is a heck of a lot of hypocrisy in this business. We are becoming used to hypocrisy from this Government.
The purpose of the Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Bill is to impose charges for export inspection of dried fruit from I July 1981. It is the Government's intention to recovcr approximately half of total inspection costs for these products. A rate of $5.50 a tonne to be imposed on exports in 1981-82 is proposed and will be recommended to the Governor-General for promulgation in regulations. On the basis of long term export averages, charges at this rate will yield approximately $259,000 in a full year. By and large, the price being received for exports for dried vine fruits is about $1 ,000 or $1, I00 per tonne. Perhaps $5.50 is not an enormous amount of money to impose on the industry. I do not know why one of our weakest industries has been singled out to be the first to take on the new General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade policy for the levying of export charges. After going through considerable adjustment and reconstruction, this industry is still one of Australia's low income rural industries in terms of incomes available to farm families. By this, 1 refer to the net cash return for each family labour input-that is, a wage equivalent figure.

Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2473

I will cite incomes for various regions. The figures are available due to the work of the Bureau of Agricultural Economics which published them in a recent quarterly review. For the Sunraysia district in New South Wales, the net cash return for a family labour unit was $7,923. There are about 446 growers in that area. In the mid-Murray district of New South Wales, the net cash return for the family unit was $4,761 and the number of growers about 50. For New South Wales as a whole, the nct cash return was only $7,489-in other words, it is below the average wage. Worse figures apply for Victoria and South Australia. For example, for Robinvale, Sunraysia in Victoria, the net cash return a family labour unit was $5,773. It is in this area that most of the industry is concentrated, there being 1,879 growers. For the mid-Murray area there was a net cash return of a mere $4,175 with 222 growers in the district. For Victoria as a whole, the average cash return is a little over $5,000. A similar low figure of $5,622 applies for the Riverland which has 1,076 growers. For all regions, the net cash return for a family labour unit is $6,042. That is for a total, within the BAE survey, of 3,773 growers.
This is an industry facing problems; it is a low income industry compared with the rest of the primary industries in terms of the way the Bureau of Agricultural Economics surveys. The horticultural industry is by far the lowest paying. It is facing problems in respect of reconstruction in the Riverland. The industry is facing problems with salinity along the Murray and in respect of decreasing yields. Essentially, dried vine fruit growers are price takers and not farmers who can influence the world market. It is very much a market in which there is a lot of competition. Export prices at the moment are slightly higher than in previous years due to major crop failures overseas. In the longer term, sustained recovery in the world DVF production could be expected to affect adversely real unit returns to Australian producers. Because, as [ have said, Australian DVF producers are essentially price takers on world markets-about 60 per cent of Australian production is exported-any increase in charges will affect the industry's ability to compete. Therefore, it is quite clear that the cost of the measure imposed by the Government will be passed back to the growers. Growers will have to pay the charge because of the pooling arrangment. The levy is expected to raise $260,000. If one does a mathematical division, one will see that each grower will forgo about $70 in income.
I will return to the basic point: Why begin this policy of cost recovery for inspection services as a

revenue raiser in one of the weakest rural industries? The industry has a lot of problems. By far the major problem is that of salinity. This Government is removing itself from all programs that relate to broader policies so essential to the health of Australian agriculture. We have already seen the Government try to get out of soil conservation and forestry. It would not surprise me if the Government does not try to get out water resources in this country. The equalisation scheme in the industry at present is not applicable due to the relative prices-export and domestic. Another stabilisation agreement between the industry and the Government as yet has not been agreed to. By and large, the present cost structure and the prices received overseas are such that stabilisation and equalisation are not immediate questions facing the industry with any urgency.
One of the industry leaders, Mr Gill, recently said that he would await the Government's approach in respect of the dairy industry in order to see what sort of direction the Government would take before he would enter into more serious negotiations with the Government. That is the only point the Opposition wishes to make. Having seen the vigour with which the Government is proceeding with most of its mad, crazy, razor gang recommendations, the Opposition believes there is not much sense in moving amendments. The Government will plough on regardless of what functions it is wiping out and the industries it will adversely affect.
The Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Bill is similar to the dried fruit Bill in that it intends to recoup part of the cost borne by the Commonwealth for inspecting fish for export. That is part of the Government's general program, as I have already said. The Bill is designed to ensure that products meet minimum standards of quality, hygiene and presentation when exported. In 1979 the Government introduced charges for meat, grain and wool inspection aimed at recovering approximately 50 per cent of inspection costs. The Government now proposes that fees aimed at a similar level of recovery should be imposed for similar services.
I will examine the fishing industry, particularly where the incidence of these charges will be borne most. The export sector of the industry largely is based on rock lobsters, prawns, oysters, pearl scallops and abalone. Fortunately, export markets for these products are lucrative. For example, the value of exports in 1978-79 for rock lobsters was $7Im. We are the world's largest producer and exporter of rock lobsters. Export sales of prawns
were worth $118m, scallops $5.lm and abalone $26m. Tuna is also exported but the markets are

2474 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Bill

less certain. In recent years this industry has been characterised by fluctuating prices. Of course, this is the industry that recently received notice that the freeze on entry into the market for the southern blue fin tuna would be lifted. This move by the Government was clearly taken against the wishes of the rnajority of the industry and the processors, particularly Safcol. Suspicion is rampant in the industry that this move was taken simply to allow Heinz into the market. I cannot see any reason for that not being true. An enormous amount of disruption will be caused if a heap of people are allowed to come into the industry. The statement put to the Minister at that time was very poorly thought through. It is quite clear that the industry will face some problems in the near future.
The profitability of the domestic sector of the fishing industry in Australia is uncertain. For example, at this time Australian fishermen are concerned that the easy access granted to the domestic market for New Zealand fishermen is depressing prices. Under the New ZealandAustralia Free Trade Agreement and closer economic agreements, as well as talks under way at the moment, New Zealand fish enters Australia duty free.
The Australian Fishing Industry Council, in commenting on the Bill before the House, has suggested that if the user must pay-that is the direction of the Government-the user also should have some control over the way in which the inspection service is run. The Council regards the existing system as inefficient and costly and it claims that the system does not meet with the industry's requirements. No doubt it has brought that to the attention of the Minister but, in so many areas these days, the Minister does not seem to respond to the legitimate claims of industry. I think this goes along with the whole razor gang approach-the ideological approach to Australia's primary industries.
As I have said before, one can see and detect that the general direction of this Government's policies towards primary industry is more and more towards giving guarantees, backing up statutory marketing corporations and getting out of programs of assistance to specific commodity groups and to primary industry overall, and to try to settle the rest of the policy in terms of taxation deductions. I think there have been about 40 taxation deduction measures since this Government came to office, of which 12 or 13 specifically relate to primary industry. It seems that there will be more of these measures on the way because the Government already has given some notice of that. That might be a rational enough approach to

primary industry; certainly it is an accountant's approach and it accords to the Fraser ideology and the tenets of Fraserism, but it does avoid a lot of responsibility. It avoids the more sensible approach of looking at what the real needs of Australian agriculture are.
The Australian Labor Party believes that, in so many of these areas, we still need to identify the national problems. One of the big national problems we have at present is water quality. Water quality affects particularly the dried vine fruit growers of this country especially in the Sunraysia, Murray and Riverland regions of this country. I know there are amendments to the River Murray Commission Act before the Senate, but these will do nothing to deal with the prime question of water quality. The amendments will merely enhance the capacity of the River Murray Commission as an advisory body but will do nothing at all about water quality. Until all the governments involved with water quality in this country realise that they need to give up some of their parochial State powers, that they need to identify the real needs, hand over some powers and set up a jointly run regulatory body with powers to monitor water quality and not just quantity, we will not solve many of these problems. It is in areas such as water quality, soil conservation, quarantine, plague locusts and other general areas that the Government is abdicating its responsibility to the primary sector at present.
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (10.3)-The purpose of the legislation before the House is to transfer to the export side of the fishing and the dried fruits industries part of the cost of supplying inspection services. This has already been done in the meat, grain and wool industries. As this transfer is one of relief to the Australian taxpayer, I have pleasure in rising to support the Bills. The Bills are not complicated but there are some matters of interest arising from them. Firstly, both the original Bills, the Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Bill and the Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Bill make the charges applicable to the exporter, even if that exporter is a State or State authority. This has significant administrative advantages in the collection of fees and the Government is to be commended for this decision. At this stage other industries subject to similar charges and levies are furiously debating who should pay for these services.
In the case of fish and dried fruit, the exporter is the processor. The factor that arises from this issue is that processors often argue that the benefit lies not with them as middlemen but with the producers. This argument is academic to say the least. All primary producers are well aware of where

Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2475

the ability to add on costs stops. It is with them, per annum on amounts outstanding from the date

the producers. They produce and supply a prodat which they were due. This penalty appears

uct to the market with no price guarantees. Every surprisingly low considering present day commer-

other industry sector operates from known price cial interest rates. I am advised that this is inten-

and cost structures. The fact that fees such as tional as the penalty is designed only to encourage

those under debate tonight are applied to the proprompt payment and not to be punitive. How-

cessor or exporter is known to him and is reflected ever, as most processors today will be financing

in his operating costs. Normally he negotiates his their stocks by money borrowed at approximately

selling price, so. he must adjust the purchasing 15 per cent, there will be a considerable attraction

price. This he does, thus passing the cost on to the towards making late payments. In fact, an un-

producer. If the exporter's business is unprofitascrupulous operator could regularly await legal

ble, he should not blame the Government but action for recovery before making payment.

look to the general efficiency of his operation or Strangely, and conversely, this section also gives

his purchasing or selling strategies. The Governthe Minister or an authorised person power to

ment has chosen the cheapest way to collect the remit penalties to a maximum of $100. Clause 7

fees and, as no reason exists for the fees to be colmakes it an offence to fail to submit returns. This

lected at another level, this decision is correct.

is treated much more seriously than failure to pay

The fish Bills have elected to differentiate between certain fish, and clauses 6 (1) and 6 (2) state:

the money as the penalty is $1,000 or six months imprisonment. The Bills give p-ower of entry to authorised persons to inspect books, documents or papers and such entry can be by the consent of the

(1) Subject to this section, the rate of charge in respect of fish is such rate as is applicable under the regulations to the class of fish in which that fish is included. (2) For the purposes of sub-section (l), different rates of charge might be prescribed in respect of different classes of fish.

occupier or by warrant issued by a justice of the peace, providing the said justice of the peace is satisfied of the need of such action. Again, a penalty of $1,000 or six months imprisonment is ap-

Clauses 6 (3) and 6 (4) give details of the maximum charges allowed under this Bill. They are 15c a dozen for oysters and 30c per kilogram for fish other than oysters. In the dried fruit levy

plicable to a person who, without reasonable cause, obstructs or hinders such an authorised person. The Governor-General again has power the make regulations in relation to these matters.

Bill, clause 6 (2) also allows for differential treatIn money terms, the transfer of charges from

ment and clause 6 (3) sets the maximum charge the taxpayer to industry is estimated at $259,000

under the proposed Act at $11 a tonne. Howfrom the dried fruit industry and $1m from the

ever, fish and dried fruit producers should not be fishing industry. That is a significant saving. How-

alarmed by the amounts referred to as these are ever, as the Bills provide for collection of only half

truly maximum charges. These charges are the cost of these services Australian taxpayers

introduced in line with present policy to give a must still contribute $1.259m towards the cost of

sensible life to the Bills. The Bills give rights to the services. This amount will certainly be greater

the Governor-General to give regulations for the due to seasonal problems and such items as super-

purposes of clauses 5 and 6. Consequently, the annuation. The producer or processor often con-

second reading speech of the Minister for Prisiders these services as a burden imposed by the

mary Industry (Mr Nixon) indicated clearly the Government and one that should be paid for by

amounts which will be applicable on the assent the Government. The service is, in fact, a necess-

of these Bills. The fees to be charged in relation ary function of the marketing process. Overseas

to fishing are: Rock lobster, 3.9c per kilogram; all purchasers are hardheaded and expect value for

other shell fish except oysters, squid, cuttlefish their money. They value the knowledge that a

and octupus, 2.5c per kilogram; all other fish qualified inspection has been undertaken. This is

except in shell or half shell, 34c per kilogram; considered even more important in the case of

and oysters in shell or half shell, lc per dozen. fish, which is one of the more perishable and haz-

For dried fruits the fee is $5.50 per tonne. Future ardous commodities. The benefit is, therefore, to

Government cost rises will be reflected in the industry. It makes the product more salable at

increased fees.

the international level and, I believe, conse-

The two collection Bills establish the criteria quently inreases the return to the producer.

for collecting the fees set out in the originating Having established that the industries should

Bills and are identical to each other in substance, meet the payment of these charges, we might ask

except for the products concerned. They require whether they can afford to do so. In Australian

payment of fees due within 28 days and section 6 terms, the charges to the dried fruit industry are

makes provision for a penalty equal to 10 per cent not large. In 1978-79 the Australian fish catch was

2476 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Bill

63,395 tonnes. The value of fish products exported was $194.1m. The investment in boats and equipment was $247.5m. State governments also supply large amounts of infrastructure, such as harbours, jetties and shipways. These facilities are supplied at very low cost when compared with the rates and taxes paid by similar sized on-shore industries. It would therefore appear that the proposed inspection fees are very small by comparison.
It could further be asked: Why not levy the total charge on the industry and remove the entire burden from the taxpayer? I am committed to re lieving the taxpayer of all such charges. However, the question must come as to what is a reasonable charge. The Department of Primary Industry, which supplies the bulk of inspection services to primary export industries, employs 2,130 export inspection officers. Forty of them are fish export quality control officers. Practically all of the industries which are recipients of the export inspec tion services and which includes the largest userthe meat industry-are seasonal and cyclical. The industry itself accepts this in all its manning and award arrangements. Employment is often part time in order to fit in with the seasonal arrange ments. Pay scales, nevertheless, generally reflect the lack of permanency. Piece rates are common.
The Commonwealth, as the employer of the in spectors, seeks to ignore this fact. I am pleased to note that the Opposition is aware of this circum stance and that it may be suggesting, as I am, that the Commonwealth is not a suitable employer for these people. The Commonwealth employs in spectors as permanent public servants, offering them Public Service hours, conditions and holiday entitlements. The regular working hours of most of these inspection employees do not coincide with those of the process workers, nor do their public holidays. This creates additional cost to the processor above the charges levied upon him by fixed charges.
Another great problem in relation to the cost to the Government is the fact that, as all charges in these Bills are levied on a unit basis, drought years or bad fishing seasons greatly reduce production and consequently the fees collected from the pro cessor. However, as the employer, the Government must continue to carry its work force. The cost to the taxpayer and the deleterious effect to the workers, who must attend although there is no work available, are both bad. There is little need for the Commonwealth to employ these inspec tors in the manner that is currently in existence. To avoid the seasonal and cyclical problems that I
have mentioned the inspectors are almost per petually in living away from home circumstances

as they move around to follow the fish, the fruit or the abattoir kill. The cost of travelling expenses for meat inspectors alone in 1979-80 was $3.8m. The inspectors have established a strong union and lobby. They are aware that they can stop these delicately balanced perishable industries by removing their services for even a few days. Therefore, they can demand rates of pay and con ditions beyond the requirements of their trade.
This brings me to the real thrust of my speech. Although it is quite right for the Government to ensure that a high standard of product leaves our country-in fact, some countries will not approve imports without such government to government assurances-this does not relieve the Government of the responsibility to ensure that we supply the most efficient inspection service and at the lowest cost. Whilst the Government has the total responsibility for meeting the cost, there is some argument that economies will be considered. The Kelly report on meat inspection certainly does not support this argument. When the Government has total control of supplying the service yet can call on others to pay part or all of the cost, it is obvious that very little control will occur. The sacred cows of health regulation and safety are magnificently suited to building large government bureaucracies, insulated with the supporting argument that the cost is of no importance when com pared with the need. It is of considerable import ance if one is paying the. bill and can watch inefficiencies and overstaffing occurring every day.
The government seeks payment of the services it offers from the meat industry and the airline industry. Now we seek contributions from the fishing and dried fruits industries. In each case we allow no input on the cost or efficiency of our ser vice from those who are paying for it. A number of my constituents have questioned the need for excellence in terms of the manpower supplied and the cost in terms of efficiency of these services. If, as this legislation currently provides, we require arm's-length industry to pay for the service, we must give it an input about how muc h it should cost. We must look closely at the efficiency of our operation. In many cases total reconstruction is necessary to acknowledge the seasonal and cycli cal nature of these industries. Part time workers, sub-contractors and direct employment might be the answer, provided in each case the Federal input remains at the supervisory level. r call on the Government to consider seriously our position in this matter. l have great pleasure in supporting the Bills.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (M cMil lan)
(1 0.17)-As has been stated by the honourable

Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Bill

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2477

member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin), the opposition does not oppose these Bills. In the short time left this evening I wish to make a few comments about the Bills. The uproar in the House earlier made it rather difficult for me to say a few words about wool. In the few minutes available to me this evening perhaps I can cover a few of the matters relating to the agricultural scene covered by these Bills and a few of the issues raised by the honourable member for O'Connor (Mr Tuckey).
The first point I wish to make is that it is strange that the Government has decided at this time to take some $500,000 from the fishing industry and some $259,000 from the dried fruit industry in the manner decided. At this time, as we have been told many times by members of the National Country Party, most rural industries are facing larger increases than would be expected to be seen in the consumer price index figures, particularly in relation to fuel costs. The fisherman would know all about that. The high cost of fuel has really hurt those industries. Even though in some cases export prices for the commodities of fishermen are high, many of them, particularly the ones in my electorate, are not doing terribly well. They would be placed in a very difficult position if the task of finding the $500,000 for their industry were passed down to them. As the honourable member for O'Connor has said, the exporter is the one who is expected to pay but in most of these cases the person at the bottom of the rung who cannot pass on the costs will usually bear the brunt of any charge that is imposed on an industry such as this.
As the honourable member for O'Connor mentioned, the exporter pays principle would apply to a State authority. It appears that the razor gang's approach to these matters is that State governments and anything to do with State governments are open slather. The Government preaches small government and less taxes, but it acts hastily to raise as much money as it can and it does not appear to mind where it takes it from, even if it means taking it from a State authority and imposing more and more costs on the States. No doubt the honourable member for O'Connor would be in support of that approach. If this approach continues, perhaps the Government's federalism policies will force State governments to impose income taxes. That has been the whole process of the razor gang. That is what it has been all about.
Some of the smaller or weaker industries have decided that they cannot really afford to have this sort of money taken out to bear the brunt of that action. But then again, because the exporters are paying, we see in that clause of the Bill dealing

with penalties for late payment---which was mentioned by the honourable member for O'Connor---that the figure is set at 10 per cent. No doubt any shrewd businessman faced with the present situation, where we virtually have a credit squeeze, with interest rates going up non-stop, would be very happy to let the Government waive that 10 per cent. it is probable that businessmen are paying 15 per cent and 18 pcr cent for the money that they are trying to borrow.
There is not much doubt that this Bill will be taking funds oll those who are earning their living actually catching the fish. They will pay the bill but those who will get the cheap interest rate will be the exporters who possibly will be able to pass the costs right down the line. The honourable member for O'Connor took the usual approach that he takes in most of the speeches he has made in this House and he had a go at the Public Service. It is very rarely that we have seen him rise to speak-in the few speeches he has made to date in the House-- where he has not had a crack at the Public Service. He seems to take the view that the person who happens to work for the Government is inefficient and cannot do anything. I do not know from where he gets his facts. In debate after debate 1have been waiting to hear some facts concerning the razor gang which will prove that public servants have some queer approach, that they are not as efficient as those employed in industry and that they cannot do the job of inspection as well as anybody in private enterprise.
it appears that this Government is definitely taking a line, regardless of where it is, to raise funds. This is just another method that it is using. We do not object to the fact that industry should pay a certain amount of inspection costs because this is something in which the Labor Party believes. For too long the Government has been fostering many very well-off rural industries and using public funds to support inspections and the like whereas the industries are able to do it themselves. In this case as part of the razor gang review approach, this Government has decided that here is another way to get a crack at the States and since this opportunity has presented itself it is one way of doing it. We all know that the $259,000 allocated to the dried fruits section is not a great amount of money but it will affect industry. At present any money taken out of industry is a further charge on that industry. It is more money going into the Government coffers. I repeat that it is another method of swallowing the funds of the Government so that the industry pays inspection charges and the Government saves in its Budget allocation. As time is short I seek leave to continue my remarks at a later time.

2478 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Adjournment

Leave granted; debate adjourned.
PUBLICATIONS COMMITTEE Mr BAUME (McArthur)-l present the fourth report from the Publications Committee sitting in conference with the Publications Committee of the Senate. Copies of the report have been circulated to honourable members in the chamber.
Report-by leave-adopted.
ADJOURNMENT Glebe Estate-Drought in New South Wales-Parliament: Accommodation-Radio Australia-Electoral Redistribution in Western Australia-Proposed Sale of Belconnen Mall-Domestic Communications Satellites Motion (by Mr Street) propo~ed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr UREN (Reid) (10.24)-Tonight I want to raise the question of the actions of the razor gang in selling the Glebe Estate. I want to deal with the insecurity and fear that this decision has brought to those people living on that estate. In my view this was a violent, crude and brutal action on the part of the Fraser Government. Some 750 families are living in this area. They are very insecure and do not know what their future is, both in the short and long term. The decision which was taken back in 1974 to acquire the Glebe Estate was very progressive. At that time. I was a Minister in the Whitlam Labor Government which acquired the Glebe Estate for $17.sm. The estate was 47 acres and on it there were 750 dwellings. We bought the estate for three reasons: Firstly, to protect the people living on that estate; secondly, to protect the townscape which had been there for over 100 years; and, thirdly, to prevent the western freeway planned by the New South Wales conservative government from cutting a broad swathe through that estate. Once the estate became the property of the Australian Government we gave notice to the New South Wales Government that it could not develop a freeway through the estate which would have destroyed it to a great extent.
By acquiring the 750 properties on the Glebe Estate the Government intervened in the public housing sector. People on low incomes living in Paddington and most of the inner suburbs of Sydney, and in the inner suburbs of Melbourne, such as Carlton and Fitzroy, were forced to the fringes of those cities. The Government, by intervening, was able to allow those people on low incomes to

remain in the inner areas of those cities. Therefore, it was decided that a program of rehabilitation would be carried out over a period of five years at a cost of $lOm. Unfortunately the present Government has delayed that rehabilitation program. It has rehabilitated only about one seventh of the properties involved over a period of some six to seven years. Frankly, this rehabilitation will cost a lot more. But one has to recognise that this is an investment. It cost us $17.5m. We acquired the estate in a single purchase from the Church of England. The fact is that the value of the properties on that estate is between $40m and $70m. The value of the terrace dwelli'ngs in that area has grown to ~uch an extent that they cost about $100,000.
At the same time we were able to protect those people living in Wolloomooloo which was a similar development. Under those circumstances we made available $17m to the then Lewis conservative gov~rnment and we made available $12m worth of land. We gave this to the conservative government of New South Wales in order to protect the people of Wolloomooloo. It seems to me that in this situation similar action could be taken and the Commonwealth land could be transferred to the Government of New South Wales. I warn honourable members that the action carried out by the Whitlam Labor Government will be protected by the Federal Labor Party, by the State Labor Government, by local government authorities and by the trade union movement. It will be protected by the National Trust, the Glebe Society and the people in that area. We will not allow this land to be sold to the private sector. My colleague the honourable member for Sydney (Mr Les McMahon) and I will be at a public meeting on Sunday to defend the rights of these people.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr O'KEEFE (Paterson) (10.29)-Once again attention must be drawn to the devastating drought which exists in the country areas of New South Wales. No rain has fallen since February and the Glenbawn Dam on the Hunter River is down to below 8 per cent of its capacity. The Keepit Dam on the great Namoi River is down to below 8 per cent of its capacity and there is just a trickle of water in the Chaffey Dam east of Tamworth. The situation for primary producers in those areas is very serious. Wyangala Dam and Burrendong Dam are in similar condition. Going into winter without water and feed is very serious, not only for primary producers but also for all the people in New South Wales and Australia. Stock numbers are down very considerably and there

Adjournment

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2479

has been a loss of crops. Many farmers in the wheat area of New South Wales have not had a crop of wheat for the past three seasons. As honourable members know, if we do not get rain in May, June and July there will be no wheat this year. This is serious for the farmers and country towns surronding the wheat areas.
It is also serious for the railways for they look to the wheat crop to bring in revenue & We had a very poor crop of wheat last year. It was one of the lowest on record. Without a good crop of wheat the railways in New South Wales will suffer a very serious loss of revenue. Small businesses in the country towns are affected because they rely on the prosperity of the people in the rural areas around them. It is evident that this Government will have to assist the New South Wales Government in the provision of funds to these drought affected areas. Of course the conditions that apply to assistance are such that when the State Government has spent $1 Om in drought relief the Federal Government provides $3 for every dollar provided by the State. It is up to the New South Wales Premier and his government to apply to the Federal authorities for drought relief funds. The Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) has stated that it is difficult on many occasions under the existing conditions for the New South Wales Government to apply for funds which are available.
Our national export income will be reduced. We rely on the production of wheat, wool and meat for our export income. With drought conditions the loss of production of these commodities will seriously affect the export income not only of New South Wales but also of Australia. I do not need to tell the House that the abattoirs in New South Wales are having great problems because of the stock shortages. Many of them have closed. Many of the local government abattoirs are calling on the New South Wales Government for financial assistance, I understand to the extent of $56m. No doubt we are over-serviced by abattoirs but, the conditions that have been brought about by a shortage of stock have exacerbated the problems that the abattoirs are facing at present.
Service industries in the country towns, such as machinery distributors, fuel distributors and motor car and lorry distributors, wilJ all be affected seriously with the result that unemployment will be rife. I can only emphasise to the people of Australia the problems we face in New South Wales. Local government bodies which provide services for people in country areas will experience financial difficulties in the collection of rates because if the people in those areas are

aiTected economically they will have difficulty in paying their rates.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (10.34)-1 draw the attention of the House tonight to a situation of concern to myself and other honourable members. I refer to the question of parliamentary accommodation and the Parliament's right to control its own administration. All honourable members are well aware of the problems we face in this building and of the fact that these problems will continue until the new and permanent Parliament House is compeleted and open for business. During the last Parliament the Presiding Officers circulated to all members and senators a document entitled 'Accommodation for the Parliament', but there were several problems with that document.
First, it was circulated towards the end of the 1980 autumn session when there was little time for adequate consideration and discussion of its contents. Second, despite the fact that the pennanent heads of all five parliamentary departments were asked to supply options for the removal of staff from this building to other locations, the only options furnished were those relating to the Parliamentary Library. Third, despite the recognition in Appendix C of the Library submission of the need for Library staff to have face-to-face contact with members and senators, often at very short notice, in order to provide information sought, this appears to have been ignored or glossed over by the Presiding Officers. There are further problems which time will not allow me to elaborate on at present.
During the last Parliament and again in this Parliament, the leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) gave notice of two motions under General Business, which appear as Nos 8 and \0 on the Notice Paper and which relate to the Parliamentary Library and the Parliament itself respectively. Both of those notices indicate a high level of concern on the part of the Opposition about the functioning of the Parliament and a vital and integral part of the parliamentary process, that is, the Parliamentary Library. If the Government were really serious about the parliamentary process it would bring those notices on for debate at an early date. Indeed, it could already have done so earlier in this session when there was so little legislation before the Parliament. I note in passing that the Senate has also established a select committee on the Parliament's

2480 REPRESENTATIVES '14 May 1981

Adjournment

appropriations and staffing and that it has not yet reported.
In the last few years, and especially since 1975, there has been much talk of parliamentary reform. However, against this background of demonstrated concern about the effectiveness of Parliament we now have further indications of reduced services and reduced effectiveness. 1 refer to the recent article in the National Times headed 'Black Ban on Library Move'. When Library staff are forced to contemplate industrial action to preserve the level of service to all members and senators, it is a black day for this Parliament. The staff members are, by and large, professionals who have provided a high level of service, under difficult conditions, to members and senators from all parties.
On 19 February 1980 my colleague the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) was contacted by the Professional Officers' Association with regard to this matter. He replied on the following day. I seek leave to have those letters incorporated in Hansard, together with a letter from the Labor Caucus to the Presiding Officers.
Leave granted.
The documents read as follows-
PROFESSIONAL OFFICERS' ASSOCIATION
Australian Public Service
Suite 3, 46-48 Colbie Court, (P.O. Box 444) Woden. ACT 2606 Phone: (062) 824030 19 February 1980
Dear Mr Holding, I refer to proposals for the movement of certain client ser-
vice staff of the Parliamentary Library from Parliament House to a more distant location at the Hotel Kurrajong.
You will recall that, in November 1979, the Professional Officers' Association sent you a copy of a submission concerning this proposed made to the Presiding Officers by the Combined Library Unions Committee (CLUC). which represents all unionists in the Parliamentary Library.
That submission pointed out that the proposed movement of Library client service staff would have a most adverse effect on the standards of service the Library could provide to Senators and Members.
On behalf of those involved, who are concerned to maintain the standards of service offered by the Library, I seek your support in having excluded from the proposed relocations those Library Staff members who provide a direct client service.
Yours sincerely. Mary Wilson
Federal Industrial Officer, POA and on behalf of Kevin Cains
Assistant Branch Secretary, ACOA and David Lamont
Branch Secretary, APSA

PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA

House of Representatives

20 February 1980

Parliament House Canberra, ACT 2600
Tel: 72 1211

Ms Mary Wilson Federal Industrial Officer Professional Officers Association PO Box 444
Woden, ACT 2606

Dear Ms Wilson,
Thank you for your letter of 19 February 1980, regarding the proposed movement of certain client service staff of the Parliamentary Library to the Hotel Kurrajong.

Let me state, at the outset, my grave concern over these proposals. If the Parliament is to function at aU, then all Members and Senators must have access to information that is
as complete as possible at the time it is required, is relevant and accurate, is speedily available and (sometimes) high ly confidential. I believe that this definition would be supported by all Members and Senators regardless of their Party affiliations.

I am in strong support of the submission made to the Presiding Officers of the Parliament by the Combined Library Unions Committee in November 1979. I do nol believe that the increased cost of the proposed move or the decline in ser-
vices that would result can be justified in any way.
Along with every other Member and Senator, r am well
aware of the accommodation problems in the present Parliament House. and the need for more space for such purposes as Committee Rooms, However, I believe that the most effective and least expensive resolution of this problem would be the erection of two demountable buildings at the rear of the building. These demountablcs would not be additions to the building in the normal sense, being freestanding. My proposal is that they be erected over the delivery road at the level of the middle floor of the existing building.

The new rooms thus created would be easily accessible to
all Members and Senators and, most importantly, would provide direct access to the Members Dining Room for the supply of meals to any Committee meetings during lunch or dinner
breaks.

Please convey my support to all members of the Parliamentary Library staff and my appreciation of their services to me
in the past.

I am enclosing copies of two articles I hope will be useful.
The example of the Congressional Research Service's increase in the number and range of services available is one which I hope the Parliamentary Library will emulate, where
appropriate.

Yours sincerely,

CLYDEHOLDING,MP

PARLIAMENT OF AUSTRALIA
The Senate
21 May 1980 To the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives:
Dear Sirs.
The members of the Federal Labor Party Caucus wish to inform you in writing of their rejection of the paper "accommodation for the Parliament" on the following grounds:

Adjournment

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2481

(a) It has failed to consider the accommodatin in Parliament House as a whole and only deals with proposals to dismember the Library. It is the view of the Caucus that the full and proper functioning of the Library fulfils one of the most important needs of

letter an inexpensive solution to the accommodation problem which would solve most, if not all, of our current problems. All honourable members will have noted the large number of questions re-

Members of Parliament.

lating to the Library and accommodation in re-

(b) The paper only looks at space and not at functions-it fails to recognise that the Library is an intrinsic and essential part of the Legislative Process. '
(c) There have been no proposals for costing in the paper

cent months. It is well past time that a full debate, in both Houses, was held on those problems. Before the Parliament can make any pretence of

and there appears to be confusion as to the future of examining the Government's policies, appropri-

West Block. If two moves of the Library or other Parliamentary facilities are contemplated during the next 18 months, then the costs will be formidable and the confusion intolerable. (Cost estimates of the move to

ations and performance, it must be able to demonstrate that it is fully in control of its own administration. I call now for a full debate, in both

West Block exceeded $600,000 in May 1978, for the Houses, before any further decisions are taken on

Legislative Research Service alone.) (d) The Caucus bel ieves that there is enough space avail-
able in the House to provide for all essential functions

parliamentary accommodation or any further moves of Library staff take place.

of the Legislative process. It is remarkable that only one of the five Parliamentary Departments was singled out for dis-membering. (e) We would suggest the following options could be
investigated:

Mr FALCONER (Casey) (10.38)-1 recently had the opportunity to spend eight days in Indonesia on a private visit. I engaged in a number of discussions and inspections which related, to a

(i) The space taken up by purely clerical adminisvery large extent, to Australia's relationship with

trative functions of Joint House, l{ansard, the Senate, the House and the Library. (ii) The space taken up by storages of various

Indonesia. One of the matters I want to raise in the House is the ability of Radio Australia to report on issues that arise in Indonesia. Recent dis-

kinds.

cussions in Australia about Indonesia has been

(iii) The space taken up by the Press (is all of it essential)? .
(iv) The space taken up by little used facilities (do we need two Billiard Rooms)?

dominated by events in East Timor, the rights of Australian journalists and, particularly, Radio Australia. Whilst these are important issues they

(v) The possibility of cheaply closing in verandahs constitute only part of the total relationship be-

or placing a portable prefabricated building at the back of the kitchen/dining room area.
(vi) The space taken by mail rooms and registeries

tween the two countries. However, on this occasion I want to speak specifically about Radio Australia.

and maintenance facilities may be able

to be moved out.

etc.

,

(f) We are concerned that the paper has been delayed

until the end of Session and ask for an undertaking that

Without agreeing totally with the Indonesian Government's attitude on this subject. I want to put to the House one or two aspects which may indicate the sort of perspective that the

no move be made until the Budget Session.
(g) We would be surprised if senior Library management ,will accept options 2-6 and believe no action should be taken until all space in parliament House in terms of functions and the servicing of the needs of Members,

Indonesian Government has on the matter. It would be fair to say that if we in Australia faced broadcasts which were 'coming from another country in English and which were critical in

'Senators and the Legislative process has been taken into account. (h) The only option we are prepared to accept is Option 1 (status quo). We are particularly concerned with respect to any option which removes more of the Library

many respects of Australian society, the Australian Parliament and the Australian Government, we would wonder about the rights of people overseas to engage in that sort of broadcasting. I

from Parliament House and the consequent effect this must have on the commitment, morale and the quality of work of the staff. It is essential that immediate access sections of the Library be in the building and that the Legislative Research Service have immediate

put it to the House that we ought to consider the
problems that arise when we have an organisation like Radio Australia broadcasting in Indonesian to Indonesia, often at a power that overrides the

access to the Reference and C.I.S. sections of the local radio stations in Indonesia and when those

Library.

broadcasts contain comments from an Australian

Senator Jean Melzer,

Yours sincerely, Senator R. McAuliffe Chairman of Caucus

source about matters within Indonesia. This raises a problem. I think that Australians, if they were in the reverse situation, would have some worries.

Secretary to Caucus.

I believe that it must be left to the Australian

Mrs CHILD-These letters demonstrate the Broadcasting Commission and to the Indonesian

length of time over which the question of Library Government to work out a method of operation

accommodation has been discussed. The honourfor Radio Australia without the intervention of

able member for Melbourne Ports detailed in his the Australian Government. The point that I

2482 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Adjournment

want to make in this House is this: It is difficult enough for the Indonesians to accept that a government owned and financed broadcasting network is not subject to government endorsement of everything that is broadcast; we only compound their suspicions by making formal representations at a diplomatic level. If we want to tell the Indonesians that the Government cannot control Radio Australia, we must let Radio Australia sort out its own relationships with Indonesian authorities. I believe that in that respect there are certain matters that Radio Australia has to attend to.
There have been reports of certain inaccuracies in some of the broadcasts that Radio Australia has made. For example, I spoke to one leading dissident in Jakarta, a critic of the Government who, by the way, enjoyed listening to Radio Australia; so I do not say that he is a critic of Radio Australia. I asked him whether he was aware 'of any inaccuracies that had been broadcast over Radio Australia news broadcasts. He said: 'Yes, indeed'. There was one inaccuracy that concerned him. A Radio Australia broadcast had said at one stage that he had been arrested by government authorities. When he went along to a social function in Jakarta that night, he was ribbed by people who thought that he was supposed to have been in gaol because they had heard on Radio Australia that he had been arrested. These incidents may be few and far between but they have to be corrected if they have arisen. I just put to the House that we really ought to allow the Indonesian Government and Radio Australia-in particular, I suppose the ABC-to work out their own relationships.
We say that the ABC is independent. That is the basis of the argument that we put to the Indonesian Government when we are faced with representations about the supposed shortcomings of Radio Australia. Ifthat is our view, we ought to say that the ABC should sort out its relationships with the Indonesian Government. I think that Australian journalists who urge that we should get tough with Indonesia-to use their words-on such matters at a government to government level are defeating their own purposes. The more we make representations at a government level, the more we convince the Indonesians that we control Radio Australia.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIIar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (10.43)- Extraordinary events are occurring in Western Australia at this time. What the Court Government is attempting to do or, in fact has done, is to

ram through thCi State Parliament a gerrymander electoral Bill which attempts to keep that Government in power forever. We know that the normal convention in a democracy is that when the people lose confidence in a government they get rid of it. The Court Government's variation of that saying is: W:hen the government gets sick of the people it gets rid of the people. That is what has happened on this occasion. The Government is now attempting the most monstrous of gerrymanders to ensure that the Court Government stays in office forever. In the first instance what it has done is to extend the metropolitan area to ensure--
Mr Street-I raise a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker. I seek your guidance as to whether the subject matter of the honourable gentleman's speech is properly one for the Federal Parliament.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Chair will bear the Minister's point of order in mind but will hear the honourable member for Fremantle further.
Mr DAWKINS-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. What the Court Government is attempting to do in the first instance is to rig the boundaries which determine the electoral divisions for the election of the Legislative Assembly in Western Australia to ensure that it is almost impossible for the Australian Labor Party with more than 50 per cent of the vote to get more than 50 per cent of the seats in the Legislative Assembly. The first mechanism it has used is to extend the metropolitan area to include various portions which were previously in country electorates. We have to remember that in Western Australia there are more than twice as many members in city electorates as there are in country electorates. On this occasion the Government has moved into city electorates areas which were previously in country electorates. But that is not the worst of it. The worst is that there are four statutory seats in Western Australia, statutory seats which are not--
Mr Tuckey-All held by Labor. at one stage. Mr DAWKINS-I will get to the honourable member for O'Connor in a moment. He is living evidence of the extent to which the Liberal Party in Western Australia has fallen into the hands of crooks and gangsters. That is one of the reasons-Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member for Fremantle will withdraw. Mr DAWKINS-I withdraw. The point is that the boundaries of four statutory seats in the Western Australian Parliament are determined by the

Adjournment

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2483

Parliament itself and not by any electoral COllmission. The Parliament sits in determination of the boundaries of those seats as proposed by the government of the day. What the government of the day has done on this occasion is to rearrange the boundaries of those four seats in an attempt to ensure that the Liberal Party continues to hold three of them. It has made the Kimberley seat, which in any event was one of the smaller country seats, into one of the largest country seats by any judgment to ensure that none of the other statutory seats fall to Labor.
The Pilbara seat was as large as any metropolitan seat; yet instead of reorganising it to ensure that the people of the Pilbara have sensible representation the Government has manipulated the boundaries to ensure that the Liberal Party will hang on to the Pilbara and the Labor Party will hang on to the Kimberley with a vastly increased enrolment. Yet at the same time it has done nothing about increasing the enrolments of the other two statutory seats, which enrolments are vastly smaller. As I said earlier, this is further evidence that the Liberal Party in Western Australia has fallen into the hands of crooks and petty gangsters.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Fremantle--
Mr DAWKINS-No, J am not reflecting on any member of this House. I use as my justification--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member will couch his sentiments in parliamentaryterms.
Mr DAWKINS-I use no better authority than Senator Chaney, who has said that the Liberal Party has fallen into the hands of right wing extremists and corporate criminals who hide their real purpose under the guise of States rights. If we look at the recent entrants into this Federal Parliament who have been given to us by the Liberal Party of Western Australia, we see that Senatorelect Crichton-Browne was mentioned in the Rae report as someone who was manipulating shares and was involved in insider trading. Certainly, his wife was involved in insider trading, capitalising on her gains to the extent of $40,000. We see the honourable member for O'Connor, who has a proven criminal record in relation to--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order!

him to withdraw and to refrain from offending in that manner again.
Mr DAWKINS-I withdraw. The point is that the people who have been sent to this House including the honourable member for O'Connor, and including the honourable member for Curtin, who is an unknown outcast from the Senate, are all the proteges of the criminals and crooks who run the Liberal Party in Western Australia.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order!
Mr DAWKINS-And there are some people who are attempting to manipulate the boundaries in Western Australia--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Fremantle--
Mr DAWKINS-To ensure the preservation--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Fremantle will resume his seat.
Mr Street-Ask him to withdraw.
Mr DAWKINS-I will not withdraw.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Fremantle will resume his seat. The Chair does not need prompting from the Minister in the matter. The honourable member for Fremantle seriously offends against the Standing Orders. I ask him to withdraw the very serious reflection on the two members he named.
Mr DAWKINS-Which ones?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I dare say that the honourable member was listening to his speech. I do not think he requires prompting.
Mr DAWKINS-Mr Deputy Speaker, if the honourable member for O'Connor, who is in the chamber, takes offence he can ask me to withdraw and I will gladly do so.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for O'Connor will resume his seat. The honourable member for Fremantle might assist by simply withdrawing without qualification.
Mr DAWKINS--Mr Deputy Speaker, the point is, as 1 understand it, that when a member takes offence---

Mr DAWKINS-No, he does.

Mr Tuckey I take offence.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER--'-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat. The honourable member is not entitled to reflect on a
member of this House or the other House. I ask

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The position simply is that the Standing Orders say: 'No member may use offensive words against either House of the Parliament or any member thereof'.

2484 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Adjournment

On that basis I call on the honourable member for Fremantle to withdraw without qualification.
Mr DAWKINS-In deference to you, Mr Deputy Speaker, I withdraw.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I call the honourable member for O'Connor.
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (lO.Sl)-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. Last night] rose in this House to give an address on behalf of the tenants of small businesses in the Belconnen Mall. I was pleased to assist these people as it had become obvious to me that their locally elected representatives had no intention of doing so. After all, when one has such important matters such as to. defend a group whose sole intention was to disrupt the solemn ANZAC Day parade, it is obvious that one would have little time for defending and assisting a group of hard working and enterprising Australians.
However, my well-meaning comments caused the honourable member for Fraser (Mr Fry) to say that I was purely reading a speech from the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman). I am incensed by this comment. Principally it infers that I am some form of ministerial lackey. Had the honourable member for Fraser consulted the specialist character assassins of his own party, of which two Western Australians-one from each House-come to mind, he would have discovered that even my enemies would not accuse me of being subservient. Until recently 1 was the President of the Country Shire Councils Association of Western Australia when I found myself in constant private and public conflict with the Government of Western Australia and in particular its Minister for Local Government--
Honourable members interjecting Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! Honourable members will remain silent. Mr Dawkins-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. The honourable member for O'Connor-Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! Mr Dawkins-Still owes the Shire of Carnarvon $180-Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! Mr Dawkins-That he has misappropriated. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for O'Connor will resume his seat. Mr TUCKEY-Say it outside. Mr Dawkins-I will say it outside. Mr TUCKEY-- Will you?

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Fremantle sorely tests the patience of the Chair. He has been warned against offending-
Mr Dawkins-Mr Deputy Speaker, he reflected on an unnamed member of this House.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order!
MI' Dawkins--He is the one who owes money to the taxpayers.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member not only invites the Chair to take action against him but also almost demands it. At this very late hour and on the basis that the honourable member for Fremantle withdraws on the clear understanding that he is warned against any further offence, I will call the honourable member for O'Connor again.
Mr Dawkins-l withdraw.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Fremantle withdraws. I call the honourable member for O'Connor.
Mr TUCKEY-At this stage of the game I will have to move on a little. The facts of life are that I think it is time that the honourable member for Fraser stopped judging others by the standards of his own party. But let me return to the comments on the responsibilities of an elected person to those who--
Mr Robert Brown--Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. In terms of the Standing Order to which you referred earlier, I request that the honourable member withdraw the comments he is making and not proceed in that way. I do not think we should have to listen to that from a business thug.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The Chair was temporarily distracted, as the House would have observed. It is not in a position to rule that offensive words were used. I will listen to the honourable member for O'Connor further.
Honourable members interjecting- -
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! If honourable members would remain silent, it would maximise the opportunities for the Chair to hear everything that is said in the chamber and therefore protect the chamber and, in the process, the members. The House will come to order. (Quorum formed). In calling the honourable member for O'Connor, I ask him not to be unduly provocative.
Mr TUCKEY-The point that I want to make~unfortunately I have lost so much time now-is that these people were sorely let down by their member to an extent that not even I realised

Adjournment

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2485

at that time. On 24 October 1980 these people apwith existing Australian television transmission

proached the honourable member for Canberra requirements?

(Mrs Kelly) and asked her to assist them in getting freehold title to their shops in the Belconnen Mall. What was the answer that they got? The answer that they got from her was that she would not assist them, but she thought it was a good idea

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 11 p.m., the debate is interrupted.
Mr Sinclair-Mr Deputy Speaker, I require the debate to be extended.

for the Woden Plaza.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The debate may

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- continue until 11.10 p.m.

Order! The honourable member's time has Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for

expired.

Communications) (11.0)-First of all, I am

Mr Baume-I raise a point of order. I ask you, Mr Deputy Speaker, to seek the withdrawal of unparliamentary terms used by the honourable member for Hunter (Mr Robert Brown) which were of gross offence to honourable members on this side of the chamber.

greatly indebted to the honourable member for Casey (Mr Falconer) for his observations about the Radio Australia broadcasts and the difficulties that there have been in ensuring rapport with the Government and people of Indonesia. I want to assure him that, in conjunction with the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street), there have been

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-There is no point quite extensive discussions as to the way in which

of order. The Chair is not in a position to call for a we can ensure the maintenance of the very sig-

withdrawal. The remarks were not heard by the nificant broadcasts by Radio Australia in South

Chair.

East Asia and, at the same time, accommodate the

Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (10.57)-1 raise a very important question of public policy relating to communication satellites. At 10.20 this evening, after I had received some information and checked the details, I telephoned the office of the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) so that he would have due warning and would be in a position to make an appropriate reply or to give an undertaking to investigate the matter and report back. An Australian firm has lodged a $5m deposit with the RCA corporation in the United States for the purchase of a domestic satellite with 23 channels up and 23 channels down and one channel dedicated to microwave transmission. It is one of the new technology satellites which will be located further out in space than the Intelsat satellites which are already in orbit. Being further out, the RCA satellite will be able to cover the whole of the Pacific basin including Australia, New Guinea, New Zealand and possibly even the east coast of Africa. (Quorum formed). The sys-

sensitivities of nations with which we hold very close relations that we would wish to preserve. The honourable member may not be aware that the senior management of the Australian Broadcasting Commission has visited Indonesia. There have been quite extensive consultations with the Indonesian Government. It is my understanding that, as a result, negotiations are under way for the readmission of ABC journalists by Indonesia and that arrangements have been made for the exchange with the Indonesian Ministry for Information of news and information items that have been broadcast in Radio Australia programs. As a result, the understanding of the basis by which Radio Australia broadcasts are made is perhaps significantly better than it was a little while ago. The Minister for Foreign Affairs and I do keep a fairly close watch on the position. I will certainly draw the attention of the Australian Broadcasting Commission to the remarks made by the honourable gentleman.

tem chosen is incompatible with Australian teleThe honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry

vision requirements, and yet it has enormous caJones) referred to a contract that has been

pacity. Australian Consolidated Press Ltd, the entered into with respect to a new generation

Packer group, does not throwaway $5m, and it is satellite-an investment by an Australian

in fact the Packer group which has put down the company-and its suggested incompatibility with

$5m by way of deposit. What I want to know from present Australian television systems. There are,

the Minister is this: On what basis has that group obviously, very dramatic changes presently occur-

paid the deposit? What discussions have there ring in the whole field of satellites and satellite

been with the Department of Communications or technology. It is true that there are many ad-

any other government entity? Is it a fact that it vances that are not presently reconcilable with

has in fact already ordered shuttle space for the the Australian television system. The system to

placing of the satellite in orbit? What are the which the honourable gentleman referred is one

future policy implications of the fact that it has of those. In our present spectrum analysis, I hope

adopted the RCA system which is incompatible that we can pick up some of the possibilities that

2486 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Adjournment

might ensue from the sort of signal that will come from that next generation satellite.
Mr Barry Jones-Were you advised before they put the deposit in?
Mr SINCLAIR-It is not for the Australian Government to be advised about an Australian company properly investing in an overseas corporation, business or endeavour. But the degree to which any signals are to be broadcast into Australia is the responsibility of the Australian Government and the degree to which that intruded on present licence responsibilities would be a matter for consideration.
Mr Barry Jones-How do you control it? Mr SINCLAIR-It seems to have been controlled quite adequately, as the honourable gentleman knows, in Canada and the United States, where borrowed signals have been regulated. (Quorum formed). Frankly the behaviour of some of the gentlemen in this place leaves one quite incredulous. Mr Dawkins-What about you? Have you paid the money back? How much do you still owe?

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The honourable member for Fremantle will withdraw.
Mr Dawkins-l withdraw.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The Minister's time has expired.There being no other Minister seeking the call, the right honourable gentleman may speak for an additional five minutes. If not, the debate is concluded. The House stands adjourned until Tuesday, 26 May 1981, at 2.15 p.m., in accordance with the resolution agreed to this day.
House adjourned at 11.6 p.m.
NOTICE The following notice was given: Mr MeVeigh to move-
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, the following proposed work be referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for consideration and report: Garden Island, NSW, Modernisation Stage 2.

Answers to Questions

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2487 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Flying Training Schools
(Question No. 980)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
(I) How many flying training schools are there in Australia, where are they located and under what name do they operate.
(2) What requirements does his Department lay down for establishing a flying training school.
(3) What checks does his Department make of the standard of flying and ground instruction at each flying training school.
(4) How many persons currently hold (a) student pilafs licence, (b) restricted private pilot's licence and (c) private pilot's licence.
(5) How many hours flying are required as a minimum to obtain a (a) restricted private pilot's licence and (b) private pilot's licence.
(6) What average number of hours are being logged to obtain each of these licences.
(7) What proportion of persons obtaining a student pilot's licence have obtained a (a) restricted pilot's licence and (b) private pilot's licence in each of the last 5 years.
(8) How many aircraft accidents have there been in Australia in each of the last 5 financial years involving (a) student pilots, (b) restricted private pilots and (c) private pilots.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) As at 31 December 1980 there were 206 air service operators licensed to conduct flying training. The names and addresses of these operators are listed below:
New South WalesBarrie Abbott's Aerial Service, 18 Lee Street, Port
Macquarie 2444
Aeropelican Intercity Commuter Air Services Pty Ltd, PO Box 10, Belmont 2280
Australasian Conference Association Ltd, Avondale College, PO Box 19, Cooran bong 2265
Aviation Centre Pty Ltd, 444 Marion Street, Aerodrome, Bankstown 2200
Wollongong Flight Training Centre, Hangar I, Aerodrome, Albion Park 2527
Bourke Flying Club, PO Box 262, Bourke 2840
Brabham Jack, Aviation Pty Ltd, Hangar 274, Aerodrome, Bankstown 2200
Port Macquarie Flying School, PO Box 799, Port Macquarie 2444
B.D. & R. Bunn Aviation Services, RMB 356, Albury 2640
Camden Aero Club, PO Box 244, Camden 2570 Campbell G. W., PO Box 13, Mudgee 2850
Chieftain Aviation Pty Ltd, Hangar 276, Aerodrome, Bankstown 2200
City & Country Helicopter Pty Ltd, PO Box 143, Bankstown 2200

Colfs Harbour & District Aero Club Ltd, PO Box 305, Colfs Harbour 2450
Commercial Aviation Pty Ltd, PO Box 51, Bankstown 2200
Condobolin Aero Club, PO Box 104, Condobolin 2877 Monaro Charters, 12 Baroona Avenue, Cooma North 2629 Crowley Airways Pty Ltd, PO Box 8, Camden 2570 Davidson G. H. & C. J., 4 Liverpool Street, Cowra 2794 East Coast (Commuter) Airlines Ltd, PO Box 49, Westdale 2340
Aeronautical Flight Training, PO Box 46, Camden 2570 Fisher, Ronald M. & Associates Pty Ltd, 490 Young Street, Albury 2640
Flight Facilities (Merimbula) Pty Ltd, PO Box 375, Mascot 2020
Gowing J. E. D., Kempsey Aerodrome, Kempsey 2440 Griffith Aero Club, PO Box 1447, Griffith 2680 Haxton Park Flying School, PO Box 172, Yagoona 2199
Hazelton Air Services Pty Ltd, PO Box 12, Cudal2864 Helicopter Service Centre Pty Ltd, Hangar 464, Airport, Bankstown 2200
Riverinair, Hangar 219, Forest Hill Airport, Wagga Wagga2650
Huttley N. A., 130 Kilbaben Road, Kilbaben Bay 2283
Illawarra Flying School Pty Ltd, Hangar 276, Aerodrome, Bankstown 2200
Bankstown Aerial Charter Service and The Australian Flying Training School, PO Box 143, Yagoona 2199
Cooma Air Travel, 'Hazeldean', Cooma 2630 Manning River Aero Club Ltd, PO Box 316, Taree 2430
Moree Air Services, PO Box 254, Moree 2400
McDonald Transport Pty Ltd, cm Hill & Boundary Streets, Coolangatta 4225
McIver Aviation, Aerodrome, Hoxton Park 2171 Air Centre, Albury, PO Box 521, Albury 2640
Moruya Aero Club, PO Box 127, Moruya 2537 Murray Border Flying Club Ltd, PO Box 53, Tocumwal 2714
NSW Police Aero Club, Building 430, Avro Street, Bankstown 2200
Namoi Aero Club, PO Box 68, Narrabri 2390
NarromineAero Club, PO Box 162, Narromine 2821 Nationwide Aviation Space Academy of Australia Ltd, PO Box 207, Cessnock 2325 Navair Pty Ltd, Hangar 120, Aerodrome, Bankstown 2200
New England Aviation Pty Ltd, PO Box 85, Armidale 2350
Southern Tablelands Flying Centre, PO Box 260, Goulburn 2580
Northern Rivers Aero Club, PO Box 113, Lismore 2480 North West District Flying School, PO Box 159, Inverell 2360
Orange Air Pty Ltd, PO Box 505, Orange 2800 Pay's Air Service Pty Ltd, JI9 Liverpool Street, Scone 2337 Arcas Airways, PO Box 675, Albury 2640
Tuncurry-Forster Aero Club Ltd, PO Box 31, Tuncurry 2428
Swiftair Aviation Services Pty Ltd, PO Box 195, Lismore 2480
Poirrier B.P., 36 Victory Street, West Wyalong

2488 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981
Star Air Charter, 73 Gilmour Street, Kelso 2795 Dubbo Flying School, PO Box 126, Dubbo 2830 RAAF Wagga Flying Club, RAAF Base, Wagga Wagga 2651 Rotor Work Pty Ltd, PO Box 439, Bankstown 2200 Royal Aero Club of New South Wales, PO Box 255, Bankstown 2200 Royal Newcastle Aero Club, PO Box 136, Maitland 2320 Schofields Flying Club Ltd, Station Street, Blaxland 2774 Scout Association of Australia, New South Wales Branch Air Activities Base, PO Box 240, Dee Why 2099 Hunter Air Service, c/o J. Blackwell, 8 Scott Street, Rutherford 2320 South Coast Aero Club, Princes Highway, Albion Park Rail Strickland Skyways Pty Ltd, 20 Ann Street, Colfs Harbour 2450 Summerland Aero Services Pty Ltd, PO Box 300, Casino 2470 Tamworth Aero Club, PO Box 52, Westdale 2340 Temora Aero Club, PO Box 206, Temora 2666 Tumut Aero Club Ltd, PO Box 112, Tumut 2720 Tweed-Byron Aero Club Ltd, PO Box 254, Murwillumbah 2484 Sydney Airways, Aerodrome, Bankstown 2200 Austavia, 345 Cheyenne Street, Lavington 2641 Canberra Aero Club, PO Box 352, Kingston 2604 Airport Flying School, Private Mail Box, Canberra Airport
Victoria and TasmaniaHarewood Air Charter, PO Box 94, Tooradin 3980 Ballarat Aero Club, Airport, Ballarat 3352 Staywood Air, PO Box 709, Warrnambool3280 SAS Southern Air Services, Northern Avenue, Moorab-
bin Airport 3194 Central Flying Services Pty Ltd, c/o The Federation In-
surance Ltd, 360 Collins Street, Melbourne 3000 Civil Flying School, PO Box 210, Cheltenham 3192 Combined Flight Training (Vic.) Pty Ltd, Moorabbin
Airport 3194 Corporate Aircraft Services Pty Ltd, 464 Collins Street,
Melbourne 3000 Coldstream Flying School, Killara Road, Coldstream
3770 Skybird Flight Centre, PO Box 230, Niddrie 3042 Air Charter Ballarat, Private Bag 25, Ballarat 3351 Ovens and King Airlines, PO Box 185, Wangaratta 3677 Fliteway Pty Ltd, PO Box 210, Cheltenham 3192 Fogarty's Field Flying School, PO Box 135, Parkville
3052 Aviation Training School, Box 918, Mildura 3500 Gawne Aviation and Gawne Airlines, Box 486, Sheppar-
ton 3630 Galaxy Airways and Flying School, PO Box 19, Essen-
don 3040 Geelong Aero Club, PO Box 82, Geelong 3220 Moorabbin Aviation Academy, Moorabbin Airport,
Mentone 3194 Groupair Pty Ltd, PO Box 118, Berwick 3806 Bairnsdale Air Charter, PO Box 291, Bairnsdale 3875 Jayrow Helicopters Pty Ltd, PO Box 46, Mentone 3194 Correll Advanced Flying Training, PO Box 234, Chel-
tenham 3192 Kyabram Aero Club, PO Box 389, Kyabram 3620 Latrobe Valley Aero Club, PO Box 200, Morewell 3840 Lilydale Flying School, PO Box 525, Lilydale 3140
GeelongAirport, Torquay Road, MtDuneed 3216

Answers to Questions
Bendigo Air Services and Sovereign Airlines, PO Box 326, Bendigo 3550
Mid-Murray Flying Club, PO Box 260, Swan Hi1l3585
Discover Flying (Australia) and Essendon Air Charter, Terminal Building, Essendon Airport 3041
Aeroproach of Ararat, 5 Blackie Avenue, Ararat 3377 Peninsula Aero Club, Stuart Road, Tyabb 3913 Essendon Flying School, Hangar 5, Bulla Road, Essendon 3041 SchUll Aviation, PO Box 83, Cheltenham 3192 Pro-Aero Training Centre Pty Ltd, Terminal Building, Essendon Airport 3041 Promair (Australia) Pty Ltd, Midland Highway, Welshpool 3966 Missionary Aviation Fellowship, PO Box 211, Box Hill 3128 Tarago Valley Flying Services, PO Box 42, Drouin 3818 RAAF East Sale Flying Club, PO Box 10, RAAF Base, East Sale 3852 RAAF Point Cook Flying Club, RAAF Base, Point Cook 3029 Phillip Island Air Charter, 170 Thompson Avenue, Cowes3922 Robertson Air Services Pty Ltd, Fisheries Road, Fiveways, Cranbourne 3977 Royal Victorian Aero Club, Moorabbin Airport, Mentone 3194 Skybird Flight Centre and Mangalore Flight Centre, Box 230, Niddrie 3042 Skyways of Benalla Pty Ltd, PO Box 297, Benalla 3672 Executive Airlines, Terminal Building, Essendon Airport 3041 Speedair Pty Ltd, Building 47, Vaughan Street, Essendon Airport 3041 The Pilot Makers E.F.T.S. Pty Ltd, 5 Heales Street, Dromana 3936 Australian Aeronautical Academy, Building 46, Vaughan Street, Essendon Airport 3041 WangarattaAero Club, PO Box 162, Wangaratta 3677 Whittlesea Flying School Pty Ltd, Grant Road, Whittlesea 3757 Wimmera Aero Club, PO Box 4, Nhi1l3418 Astral Airways,PO Box 117, East Devonport 7310 Launceston Flying School Pty Ltd, PO Box II, Evandale 7212 Tasmanian Aero Club, PO Box, 42 Evandale 7212 The Aero Club of Southern Tasmania, GPO Box 45IE, Hobart 7001
QueenslandQueensland Air Training Corps (RAAF Cadets), PO
Box 125, East Brisbane 4169 Air Training Centre Pty Ltd, Terminal Building Area,
Archerfield Aerodrome 4108 Ayr FlyingServices Pty Ltd, PO Box 794, Ayr 4807 Suncoast Flying, PO Box 437, Maroochydore 4558 Bundaberg Aero Club, PO Box 472, Bundaberg 4670 Butler Airlines Pty Ltd, PO Box 2, Brisbane Airport 4007 Butler Airlines (Gold Coast) Pty Ltd, PO Box 5352,
Gold Coast Mailing Centre 4217 Darling Downs Aero Club, Aerodrome, Carroll Street,
Toowoomba 4350 Aviation Training and Transport, PO Box 786, Mackay
4740 Gil Layt's Flying School Pty Ltd, Hangar 4, Archerfield
Aerodrome 4108 Golden Wings Aviation Pty Ltd, 346 Ingham Road,
Townsville 4810

Answers to Questions

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2489

RAAF Amberley Flying School, c/o Wing Cdr. Hains, OlC AEMF 482 Sqn., RAAF, Amberley 4305
Hinchinbrook Air Services, PO Box 600, Innisfail4860 Hawker Pacific Beech Aero Centre, PO Box 15, Rocklea
4106 Helicopter Charter Pty Ltd, PO Box 18, Brisbane Air-
port 4007 Hempel, Barry, Building 221, Archerfield Aerodrome
4108 Henebery Aviation Company, 145 Bulcock Street,
Caloundra4551 Highlands Air Pty Ltd, PO Box 260, Emerald 4720 Downs Flight Centre, M.s. F28, Warner Street, War-
wick 4370 Noel Lyons Aviation Services, 70 Tierney Drive, Cur-
rumbin4223 Mount Isa Aero Club Inc., PO Box 1772, Mt Isa 4825 North Queensland Aero Club, Airport, Aeroglen, Cairns
4870 Outback Air Pty Ltd, 181 Jensen Street, Edge Hill,
Cairns 4870 Piccolo Aviation and Phoenix Aviation, PO Box 360,
Gladstone 4680 Pioneer Flight Centre Pty Ltd, 24 Penn Street, Mackay
4740 Archerfield Flight Centre, PO Box 361, Rocklea 4106 Rex Flight Centre, PO Box 108, Rocklea 4106 Rockhampton Aero Club, PO Box 3, Rochampton 4700 Central Coast Air Charter and Central Coast Flying
School, 77 Ocean Avenue, Slade Point 4741 Royal Queensland Aero Club, PO Box 41, Rocklea 4106 Rundle Air Service Pty Ltd, PO Box 143, Aitkenvale
4814 Sea World Aviation, PO Box 190, Surfers Paradise 4217 Southport Floatplane Services Pty Ltd, PO Box 74, Run-
away Bay 4216 Sunbird Airlines Pty Ltd, Airport, Gladstone 4680 Sunshine Coast Air Charter Pty Ltd, PO Box 377,
Caloundra 4551 The Gold Coast Aero Club, 12 Coolangatta Airport,
Bilinga4225 The Redcliffe Aero Club, PO Box 158, Redcliffe 4020 The Wide Bay Aero Club, PO Box 85, Maryborough
4650 Air Maroochy, 12 Shrapnell Street, Bunderim 4556 RedC\iffe Flying Services, PO Box 120, Redcliffe 4020 Townsville Aero Club, Box 5309 M.S.O., Townsville
4810 Whitsunday Aero Company Operations, PO Box 254,
Proserpine 4800 Westco Air Charter, PO Box 140, Rocklea 4106

South Australia and Northern Territory-

Aero Club of Broken Hill, PO Box 1, Broken Hill South

2880

Alice Springs Aero Club, PO Box 508, Alice Springs 5750

Commodore Aviation Pty Ltd, PO Box 135, Port Lincoln

5606

Darwin Aero Club Inc., PO Box 39252, Winnellie 5789

Ian Drennan Aviation, PO Box 1756, Port Augusta 5700

Eyre Charter Pty Ltd, PO Box 16, Cummins 5631

Central Flying School, 302 North Terrace, Adelaide

5000

Bruce Hartwig's Flying School, PO Box 101, Lyndoch

5351

.

Hiller Aviation, PO Box 969, Murray Bridge 5233

Masterflight, Parafield Airport 5106

O'Connor's Air Service, PO Box 21, Mt Gambier. 5290.

Pinnaroo Aero Club Inc'l c/o D. J. O'Driscoll, PO Box 100, Pinnaroo 5204

Port Lincoln Flying Club Inc., PO Box 605, Port Lincoln

5606

Rossair Pty Ltd, Parafield Airport 5106

Royal Aero Club of South Australia, Parafield Airport 5106
South Coast Air Centre Pty Ltd, 253 Main South Road, Morphett Vale 5162
Aircare, Parafield Airport 5106 Tennantair Pty Ltd, PO Box 480, Tennant Creek 5760 Beechair, Hangar 50B, Parafield Airport 5106 Trojan Aerial Services Pty Ltd, PO Box 467, Virginia 5120 Intercity Airlines, Parafield Airport 5106
Western AustraliaJ.A. Air, Box D152 GPO, Perth 6001 Aviation Academy of Australia, PO Box 110, Cunderdin
6407 Bunbury Aero Club (Inc), PO Box 120, Bunbury 6230 Chrishine Nominees Pty Ltd, 30 Marine Terrace,
Geraldton 6530 Kalgoorlie-Boulder Aero Club (Inc), PO Box 146,
Boulder 6432 Narrogin Flying Club (Inc), PO Box 79, Narrogin 6312 Perry Aviation, PO Box 2252, South Hedland 6722 Piper West Pty Ltd, Hangar 126, Airport, Jandakot 6164 Royal Aero Club of Western Australia (Inc), Airport,
Jandakot 6164 Tropic Air Services Pty Ltd, PO Box 26, Carnarvon 6701 West Air Flight Service, Hangar 109, Jandakot 6164
(2) My Department lays down requirements for establishing flying schools in Air Navigation Orders Part 80, Section 80.1.
(3) My Department makes the following checks of flying and ground instruction at flying training schools:
(a) Annual surveillance of each school for licence renewal. This includes checks of flying training records, training syllabuses, students' progress records in theory subjects and the Chief Flying Instructor's record of flights with his staff for their annual checks.
(b) Biennial flight and ground checks of each flight instructor.
(c) Where a school employs a person who is approved to conduct licence or rating tests, up to 20 per cent of candidates prepared by the school are tested by a Departmental examiner. In other cases all tests are conducted by a Departmental examiner.
(d) Approval interviews and flight testing of all flying instructors wishing to be approved to conduct licence tests.
(e) Written examinations covering essential aeronautical knowledge and the principles and methods of instruction for all instructor rating candidates.
(f) Approval and observation of flight instructor refresher courses.
(4) As at 31 December 1980 there were: (a) 20,471 student pilot licence holders; (b) 6943 private pilot licence holders with area restriction;
and (c) 16,922 private pilot licence holders without area
restriction.
(5) The minimum number of hours required to obtain a private pilot licence with area restriction is 33 hours. The minimum number of hours required for the lifting of the area restriction on a private pilot licence is 22 hours.
(6) No comprehensive records of actual hours taken to achieve issue of flight crew licences are kept by my Department. An estimate of the average number of hours logged to obtain a private pilot licence with an area restriction is 45 hours. An estimate of the average number of hours logged to obtain a private pilot licence without an area restriction is 68 hours.

2490 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(7) My Department does not keep records as to which
student pilots attain private pilot pilot standard. There is no indication as to the average lag time between a pilot taking out a student licence and obtaining a private licence. The lag time may vary between a few months and several years. The following table gives figures on the number of first issue licences
from I January 1976 to 31 December 1980. I trust that the table meets the honourable member's needs:

First Issue Flight Crew Licences for Year Ended 31 December

Year

Student Private

pilot

pilot

1976 1977 1978 1979 1980

5,641 5,740 5,967 4,932 4,530

3,060 3,439 3,629 3,809 3,258

(8) Aircraft accident statistics are not readily available in
financial year periods as my Department follows the international practice of collecting and examining such data on a calendar year basis. I trust that the following table meets the honourable member's needs:

Year
1976 1977 1978 1979 1980

Student Restricted pilot private

17

7

14

12

15

3

14

12

10

6

Private
125 104 121 97 105

Office of Road Safety
(Question No. 981)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
(l) Did he say in answer to my question No 164 (Hansard 4 December 1980, page 470) that a resource limitation was that an adequate number of suitably qualified staff was not available to launch and monitor research and promotion projects of the Office of Road Safety.
(2) Was the limitation on qualified staff during 1980 due to the loss of qualified and experienced officers caused by resignation and/or transfer to other departments emanating from the compulsory transfer of the Office of Road Safety from Melbourne to Canberra; if not, what was the specific nature of the resource limitation referred to in his answer to question No. 164.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) The limitation on staff during the period referred to in my answer to question No. 164-i.e. during the twelve months to 30.6.80-was due to the loss of qualified and experienced officers as a result of resignation and/or transfer to other areas of Department of Transport Australia and to other organisations coupled with the inevitable delay in replacing such highly specialised officers. I am unable to say why the officers resigning or transferring chose to seek other positions.

Northern Airlines
(Question No. 1039)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 2 April 1981:
(1) Did Northern Airlines recently withdraw from aviation activities in the Northern Territory; if so, is he able to say for what periods and in respect of which sections of coastline were coastal surveillance activities for which Northern Airlines had responsibility not carried out.
(2) What specific arrangements were made for performance of relevant coastal surveillance duties not carried out by Northern Airlines during the periods, and at the locations concerned.
(3) What specific arrangements have been made for performance of the coastal surveillance duties previously covered by contracts with Northern Airlines and what are the precise financial provisions in each case.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) Northern Airlines ceased operations in the Northern Territory on 6 February 1981. The company, in a managerial role only, continued to provide surveillance coverage through sub-contractors to allow time for a new contract to be let. While this was being arranged, ad-hoc contractors were called in at short notice. Coverage was not able to be provided as follows:
Littoral Search of Bathurst and Melville IslandsFebruary 7 to 9
Littoral Search from Darwin to Millingimbi-February 7t09.
Offshore Search of refugee approach routes-February 7 to 14.
(2) Ad-hoc coverage was provided by Arnhem Air Charter. Nomad aircraft operated on behalf of the Customs Bureau were on stand-by.
(3) The surveillance duties formerly carried out by Northern Airlines are now being performed by Ansett to whom the Northern Airlines surveillance contracts have been assigned. The financial provisions of the contracts remain unchanged.
Australian National Line
(Question No. 1080)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :
(1) What were the average annual rate rises of the Australian National Line in (a) coastal general cargo, (b) overseas liner exports to Europe and to the United States of America and (c) overseas bulk exports of iron ore. since 1972-73.
(2) What profit or loss has the Line made in (a) coastal general cargo trades, (b) overseas liner exports, (c) overseas liner imports, (d) overseas bulk exports and (e) container terminal operations since 1972-73.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) The actual freight rate changes in Australian National Line (ANL) coastal general cargo trades since 1972-73 have been:

Answers to Questions

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2491

Date August 1972
July 1974 September 1974 January 1975 July 1975
NSW
August 1975 July 1976
August 1976
October 1976 March 1977 October 1977 December 1978 June 1979 August 1979 November 1979 March 1980 November 1980

Variation

Trade

+ 12 percent

+ 25 per cent

+ 20 per cent

+ 11 percent

++

22 18

percent percent

+ 2t per cent Wharfage Surcharge

up to $2.40 per cu metre reduction

+ 2t per cent Wharfage Surcharge + 1t per cent Wharfage Surcharge
Wharfage Surcharge increased rom 2t per cent to 5 per cent
Wharfage Surcharge increased from 1+ per cent to 3+ per cent
+ I! per cent Wharfage Surcharge + I per cent Wharfage Surcharge + 1per cent Wharfage Surcharge

+ t per cent Wharfage Surcharge

+ +

1 t

per per

cent cent

Wharfage Wharfage

Surcharge Surcharge

+ 40 percent

++

128 per cent 24 per cent

+ 188 per cent

+ 15 per cent

+++++

7 per cent 11 percent 50 percent 24 per cent 15 per cent

+ 1.75 per cent Wharfage Surcharge

+++

1 per cent Wharfage Surcharge I per cent Wharfage Surcharge 0.5 per cent Wharfage Surcharge

+ 15%

+
up

1to0%+

8%

++

8% 5%

+5% +5%
+ 3% + 3% bunker surcharge

Bunker surcharge increased from 3% to 6%

up to + 7%

+ 4.5% bunker surcharge
up to + 10%

Dense cargo (except aluminium, zinc concentrates and other defined Tasmanian export commodities)
- Sydney/Tasmania/Sydney - Melbourne/Tasmania/Melbourne Hazardous cargo all trades Newsprint Tasmanian trades Removal of Concessions - Heavy lift cargo all trades - Mobile industrial machinery all trades
All trades
Northbound general cargo from Tasmania (excluding paper)
Tasmania/Melbourne Melbourne /Tasmania Tasmania/ Melbourne
Melbourne/Tasmania
Melbourne/Queensland/Melbourne Melbourne/Darwin Tasmania/NSW
NSW /Tasmania Queensland/NSW NSW /Queensland
All trades except northbound general cargo from Tasmania (except paper)
Tasmania/Melbourne Melbourne/Tasmania Refrigerated cargo, Tasmania/Melbourne NSW /Tasmania Tasmania/NSW Brisbane / T a s m a n i a Tasmania/Brisbane Other Queensland cargoes East Coast/Darwin/East Coast
Melbourne/Tasmania Tasmania/Melbourne NSW/Queensland to Tasmania Tasmania to NSW/Queensland
East Coast/Darwin/East Coast Bass Strait trade Tasmania/NSW/Queensland service Bass Strait trade Melbourne/TasmaniajNSW to Queensland Tasmania to mainland ports Queensland/Melbourne to Tasmania Sydney/Tasmania All trades
All trades
All trades
All trades All trades

(I) (b) The ANL liner services to Europe and the United States are provided as a member of the respective shipping conferences serving these trades. Freight rate changes for conference shipping are determined by commercial negotiation between conferences and shippers. In practice conference rates may be varied by agreement with individual shippers and the Australian Shippers Council. Details of rate changes on a conference basis are as follows:

1972-73 1973-74

FREIGHT RATE CHANGE Australia-Europe trade

General cargo

Wool

Per cent 4.0 4.0

Per cent 8.0 decrease 4.0

2492 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Answers to Questions

General cargo

Wool

1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

Percent 15.3 35.1 10.0 9.0 4.5 2.0 6.0

Per cent 4.5 25.0
25.0
10.0 5.0
9.0 decrease 6.0 decrease

Note: Wool Rates Separately Negotiated With Conference. FREIGHT RATE CHANGE Australia-USA trade

General cargo

Meat

1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

Percent 6.5
4.0
35.1 13.5
12.5 9.5
4.5 8.0
10.59.2

Per cent 8.0
4.0
35.1 nil
9.0 7.0 3.0 5.0

Note: Meat Rates Separately Negotiated With Conference.
(I) (c) ANL's freight rates in the Japan iron are trade are considered to be commercially confidential.
(2) (a) (b) (c) (d) and (e). Profits and losses made by the Australian National Line in coastal and overseas trading since 1972-73 have been:

Year

Coastal

Overseas

1972-73
1973-74 1974-75 1975-76

$'000 955 loss 953 loss 9,272 loss
6,987 loss

$'000
2,490 2,372 2,026 loss 3,68810s8

Because of the increasingly competitive nature of international trading, ANL decided, for commercial reasons, not to report the results of its coastal and overseas trade separ-
ately. The overall results of the Line's operations from 1 July
1976 have been:

1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

$'000 3,889
5,692 4,708 loss
7,989 loss

North West Shelf Gas and Petroleum Project
(Question No. 1085)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) What is the estimated sum of public funds required for (a) port infrastructure and (b) road and rail infrastructure for the North West Shelf gas and petroleum project.
(2) What is the division of costs and responsibilities between Commonwealth and State Governments in the development and operation of the port.

(3) To what degree will the port facilities be owned or leased or operated by the private companies owning the minerals to be exported.
(4) Is there any requirement for the mineral exports to be transported in Australian flag ships, in line with the Government's foreign investment guidelines on mineral ownership.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The provision of port infrastructure and road/rail infrastructure within the development area in the vicinity of Dampier, and in the Burrup Peninsula, is a matter for the Western Australian Government. I understand that the State Government is contributing (under the agreement with the Joint Venturers) $1 million to the infrastructure costs of roads on the Burrup Peninsula to service this development. Local Government is also likely to contribute funds towards road infrastructure for the project. The total requirement for public funds is not known.
(2) Provision of portfacili ties for the North West Shelf Gas Development project is primarily the responsibility of the Western Australian Government. The Commonwealth has no direct responsibility for the development and operation of the port nor for meeting costs.
(3) I understand the supply base and export facilities at the port will be owned and operated by the Joint Venturers. The ownership and operation of a materials handling facility, to be constructed for the development project by the Joint Venturers, may revert to the proposed Port Authority on completion of the construction phase. The State Government is discussing legislation for the Port Authority with the Joint Venturers.
(4) There is no requirement for the mineral exports to be transported in Australian flag ships. The Government supports the use of Australian flag ships in the overseas trades where their operation is commercially viable, and where additional costs of such transportation are not imposed on the industry or the community.
Sky West Airlilles: Ban On Smoking In Aircraft
(Question No.1087)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the recenl news reports that a Western Australian commuter operator, Sky West Airlines, has banned smoking in its aircraft.
(2) Has he had or will he have discussions with other Australian airlines for extension of the ban on smoking in aircraft especially on short haul routes.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes, I commend Sky West Airlines for their initiative in this matter.
(2) While I am sympathetic to the problems faced by nonsmokers on aircraft, it is extremely doubtful whether the Commonwealth has any authority to ban smoking on aircraft except in matters relating to safety, such as during take-off, landing, refuelling, and in toilet areas. Although banning of smoking in aircraft in addition to the above restrictions is a matter for each individual operator, I do consider that all passenger air service operators should reflect community attitudes and expectations. I have and will continue to encourage the airlines to keep this matter under review to ensure that any alteration in the demand for non-smoking seats is rel1ected in their decisions.

Answers to Questions

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2493

Trans~Australia Airlines
(Question No. 1163)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 8 April 1981 :
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a report on page 2 of the Australian Financial Review of 3 April 1981 where he is reported to have told the Chairman of the Australian National Airlines Commission that the Government would hold all shares if TAA was formed into a public company.
(2) Is there any substance to this report; if so, when did he advise the Chairman of the Commission that TAA was to be formed into a public company.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) I am aware of the Press report referred to by the honourable member.
I spoke to the Chairman of the Australian National Airlines Commission on Tuesday, 31 March 1981 to inform him that the Government had resolved in principle to establish TAA as
a public company. r informed him that the structure of the
company had yet to be determined but that I thought that the Government would establish it as a company similar to Qantas. I rang him again on Wednesday 1 April saying that the Government had asked for a paper setting out a number of options that it could consider in establishing TAA as a public company.
Might I say that all the options that have been canvassed so far are purely hypothetical. The simple fact is that when I spoke to the Chairman of the Australian National Airlines Commission the Government had not considered that issue.
Annual Reports and Other Publications: Minister for Science and Technology
(Question No. 1250)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April J981:
(1) What annual reports are produced by his Department and authorities under his aegis.
(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.
(3) Are other regular publications issued by his Department and these authorities; if so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of each.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I) Annual reports are produced by;
Department of Science and Technology Patents, Trade Marks and Designs Office Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Or-
ganisation and the following Institutes of CSIRO Institute of Animal and Food Sciences Institute of Biological Resources Institute of Earl h Resources Institute of Industrial Technology Institute of Physical Sciences Bureau of Scientific Services Anglo-Australian Telescope Board Australian Industrial Research Development Incentives Board Australian Institute of Marine Science Metric Conversion Board National Standards Commission
(2) $59,000.

(3)-

Department

Production

Central OfficeAntarctic Research Policy Advisory Committee report
Australian Research Grants Scheme List of Approved Grants
Baseline Air Pollution Station report
Science Statement
Work and People (Relates to the small number of copies distributed by Department. AGPS sells and distributes the majority of copies)
Patent, Trade Marks and Designs Office~~
Abstracts of Unaccepted Complete Specifications Open to Public Inspection
Australian Official Journal of Patents, Trade Marks and Designs (Relates to the small number of copies distributed by the Department. AGPS sells and distributes the majority of copies)
Names of Applicants for Patents
Names of Applicants for Registration of Trade Marks
Numerical Record of Trade Marks Proceedings
Printed Patent Specifications Registered Owners of Designs
and Articles for which Designs have been registered Bureau ofMeteorology-Australian Meteorological Magazine
Monthly Rainfall Revicw Monthly Weather Review
(Costs of above Bureau publications are recovered through subscriptions)
Ionosopheric Prediction Service-
Ionospheric Prediction Series
Ionospheric Handbook Commonwealth Scientific and
Industrial Research OrganizationAustralian Forest Research Australian Wildlife Research
Brunonia Industrial Research News
Rebuild
Food Research Quarterly Scifile Ecos Rural Research
Australian Journal ofAgricultural Research
Australian Journal of Biological Sciences

$
720
2,090 1,820 1,020
15,000
38,750
371,800 11,960
5,620 7,370 37,780
950
3,040 960
1,560
4,180 600
6,400 16,800 8,100 5,500 4,000 5,100 6,800 44,900 52,400 69,800 53,900

Distribution $
150
160 100 280
750
5,570
4,180 500
320 220 2,490
10
110 430
2,620
4,200 300
1,000 2,800 2,300 5,900 8,200 1,600
100 16,800 30,400 10,100 4,600

2494 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Department

Production Distribution

Australian Journal ofBotany Australian Journal of Chemi-
stry Australian Journal of Marine
and Freshwater Research Australian Journal of Plant
Physiology Australian Journal ofPhysics Australian Journal of Soil
Research Australian Journal of Zoology Australian Institute of Marine
ScienceNewsletter Metric Conversion BoardNewsletter

$ 45,200 214,000 45,200 42,000 77,900 18,600 51,500
2,000 920

$ 3,800 14,700 5,600 4,300 4,300 2,900 10,600
1,120 2,000

Annual Reports and Other Publications: Minister for Aboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 1255)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What annual reports are produced by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs and authorities under the Minister's aegis.
(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.
(3) Are other regular publications issued by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs and these authorities; if so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution ofeach.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) and (2) The following table shows the annual reports produced by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs and statutory authorities within the responsibility of the Minister in 1979-80 and their publication costs:

Annual Reports

Cost

Department of Aboriginal Affairs Aboriginal Loans Commission* . Aboriginal Land Fund Commission* . Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies Aboriginal Land Commissioner

$
6,500 3,400 2,400
480 600

Total

13,380

* Since absorbed into the Aboriginal Development
Commission. (3) Other regular pUblications produced in 1979-80 were as
follows:

(a)

(b)

Production Distribution

cost

cost

$

Department ofAboriginal Affairs

Aboriginal Newsletters

22,500

$ 19,272

(a)

(b)

Production Distribution

cost

cost

$

$

Research Newsletter

122

72

Statistical Newsletter

672

54

Aboriginal News (Quarterly)

12,405

Australian Institute ofAboriginal Studies

Newsletter (2 issues)

- -5,-530- - - -

Total

41,229

19,398

Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment: Department ofAdministrative Services
(Question No. 1407)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Have any officers and employees of his Department been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many.
(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment approved in each case.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Twenty-three officers and employees of the Department currently have approval to engage in outside employment in accordance with the provisions of the Public Service Act, Regulations and General Orders.
(2) Divisional status, approximate annual salary and nature of outside employment for each individual is outlined below:

Division
Third Third Third Third Third Third Third Third Third Third
Third Third Third Third Third Third
Third Third Fourth Fourth Fourth Fourth Fourth

Annual

salary

Outside

(rounded) employment

$ 22,000 22,000 22,000 22,000 22,000 20,000 20,000 19,000 19,000 19,000
19,000 16,000 16,000 16,000 15,000 14,000
14,000 14,000 18,000 14,000 13,000 12,000 10,000

Lecturer
Lecturer Lecturer
Piano teacher Musician Riding instructor
Shop assistant Shop assistant
Lecturer Auditor for community organis-
ation Lecturer
Musician Barman
Bar attendant Catering Work/study experience (Con-
servatorium of Music)
Musician Football gate keeper Trade lecturer Surveyor (overseas)
Musician/photographer Alderman (local government)
Cosmetic representative

Answers to Questions

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2495

Engagement by Officers in Outside Employment-Department of Aboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 1411)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Have any officers and employees of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs been granted permission to engage in outside employment; if so, how many.
(2) What is the division and approximate salary level of each officer or employee granted permission, and what was the nature of outside employment approvedin each case.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes, two (2).
(2) Both third division officers-
(a) Salarylevels-(i) $25,821, (ii) $20,200.
(b) Nature of employment-
(i) Radio announcing on weekends,
(ii) Bookkeeping and clerical work.
Overseas Travel: Department of Communications
(Question No. 1443)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many officers and employees of the Department of Communications travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances, etc.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) During 1979-80, 14 Officers of the Department travelled overseas on official business.
(2) The total cost of travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances, etc., came to $53, 653.56.
Overseas Travel: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 1459)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances, etc.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) 72 officers and employees of my Department and organisations within my portfolio travelled overseas on official duty during 1979.80.
(2) The total estimated cost of this travel, including fares, accommodation and allowances was in the order of $300,000.

Home Telephone Rentals: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs
(Question No. 1529)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully or (b) partially paid by his Department.
(2) What was the cost to his Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) Fully paid home telephones-5, (b) Partially paid-l 62.
(2) Cost to the Department in the year 1979-80$26,105.29.
Home Telephone Rentals: Department of Transport
(Question No. 1532)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully or (b) partially paid by his Department.
(2) What was the cost to his Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) and (b) Where an official telephone service has been installed at the private residence of an officer Finance Direction No. 13/12 of the Department of Finance authorises the Department concerned to make payment of the full basic rental plus up to 120 metered calls per half-year plus official trunk calls. Put simply, all of the basic rental and part of the telephone calls are paid for by the Department. Nine hundred and sixty one key operational, policy, technical and administrative staff in the Department of Transport have official telephones at their private residences in accordance' with these provisions.
(2) $131,662.
Home Telephone Rentals: Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 1536)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department have their home telephone rentals and/or charges (a) fully or (b) partially paid by his Department.
(2) What was the cost to his Department of this expenditure in 1979-80.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) (a) None.
(b) One hundred and forty officers of my Department currently have their home telephone accounts partially paid by the Department as per Finance Direction 13/12.

2496 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) The cost to my Department for payment of semi official telephones in private residences in 1979-80 was approximately $16,600.
Re~cycling ofPaper: Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 1570)
Mr Bungey asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Has any action been taken by his Department to re-cycle paper; if so, what action.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Department of Administrative Services, in its role as Manager of Commonwealth Property, has made arrangements with a commercial organisation for the re-cycling of waste paper for the building in which my Department is located in Canberra.
Re~cycling of Paper: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 1589)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Has any action been taken by his Department to re-cycle paper; ifso, what action.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
My Department has let contracts to various firms in all States and the Australian Capital Territory for the removal and re-cycling of waste paper.
Tea Services: Department ofAboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 1619)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many (a) full-time and (b) part-time staff are employed on tea making and distribution in (i) the Head Office and (ii) other offices of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs.
(2) What was the cost of (a) salaries and (b) other charges in the provision of tea services in the Department in 1979-80.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) (a) (i) Two. (ii) Two. (b) (i)Nil. (ii) Nil.
(2) (a) $38,072.36. (b) Nil.
Coastal Surveillance
(Question No. 1681)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many (a) vessels and (b) aircraft were engaged in patrolling the north-west coast of Western Australia during 1979-80.
(2) How many foreign fishing vessels were reported or sighted fishing illegally in the area and what action was taken.

(3) From which country did each reported or sighted fishing vessel come.
Mr Hunt-Th~ answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) An average o( two RAN patrol boats per month supplemented for short periods by charter vessels and one 'Cape' Class navigational aids vessel.
(b) An average of four light-twin aircraft daily along the littoral and two to four patrols per month through the contiguous AFZ by RAAF Orions.
(2) There were two reported sightings of confirmed illegal activity by foreign fishing vessels in the north-west during 1979-80. Each was of a pair of Taiwanese trawlers operating inside the then Declared Fishing Zone (DFZ). Both pairs were subsequently boarded outside the DFZ and the masters were severly reprimanded.
From time to time during the year, Indonesian subsistence fishing vessels were found to be engaged in activities not in accordance with the bilateral Memorandum of Understanding between the Australian and Indonesian Governments. Action was initiated through diplomatic channels. A higher rate of deterrent patrols was mounted and ultimately enforcement action including prosecution of the masters of two vessels ensued.
(3) See (2).
Damage to Navigational Installations
(Question No. 1682)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(l) What navigational installations located on or off the north-west coast of Australia were damaged by causes other than natural causes during 1979-80.
(2) What has been the repair costs of any damage.
(3) Have any cases of damage been attributed to foreign fishermen; if so, what are the details.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The following marine navigational installations located on or off the north-west coast of Australia were damaged by causes other than natural causes during calendar years 1979 and 1980:
(a) Dampier Decca Navigation facility-a monitor station located at Woodbrook was damaged in July 1979 when a high powered bullet holed the diesel shed wall.
(b) Port Hedland buoys-a buoy suffered minor structural damage in August 1980 when run down by a vessel.
(c) Quobba Point Lightstation-the wind vane was stoned by vandals in August 1980 causing the vane to bend.
(d) Port Hedland Decca Navigational facility-the padlocks securing the main compound, disesel shed and battery room at the De Grey station were cut with bolt cutters.
(2) The costs incurred in repairing damage to each of these facilities was as follows:
(a) Dampier Decca Navigational facility-$20.
(b) Port Hedland buoy-$I,196.
(c) Quobba Point lightstation-Nil.
(d) Port Hedland Decca Navigational facility-$30.

Answers to Questions

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2497

(3) None of the above damage was attributed to foreign fishermen.
Crashes of Light Aircraft
(Question No. 1685)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many crashes of (a) private and (b) commercial light aircraft occurred during the last 3 years.
(2) What type of aircraft was involved in each crash and what was the (a) date, (b) place, (c) cause and (d) number of persons killed or injured in each crash.
(3) What action is being taken to reduce the number of crashes of light aircraft.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) During the years 1978 to 1980 inclusive 74S accidents involving general aviation aircraft were reported to my Department. These accidents can be grouped by type of operation as follows:
(a) private-333 (b) charter-64 (c) commuter-IS (d) agricultural-87 (e) flying training-I 02 (f) other aerial work-145
(2) The detailed information requested by the honourable member in respect of each of the aforementioned accidents, whilst generally available within the data recording system, is not in a form which readily lends itself to answering the honourable member's question. It would be very timeconsuming to compile the specific answers in the form requested and I consider that the diversion of available resources to this task is not warranted without further justification. If the honourable member has in mind some particular aspects of light aircraft safety which he wishes to pursue I would be very happy to look into the matter of providing relevant statistical data more readily obtainable from Departmental records.
(3) An investigation is carried out by the Air Safety Investigation Branch of my Department into all reported aircraft accidents and air safety incidents. Relevant findings arising from these investigations are conveyed to the appropriate regulatory Branches of my Department so that any necessary corrective action can be taken as part of a continuing safety monitoring process which addresses itself to all aspects of aircraft operation.
Golden Shouldered Parrots
(Question No. 1766)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What conditions obtain in the Australian Capital Territory concerning the keeping, bringing into the Territory and sale, both within and without the Territory, of Golden Shouldered Parrots.
Mr HodgmanThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that the Animal and Birds Protection Ordinance 1918 provides protection for most native bird species, including the Golden Shouldered Parrot, in the Australian Capital Territory. The Golden Shouldered Parrot does not occur in the wild in south-eastern Australia and any specimens which are kept must have been bred in

captivity or imported from interstate. A permit is required to keep native birds, but there is no restriction on the sale of legally held birds. The present Ordinance does not specify the need for permits covering the import into or export of birds from the Australian Capital Territory. but the recently made Nature Conservation Ordinance will rectify this omission. The legislation applying in each of the States (except Victoria) and the Northern Territory prohibits the export of native birds without a permit and requires an import permit to be issued by the receiving State or Territory. The Australian Capital Territory liaises with State and Territory authorities to establish that their legislative requirements have been met before issuing import permits for native birds to be brought into the Australian Capital Territory. In addition, all States and Territories (including the Australian Capital Territory) are parties to an administrative agreement reached by the Council of Nature Conservation Ministers whereby the interstate movement of certain endangered species (which includes Golden Shouldered Parrots) is restricted.
Government Assistance
(Question No. 1768)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Has any Government assistance been granted or promised to the (a) Canberra Aero Club, (b) Canberra Greyhound Racing Club Inc., (c) Canberra and District Historical Society, Inc., and (d) Canberra Kennel Association; if so, what are the details in each case.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that no financial grants have been made or promised through my Department to the Canberra Aero Club, the Canberra Greyhound Racing Club Inc. or the Canberra Kennel Association. In the past the Canberra and District Historical Society has received some financial assistance. In 1980/81 for example, the Society received a total of $7,450 from the A.C.T. Community Development Fund. The grant comprised a $6,000 general grant to assist the Society with administrative overheads and in the operation of Blundell's Farmhouse together with an amount of $1,450 for capital and equipment purposes.
Australian Capital Territory Architects Board
(Question No. 1795)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
What costs were incurred by the Commonwealth Government in (a) 1979 and (b) 1980 by the attendance of members of the Australian Capital Territory Architects Board at meetings of the Joint Registration Boards of Australia and/or Architects Accreditation Council of Australia.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that a joint meeting of both bodies is held once per annum. One member attended the 1979 and 1980 meetings and was paid a fee of $72 in respect of each meeting in accordance with section 3(6) of the Remuneration Ordinance 1976. The Board's contribution to the cost of these meetings in 1979 and 1980 amounted to $11.25 and $9.50 respectively.

2498 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Australian Capital Territory Architects Board
(Question No. 1796)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What was the total cost, including support services, of running the Australian Capital Territory Architects Board for 1979-80.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that the total cost in 1979-80 was in the order of $8,290 of which $1,530 can be directly attributed to the requirement to assess applications from overseas architects who wished to participate in the Parliament House design competition.
Premiums on Leases to Churches
(Question No. 1801)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Were the premiums on leases granted to the Church of England at Evatt, $2,400, and at Wanniassa, $5,100, to the Roman Catholic Church at Waramanga, $11,200 and to the Salvation Army at Wanniassa, $12,500; if so, how were the premiums determined.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
T am informed by my Department that the premiums charged were as stated. Except in the case of the Salvation Army site at Wanniassa, the premiums were determined having regard to the policy generally applying to leases granted for church purposes. This policy provides for the premium to be one third of the current assessed cost per hectare of providing serviced land.
The two Church of England sites were for residences integrated with church developments and the lower prices reflect the smaller block sizes. The Roman Catholic and Salvation Army sites were significantly larger, being for a church and a churches centre respectively.
The standard pricing policy suggested a premium charge of $21,600 for the Salvation Army site but because the site required considerable fill, the premium was reduced to $12,500 on valuation advice.
Lease of Playing Fields to Marist Brothers' College, Pearce, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 1802)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(1) Was any premium required of the lease granted to Marist Brothers' College, Pearce, A.C.T. for playing fields; if so, what was the premium.
(2) If no premium was required, why not.
Mr Hodgman-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
1 am informed by my Department that:
(1) No premium was required.
(2) In 1970 after discussion with the then Department of Treasury, agreement was reached that where schools eligible for a subsidy from the Commonwealth for building purposes sought land, leases would be granted free of charge. This arrangement still applies.

Rabbit Destruction Ordinance
(Question No. 1803)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What animals have been declared noxious under the Rabbit Destruction Ordinance, and what are the gazetted scalp bonuses for each.
(2) When were the animals declared noxious and when were the bonuses last reviewed.
Mr Hodgman-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(1) Native dogs, foxes, hares, crows and cormorants have been declared noxious and that no scalp bonus is currently paid.
(2) Native dogs, foxes, hares, crows and cormorants were declared noxious most recently on 3.1.57. Hares previously had been declared noxious and bonuses were paid during nine periods from 1937 to 1953 at the rate of 3d per scalp. Since 1953 no bonus has been declared or paid for any animal. There is no intention of re-introducing scalp bonuses.
Rabbit Control Baiting Program
(Question No. 1804)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What native animals, and how many of each, were poisoned in the rabbit control baiting program conducted on Bowen Island, Jervis Bay, in September 1979, and follow up poisoningin 1980.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by my Department that the Department found no evidence of native animals being poisoned in the rabbit control baiting programs conducted in 1979 and 1980.
Australian Capital Territory Building Review Committee
(Question No. 1822)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What was the total cost, including support services, of running the Australian Capital Territory Building Review Committee in 1979-80.
(2) What fees were paid to members, and what income was received by or on behalf of the Committee.
Mr Hodgman-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(1) The total cost was approximately $3,835, comprising $2,535 paid to Committee members, plus $1,300, this being the proportion of the salary of the support clerk assessed as attributable to Committee work.
(2) The Remuneration Ordinance at that time provided for the Chairman and Members to be paid-
$90 and $72 respectively if the period during which they were 'engaged on that day' was not less than 3 hours;
$45 and $36 respectively for periods of less than 3 hours.

Answers to Questions

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2499

Aboriginal Sacred Sites in Western Australia
(Question No. 1844)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Why were no sacred sites in Western Australia included in the purchase proposals drawn up by the Aboriginal Land Fund Commission following the Land Need Conference of August 1978.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The list compiled by the Aboriginal Land Fund Commission reflected the priorities expressed by participants in the Conference. A number of Western Australian properties in the list were included, at least in part, because they contained sites of traditional religious significance to local Aboriginals.
Endangered Species of Australian Birds
(Question No. 1856)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
What action has the Government taken to (a) preserve endangered species of Australian birds and (b) reduce the risks to indigenous wildlife posed by feral cats.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Nature conservation in t!le States is the responsibility of State Governments, so actions to protect endangered species such as birds would be carried out by State wildlife authorities. The Commonwealth Government is aware of its responsibility to ensure protection of species in areas under its control, particularly the External Territories. In consultation with other Government Departments and local authorities, the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service examines possible threats to endangered species of birds in the Territories and studies or surveys may be carried out to ensure protection of those species. Examples of such actions are the recent study of Abbott's Booby on Christmas Island and the survey of the Green Parrot on Norfolk Island.
Australia is a Party to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, which gives protection to endangered species of birds likely to be affected adversely by trade. Additionally, the Agreement between the Government of Australia and the Government of Japan for the Protection of Migratory Birds and Birds in Danger of Extinction and Their Environment has been ratified, thereby affording extra protection to endangered species of birds and their habitats.
All wildlife authorities have expressed concern about the threats to native fauna from increasing numbers of feral cats. This prompted the Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service to support a consultancy project, 'Ecological Studies of Feral Cats in South-eastern Australia'. These studies were carried out during 1977-1980 by officers of the Victorian Vermin and Noxious Weeds Destruction Board, and their findings are now being appraised.

Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 1886)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London metropolitan police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000, or about 20% by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of his Department controlled; if so, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in his Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) Except in the case of some senior officers or where there is a demonstrable need, all Departmental telephones have been barred for STD calls. Officers have been advised that Departmental telephones are provided only for official purposes and have been instructed to avoid making private calls unless they are urgent and unavoidable. Private trunk calls are permitted to be made only with specific approval, and must be paid for. Official trunk calls cannot be made without authorisation by a senior officer. No Departmental telephones are provided with an ISD (International Subscriber Dialling) facility.
(3) Yes. Prior to the introduction of STD bars on telephones the Department had installed PETRA call recording devices. It is not considered economic to use these devices to monitor local calls.
Telephone Calls by Staff: Department of Aboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 1890)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to a report in the West Australian of 18 July 1979, page 37, that London metropolitan police reduced its telephone bill by $985,000, or about 20% by use of a monitoring device which recorded length, time and destination of telephone calls and the extension from which the call was made.
(2) Are personal telephone calls, particularly trunk and STD calls, made by staff of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs controlled; ifso, in what way.
(3) Has any consideration been given to the introduction of monitoring devices for telephone calls in the Department; if so, what was the outcome of the consideration.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) Yes.
(2) and (3) The Department has more than 40 offices located throughout Australia. Control and monitoring arrangements vary according to the size and location of the office and the type of telephone equipment in use but trunk,

2500 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Answers to Questions

STD and personal telephone calls from official telephones must, in all cases, be approved by a senior officer.
Departmental instructions provide for the recording and checking of calls made through manual switchboards while extension metering and STD access barring is used for auto matic services. Existing controls are considered to be adequate and the use of other monitoring devices has not been considered by my Department.
Community Development Employment Project
(Question No. 1906)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9April1981:
(I) Is the Minister satisfied with the operation of the cur rent Community Development Employment Project.
(2) Is it a fact that this scheme was designed to create jobs for unemployed Aboriginal people in their remote communities.
(3) If so, is the scheme therefore removing from the De partment of Social Security the need for payments of unemployment benefits to individuals in the communities in which the CDEP is operating.
(4) Has there been a consequent reallocation of funds from the Department of Social Security to the Department of Ab original Affairs to cover the cost of operating this scheme.
(5) Is the Minister able to say whether those communities
which have opted to utilise the scheme are now finding that the Department of Aboriginal Affairs is unable to provide enough funds for the employment of all those seeking work.
(6) If so, are some Aboriginal communities now in receipt
of significantly reduced overall incomes.
(7) Does the scheme at present make adequate provision to ensure that in those remote communities in which the CDEP now operates all those Aboriginal men and women who are seeking work are able to obtain paid employment.
(8) Is CDEP at present under review; if so, will the Minister endeavour to obtain for the Department of Aboriginal Affairs a reallocation from Treasury of the funds saved by the Department of Social Security since the introduction of this scheme.
(9) Does the Minister consider the CDEP to be a worthwhile scheme enabling Aboriginal people in their own com munities to utilise the income available to them for their own Council controlled, self-managed development; if so, will the Minister ensure that this worthwhile project is not allowed to wither because of any failure of respective Departments to or ganise the necessary budget reallocations.
( 10)Will the Minister ensure that the scheme is adequately funded so as not to be a drain on the other funds of the De partment of Aboriginal Affairs.
(11)Will the Minister also ensure that the scheme is funded sufficiently to ensure that jobs are available to all those Aboriginal people in these remote communities, both men and women, who are seeking work.
(12) In what locations has the CDEP been introduced in Western Australia.
(13) Is the Minister considering introducing the scheme into any other communities in Western Australia; if so, which ones.
Mr VinerThe Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honour able member's question:

(1) Since its inception in 1977 the Community Development Employment Project (CDEP) Scheme has been introduced to 18 communities throughout Australia on a pilot basis. In keeping with the pilot status of the Scheme, a review was commenced in 1980. This revealed some unsatisfactory features of the Scheme and modifications to it are under consideration.
(2), (3) and (4) The CDEP Scheme was introduced in di rect response to Aboriginal communities seeking an alterna tive to unemployment benefits. Due to the application of the work test, Aboriginals engaged in work as part of a CDEP Scheme are not normally eligible for unemployment benefit. All the costs of the Scheme are met by Department of Aboriginal Affairs.
(5), (6) and (7) The Scheme made available to communi
ties new funds for wages and the cost of equipment and material associated with community projects, and it is un likely that its introduction resulted in a reduction of overall incomes. Some communities have approached me about increasing the numbers of people in'their CDEP workforce and, consequently, their CDEP funds. Given other priority demands on my Department's funds, I have been unable to agree to these requests. People who are unable to get work in CDEP communities because of restricted CDEP funds are en titled to apply for unemployment benefits.
(8) and (9) Decisions taken on the future of the Scheme, arising out of the review mentioned above, will include de cisions on the appropriate source of funds. I consider that the CDEP Scheme has many worthwhile features, such as self management and community development mentioned by the honourable member. Any changes arising from the review of the CDEP Scheme would retain the good features of the present Scheme.
(10) and (II) Funds for CDEP Schemes in particular com munities can only be applied at the expense of other projects administered by my Department. Therefore the allocation of funds to CDEP Schemes needs to be seen in the light of other competing priorities.
(12) Wiluna, Oombulgurri, Warburton, Jameson, Black stone,Wingellina andWarakurna.
(13) and (14) A number of communities in the Torres Strait, Central Australia andWestern Australia have asked to be included in the CDEP Scheme Expansion of the Scheme has been suspended, however, pending the outcome of the re view referred to above.
Western Australian Museum-Aboriginal Sites Department
(Question No. 1985)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 29 April1981:
(I) Does the Department of Aboriginal Affairs provide
financial assistance to theWestern Australian Museum for the operation of the Aboriginal Sites Department.
(2) If so, in what years was this assistance provided and what sum was provided in each of those years.
(3)What was the purpose of the assistance.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honour able member's question:
(1) The Department of Aboriginal Affairs does not provide financial assistance to theWestern Australian Museum for the operation of the Aboriginal sites department. The Australian

Answers to Questions

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2501

Institute of Aboriginal Studies has made a number of grants to the Museum to support the site recording program since 1972.
(2) and (3) Seen answer to (1) above.
Export of HistoriCAircraft
(Question No. 321)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, - Upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(I) Can he say whether an historic Mustang aircraft for which an export permit has not been issued is currently being held by the Bureau of Customs; if so, has he been advised that the Mustang aircraft is the last, or one of the last, Australian built airworthy aircraft of its type, unmodified, remaining in Australia.
(2) Will he give an undertaking to make further inquiries to determine the historic worth of this aircraft.
(3) Pending finalisation of matters concerning the Bureau of Customs, will consideration be given to causing the retention of this aircraft in Australia.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) [am advised that the Bureau of Customs holds no Mustang aircraft for which export permits have not been issued by the Department of Transport, the responsible authority for the issue of such permits. I am further advised that a Mustang aircraft for which approval to export was given has been seized by officers oflhe Bureau of Customs in terms of Section 229 (p) of the Customs Act. This was because the aircraft was packed along with a prohibited export.
(2) Under existing arrangements between the Department of Transport and my Department, an assessment of the historic significance of this Mustang aircraft was completed prior to an export permit being issued. Further investigations are not considered necessary.
(3) I am advised that the Bureau of Customs will retain the aircraft until the completion of prosecution proceedings instituted under the Customs Act.
2,4-D
(Question No. 788)
Mr Howe asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(I) Is he able to say whether the National Parks Service in the United States of America has banned the use of the chemicaI2,4-D; if so, is he able to say what were the reasons for this ban.
(2) What quantities of this chemical were (a) imported into and (b) manufactured in Australia in each of the last 5 years.
(3) Which companies manufactured 2,4-D in (a) the United States of America and (b) Australia.
(4) What evaluations from the point of view of potential impact on human health have been carried out of this toxic chemical in Australia.
(5) Are there currently any restrictions on the use of 2,4-D in any Australian State or Territory.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am advised that the policy of the United States Department of Interior (USDI) is to maintain national parks in as natural a state as possible and that, wherever practicable, attempts are made to correct problems using natural and biological means before resorting to use of chemicals. The USDI

accepts compounds approved by the US. Environmental Protection Agency and does not specifically exclude additional compounds. However, when it is intended that a chemical programme be carried out in a national park, full details must be submitted to the USDI for approval. Approval is based on the type of problem and the relative cost efficiency of natural controls as compared to chemical treatment.
I am further advised that reports from the USA. that the USDI was to halt use of 2,4-D in national parks may have resulted from a misconstrual of the policy outlined above.
(2) (a) Imports of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid and its salts and eslers, which I am advised constitute the technical grade material used in the formulation of herbicides containing 2,4-D, are classified under Item 29.16.200 of the Australian Customs Taritf. Imports from 1975-76 to 1979-80 have been as follows:

Country of Year origin

Quantity

Value for
duty

Duty

(kg)

$A

SA

2,4-D, being a separately chemically defined oxygen function

acid

1975-76 Austria

70,000 79,292 23,787

Philippines

20,004 35,381 7,076

total

90,004 114,673 30,863

1976-77 Germany, Fed. Rep.
Total

10

76

2

10

76

2

1977-78 Netherlands UK Total

2,000 8,000 10,000

2,283 6,761 9,044

685 1,521 2,206

1978-79 Germany Fed. Rep.
UK USA
Total

10,000
304,661 33,900
348,561

9,131
385,486 48,446
443,063

2,739 86,733 14,534 104,006

1979-80 Argentina Germany Fed. Rep. UK USA
Total

52,500
20,000 187,856
260,356

100,282 20,056

14,248 310,827
2 425,359

4,274 69,936
1 94,267

Salts and esters of 2,4-dicblorophenoxyacetic acid (excluding amine saits)

1975-76 Argentina Canada Total

n.a. 24,972 4,994 n.a. 132,708 33,227 n.a. 157,680 38,221

1976-77 UK Total

n.a.

2,823

63

n.a.

2,823

63

1977-78 Netherlands Total

n.a.

6,216 1,865

n.a.

6,216 1,865

1978-79 Germany Dem.Rep.
Poland Total

112,000 (100,000
by-law) 10,000 (by law) 122,000

76,102 (67,124 by-law} 65,786
141,888

2,694

1979-80 UK Total

48,056 48,056

85,937 85,937

n.a.---not available.
I am further advised that such imports as may have .occurred in the above years of 2,4-dichlorophenol and its sodium

2502 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Answers to Questions

salt (intermediates which can be used for the production of 2,4-D), the amine salts of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (a substance used as a technical grade material in the production or 2,4-D based herbicides), and 2,4-D containing herbicides intended for retail were not separately recorded in import clearance statistics.
(b) Australian production statistics for the herbicide 2,4-D are not collected by the Australian Bureau of Statistics. I understand, however, that Australian usage has been estimated as of the order of 2,000 to 3,000 tonnes annually in recent years. The reported value of manufacturers' sales of the herbicide for the latest available 5 year period, 1974-75 to 1978-79, as provided by the Australian Bureau of Statistics, is as follows:

Year

Value

1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79

($'000)
12,349 8,182 8,720
10,627 13,155

(3) (a) 1 am advised that several hundred companies could
be involved in the manufacture andfor formulation of 2,4-D herbicides in the USA.
(b) Two companies are currently understood to be manufacturing 2,4-D in Australia. These are:
Nufarm Chemicals Pty Ltd, Laverton, Vic. 3028 Chemical Industries (Kwinana) Pty Ltd, Kwinana, WA 6167.
It is further understood that 18 or more companies are involved in Australia in formulating 2,4-D-based products for different uses.
(4) 2,4-D herbicides have been widely used in Australia for over thirty years. Over that time continuing review has been maintained by Australian authorities of new scientific data generated world-wide on their properties, effect and fate. in addition, Australian authorities have had access to evalu ations by international bodies such as the Food and Agricul ture Organisation of the United Nations and the World Health Organisation.
(5) A precondition for the sale of 2,4-D herbicides, like other agricultural chemicals, in Australian States is that they be registered with appropriate State authorities, with claims for use, directions, and other label statements being subject to control in this respect. 2,4-D-based herbicides are approved only for uses and in the manner detailed in registered product labels.

Aid Projects in Western Samoa (Question No. 841)
Mr Jull asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:
(1) Are aid projects being sponsored by the Commonwealth Government in Western Samoa in 1980-81; if so, what are the details?
(2) How many Australian personnel are being employed on each project?
(3) How many Western Samoan nationals are employed on each project?
(4) Who are the Australian personnel employed on a per manent or contractual basis on each project and what is their (a) designation and (b) salary?

(5) Are any Australians employed on a casual basis on these projects; if so, (a) who are they, (b) what is their clas sification and (c) what pay rates are applicable to them?
(6) Is overtime payable to either contractual or casual staff on these projects; if so, what accounting arrangements are made to ensure that overtime claims are legitimate?
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable
member's question is as follows:
(1) Aid projects are being sponsored by the Commonwealth Government in Western Samoa as a major part of the Australian aid program to that country. Of the total budget al location for Western Samoa in 1980-81 of $4.19 million: $3,200,000 is budgeted for project aid, $200,000 for Staffing Assistance, $250,000 forFood Aid, $140,000 for Training and $400,000 for the Development Import Grant.
(2) There is one Australian presently employed by the Australian Government, as a Works Supervisor supervising re pairs to Apia Wharf. Other Australians are employed under the Australian Staffing Assistance Scheme and the Development Imports Grant Scheme. Under both these Schemes, the employees are engaged by and are responsible to the Western Samoa Government.
(3) The Australian Government is employing no Western Samoa nationals on aid projects. Where Western Samoa nationals are working on aid projects for which some funds have been provided by the Australian Government, they are employed by the Western Samoa Government either with payment from funds provided by the Western Samoa Government or under grants from Australia which are accouilted for by the Western Samoa Government.
(4) The Australian Works Supervisor mentioned in (2) above is Mr A. Watt from the Department of Housing and Construction. His salary is $17,514 p.a. There are at present 9 Australians employed under the Australian Staffing Assist ance Scheme by the Western Samoa Government. The salary supplementation budgeted by Australia is an average of $20,000 per position. This includes provision for return air fares, education allowances for children, cost of living allow ance and inducement allowance. As at January 1981, their names and designations are:
D. Pedrana-Chief Architect K. Newton-Cocoa Agronomist C. Pedrana-ChiefFood Technologist F. L!oyd-Chieflnspector, Inland Revenue B.Fisher-Assistant Manager, Development Bank J. Moroney-Commissioner of Inland Revenue K. Tong-Water Design Engineer J. Worral-General Man a g e r , E l e c t r i c Power Corporation Dr Pittar-Pathologist
Australians employed under the Development Import Grant Scheme are employed under consultancy contracts as follows:
(a) Banana Quality Control Contract Mr T. Eady
(b) Faleolo Airport Upgrading Study Sir Alexander Gibb
& Partners
(5) No Australians are employed in Western Samoa di rectly by the Australian Government on a casual basis. Local labour, including casual labour employed on aid projects for which funds have been provided by the Australian Government, is the responsibility of the Western Samoa Government, which provides to the Australian Government statements of expenditure, accounting by category, and certified by the Financial Secretary of Western Samoa.
(6) Any overtime payments made to personnel who may be employed directly by Australia are verified according to Australian Government procedures. Payments made to personnel

Answers to Questions

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2503

employed by the Western Samoa Government are accounted for by the method described in answer to question 5 above.

Apprentices: Commonwealth Departmental Staff Ceilings
(Question No. 844)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:
(I) In his capacity as Chairman of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions reviewing Commonwealth departmental staff ceilings, has account been taken of the recommendation of the Departments of Labour Advisory Committee (DOLAC) Working Party regarding the desirability of dissociating Government-employed apprentices from staff cutback and policies of attrition; if so, what.
(2) Will Government employed and trained apprentices be excluded from these policies.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) Consideration by the Government of the recommendations of the DOLAC Working Party took place before the Committee on Review of Commonwealth Functions was established.
A decision was taken by the Government during the latter half of 1980 which has changed the method of counting apprentices for staff ceilings purposes.
Under the new arrangements separate ceilings are determin.ed for apprentices and the apprentice ceiling cannot be used for other types of staff.
The Government has directed departments and authorities to recruit enough apprentices to ensure that they are selfsufficient in relation to apprentice training; that is, they recruit as many apprentices as are requited to maintain expected levels of tradesmen. This direction gave effect to the relevant recommendation of the DOLAC Working Party.
The total apprentice intake approved by the Government for 1981, in the Commonwealth area suubject to ceilings, including apprentices trained under the Group One Year Apprentice Scheme, is the highest level recorded in anyone year for the Commonwealth Service.

Ministerial Car Transport in Canberra

(Question No. 853)

Mr Morris asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:

(I) What was the cost of providing car transport for all Ministers w/lile in Canberra by (a) private hire cars and (b) Commonwe'alth cars for (i) 1979-80 and (ii) I July 1980 to the date of preparation of the answer to this question.

(2) What was the total labour cost incurred in providing all Ministers with Commonwealth car transport while in Canberra for (a) 1979-80 and (b) I July 1980 to the date of preparation of the answer to this question.

Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) The accounting arrangements used for car transport provide for dissections of cost to be made on a billing basis rather than an expenditure basis. The value of accounts rendered for car transport for all Ministers while in Canberra is:

(i) 1979-80 (a) private hire care
(b) Commonwealth cars

$
1,067 312,832

(ii) I July 1980 to 5 April 1981 *

(a) private hire cars

596

(b) Commonwealth cars

210,395

* End of latest four-weekly billing period for which details

are available.

(2) Car transport jobs are not individually costed. Consequently, it would be an expensive exercise, because of the time and effort involved, to provide an exact answer to the honourable member's question. However, an estimate, based on the average hourly labour cost in the ACT, for the driver labour costs incurred in providing all Ministers with Commonwealth car transport in Canberra is:

(a) 1979-80

.......

(b) I July 1980 to 5 April 1981

$
270,000 180,000

Cost of Public Relations Campaigns
(Question No. 870)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
What is the cost of public relations campaigns associated with the (a) Life. Be in it. and (b) National Day campaigns.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) The Commonwealth appropriated $700,000 in 1980-81 for the national Life. Be in it program. These funds are used to promote the program nationally and are expended mainly on a national advertising campaign and the production of promotional and resource material to reinforce the advertising messages.
None of these funds are used to engage Public Relations Organisations to conduct public relations campaigns for Life. Be in it.
(b) The arrangements for celebrating Australia Day are handled through the National Australia Day Committee under the chairmanship of Mr Herb Elliott, M.B.E.
The Committee prepared a co-ordinated campaign for Australia Day 1981 with the assistance of a Public Relations consultant. The cost of such assistance was $45,000.

Head Office: Department of National Development and Energy

(Question No. 1496)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

(I) Are any sections of the Head Office of the Department of National Development and Energy not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many staff are in each.

(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra, if so, when.

Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) Yes.

Australian Safeguards Office, Sydney, NSW

(6)

Topographic Office, Division of National Map-

ping, Dandenong, Vic. . . . . . . . . (105)

Map Sales Sub-Section, Division of National

Mapping, Sydney, NSW . . . . . . . (3)

2504 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Committee of Inquiry into Electricity Gener-

ation in South East Australia, Melbourne, Vic. (6)

Regional Office Victorian Section, Management

Services Branch, Dandenong, Vic.

(20)

Geomagnetism and Seismology Sub-Section, Bu-

reau of Mineral Resources, Geology and Geo-

physics, Mundaring, WA . . . . . . . (5)

Geological Office and Geophysical Laboratory,

Bureau of Mineral Resources, Geology and

Geophysics, Darwin, NT . . . . . . . (3)

(2) Decisions to relocate units of Government employment to Canberra are taken by Government on the advice of the Location of Australian Government Employment Committee (LAGE), an IDC chaired by the Public Service Board. The advice tendered to Government by the LAGE Committee is based on submissions by the relevant Department, and consul-
tations with interested bodies such as Staff Organisations. Any plans to relocate the sections in Canberra is a matter for
LAGE consideration and subsequent decision by Government.

Vehicle Conversion to LPG Usage: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 1550)
Mr Dungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(I) How many (a) cars, (b) commercial vehicles and (c) trucks were being operated by his Department, excluding vehicles supplied by the Department of Administrative Services, as at 30 June 1980.
(2) How many of these vehicles had been (a) converted to LPG usage and (b) purchased already equipped for LPG usage.
(3) Have plans been made to increase use of LPG in vehicles operated by his Department; if so, what are the details.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's questions is as follows:
(I) (a) one; (b) twenty-six; (c) one.
(2) (a) nil; (b) nil.
(3) No.

Cocoa Research Project at Nu'u, Western Samoa
(Question No. 1640)
Mr Dungey asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April1981:
(I) What progress has been made on the cocoa research project at Nu'u, Western Samoa?
(2) What sum has been spent by Australia on this project since commencement, and what have been the 111ajor items of expenditure?
(3) Where larger purchases of materials, buildings, plant and fittings have had to be imported into Western Samoa, have they come from Australian suppliers; if not, from where have they come and why have they come from that source?
(4) What changes of Australian staff have taken place over the last 2 years?
(5) What are the names of relatives of the Australian project manager, Mr K. Newton, or his wife, who have been engaged on the project either on a wages or contract basis and what sum has been paid to each?
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) The cocoa research station at Nu'u is a Western Samoa Government project designed by the Western Samoa Government and based on a report prepared by a cocoa expert. It is partially funded under Austraian aid: funds are provided in the form of an accountable cash grant for the establishment of the station and a staffing assistance grant supplementing local salaries to enable the Western Samoa Government to employ qualified Australians to staff the station.
Establishment of the Australian funded components of the infrastructure for the station is nearly completed. This includes clearing of land and preparation of the site, supply and erection of four prefabricated houses, prefabricated officejlaboratory, nurseryjpropagator building and machinery shedjworkshop, planting of 13 acres of shade trees, importation of new types of breeding seed, propagation and planting out of new plants for seed production and the establishment of shade and fertilizer trials at various sites outside the station.
(2) Under the accountable cash grant, $510,000 has been spent on the establishment of the station and an amount of $45,000 through the staffing assistance grant.
Major items of expenditure of Australian funds have been four kit homes, prefabricated office and laboratory, two vehicles, propagator, processing unit and local costs associated with site works and erection of buildings at the station.
(3) Under the terms and conditions for the administration of accountable cash grants, any goods or supplies not locally produced, must be purchased in Australia. An amount of $Al3,170 for furniture purchased in New Zealand was not reimbursed from Australian aid funds.
(4) Two Australians were employed by the Western Samoa Government under the Staffing Assistance Scheme to fill the positions of cocoa agronomist who is in charge of the station and a cocoa development officer at the research station and they took up their positions in November 1978 and February 1979 respectively. The cocoa development officer resigned his position in September 1980 and a replacement is currently being recruited by the Western Samoa Government.
(5) As the Western Samoa Government is responsible for the management and operation of the cocoa research station, employment of local, contract or casual labour to work on the station is their responsibility.
Details have been sought from the Western Samoa Government and will be provided in a supplementary answer.

High Court Building
(Question No. 1833)
Mr Dungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April1981:

Further to his answer to question No. 4017 (Hansard, 15
April1980, pages 1761-2), what are the details of the added expenditure of $3.5m for the High Court Building termed factors outside builder's control.

Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

I am informed by the National Capital Development Commission that the items outside the builder's control were:

$m

Latent ground conditions

0.2

Additional working drawings

0.2

Additional formwork and cleaning to obtain

required standard of concrete finish

1.2

Answers to Questions

14 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2505

$m

Extensions of time and additional preliminaries

and overheads arising from inclement weather

conditions and industrial disputes

1.9

3.5

Department of Aboriginal Affairs: Employees
(Question No. 1922)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal AfTairs, upon notice, on28 April 1981:
(1) How many employees of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs in each State have received notices informing them that their positions are to be transferred to the Aboriginal Development Commission.
(2) Is it a fact that persons opting for this transfer will lose normal public service tenure and will be employed on a 12 month contract basis.
(3) Is it also a fact that those persons not opting for the transfer will be given 6 months to find alternative employment within the public service and if they have failed to do so within a 6 month period they will then be placed on the unattached list and made redundant.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) ACT-8, New South Wales 12, Victoria-I, Queensland-17, South Australia--I, Northern Territory-19, Western Australia---4.
(2) No. Officers will be on loan to the Aboriginal Development Commission for a minimum period of 12 months from I July 1981. They will retain their substantive positions in the Department of Aboriginal Affairs and will retain superannuation, sick leave and long service leave rights and other normal entitlements, including the right to apply for promotion or transfer to other Public Service positions.
(3) No. Officers who actually occupy positions identified for transfer to the Aboriginal Development Commission but whose substantive positions are not so identified may choose to revert to their substantive positions from 1 July 1981.
Officers who are both the substantive and actual occupants of a position identified for transfer who choose not to accept the loan arrangement will become available [or redeployment to other positions under the appropriate Commonwealth Public Service conditions.
Australia-China Council: Media and Information Program
(Question No. 1923)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 28 April 1981 :
(I) Has the Government spent $107,857.58 on a media and information program for the Australia-China Council in one year; if so, was any project aimed at exchange of political views or promotion of mutual understanding of political differences between Australia and China.
(2) Is part of the function of tbe Council to recommend to him the means of promoting greater awareness within each country of the other country and development of public information and assistance to Australian media and research on matters of direct importance to relations between the 2 countries.

(3) Have members of the Council been chosen Or sum~es tions Of directions to the Council determined that the most important relationship between the countries, as expressed in ministerial statements, namely strategic relationships., should not be noticed by the Council.
(4) Will the Government set up a similar Council to clarify relationships between Australia and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
(5) Has the Government spent amounts comparable to that referred to in part (1) to encourage cxchange of mass media coverage of opposing views in Australia and the USSR.; if not, why not.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) As recorded in the Annual Report of the AustraliaChina Council for 1979-80, $107,857.58 was spent on the media and information program of the Council. Principal projects funded under this heading which contributed to an exchange of political views or promotion of mutual understanding of political differences between Australia and China included:
The visit to Australia by a delegation of six Chinese journalists led by the Deputy Chief Editor of the People's Daily, and a second visit by a group of flvc journalists from the proposed English-language paper 10 be published hy the People's Daily. Several major book gifts to the Beijing National Library and the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences purchased in this year have provided reference material on Australia, including Australian political and strategic thinking.
In 1980-81 these programs havc continued. At present a joint press seminar is being organised in Beijing through the Australia-China Council and the Chinesc Journalists Association, to discuss the background to reporting of each country on the media of the other.
(2) Yes.
(3) The Council has been established, as stated in the order in Council, to promote greater awareness in each country of the other and the enlargement o[ thc areas of contact and exchange between Australia and China, Thc appointment of members does not relate to any consideration of strategic issues. No suggestions or directions in relation to strategic matters have been given to the Council.
(4) No.
(5) No. Such activities are precludcd by the measures imposed by the Government against the Soviet Union following that country's invasion and occupation of Afghanistan.

Soviet Union: Mr Y. Shukhevych

(Question No. 1975)

Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 29 April 1981:

(1) What stage has been reached as a result of Australian

diplomatic represcntations to the United Soviet Socialist Re-

public Ministry of Foreign AfTairs concerning Ukrainian pris-

oner of conscience Yuri Shukhevych.

,

(2) Can he say whether Mr Shukhevych is in his 30th year of imprisonment.

(3) Is he able to say whether Mr Shukhevych's aunt, Mrs S. Strokon of Sydney, had her sponsorship of Yurias an immigrant approved in 1980 by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs.

(4) Will the release of Yuri Shukhevych, and his migration to Australia, contribute to success in the mutal adherence to the Helsinki Final Accords.

2506 REPRESENTATIVES 14 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Australian Embassy in Moscow has made representations to the Soviet authorities on behalf of Mr Shukhevych. The Soviet authorities have advised the Embassy that Mr Shukhevych cannot apply to emigrate until he has completed his prison sentence.
(2) Mr Shukhevych is due to complete a ten year prison sentence in March 1982. He is then due to serve a five year period of internal exile. I understand that Mr Shukhevych served terms of imprisonment from 1948 to 1958 and from 1959 to 1969. From 1969 until his imprisonment in 1972 Mr Shukhevych was in internal exile.
(3) My colleague, the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, has agreed that Mr Shukhevych and his family will be permitted to emigrate to Australia if the Soviet authorities allow them to leave the Soviet Union. I understand that Mrs Strokon, who is a relation of Mr Shukhevych, is prepared to act as sponsor in this case.
(4) Yes. Australia is not a party to the Helsinki Final Accords. Nevertheless we have in this case and others expressed our abhorrence of the denial of fundamental civil and political rights as officially practised in many parts of the world. The Government has conveyed these views officially to the Soviet authorities on many occasions and has called on them to abide by the human rights principles embodied in United Nations instruments and the 1975 Helsinki Final Accords.
Aboriginal Health Care
(Question No. 1986)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 29 April 1981:

(1) What is the Aboriginal population in Western Australia for (a) the whole State, (b) the Pilbara region, (c) the goldfields and (d) the Kimberley region.
(2) What is the total annual sum allocated by the Commonwealth Government for Aboriginal health in Western Australia.
(3) What amount of these funds goes to the Western Australian State Government.
(4) Is he able to say what sum of the allocation is used by the Western Australian Public Health Department for Aboriginal health care.
(5) Which other State bodies utilise Commonwealth Government funding for Aboriginal health care and what sums do each of these use.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The Aboriginal population recorded at the 1976 Census was:
(a) 26,126 for Western Australia;
(b) 2,664 for the Pilbara Statistical Division;
(c) 1,687 for the Lefroy Statistical Sub-Division (including the Shires of Laverton, Leonora, Menzies, Boulder, Coolgardie and the Town of Kalgoorlie);
(d) 6,350 for the Kimberley Statistical Division.
(2) A total of $7,105,460 was allocated by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs for expenditure on Aboriginal health programs in Western Australia in \980-81.
(3), (4) and (5) A total of $6,464,700 was allocated in 1980-81 for expenditure by the Western Australian Government, all of which is provided to the Public Health Department.


