House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 124, 1981 Thursday, 20 August 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--THIRD PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-THIRD PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the
Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House "Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry "Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas AnthQny
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.c.
Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee - The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.c.
The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senatonhe Honourable Anthon~ John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, K.e.M.G., QC. Chairman a/Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deput)' Chairmen a/Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Dona.ld Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader a/the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader a/the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden DeplIl)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader oJthe Liberal Party oJ Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. Deput), Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAllstralia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G. Leodera/the Nalional Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony DepulJ' uaderofthe NatiollalCountry Par/yofAustra(ia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Lobor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor PartJ'-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony, Rt Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewell. Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.e. Brown, Robert James Bungey, Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Hon. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest
Child,Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Han. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley
Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, e.H. Free, Ross Vincent Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey Q'Halioran Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John
Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.e. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles
Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allen Clyde Howard, Han. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunnet Hurford, Christopher John Hyde, John Martin Innes, Utquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher,Qld
Richmond, N.S.W. Chiftey, N.S.W. Macatthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. Bonython, SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith, N.S. W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qld Parramatla, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic.
Hunter, N.S. W. Canning, WA. Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden, Qld
Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
Henty, Vic. Robertson, N.S. W.
Wentwotth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne,N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld McMillan, Vic.
Lilley, Qld Fremantle, WA. Herbert, Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. ,
Holt,Vic. Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Faner, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S.w. Fraser, A.e.T. Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas. Braddon, Tas. Boothby, SA Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qld. Riverina, N.S. W.
Petrie,Qld Denison, Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Griffith,Qld Gwydir, N.S.W.
Adelaide, SA Moore,WA. Melbourne, Vic.

NCP
NCP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP LP
ALP LP LP LP LP LP
NCP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP ALP ALP LP
LP NCP ALP
ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP
ALP LP ALP
Ll' LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP
LP LP ALP ALP NCP LP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP NCP
ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles Killen, Hon. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
K.e.M.G. MacKellar, Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., e.H.
McVeigh, Hon. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Han. William Lawrence Mounlford,John Graham Newman, Han. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Han. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Han. Andrew Sharp Parler, James Robert Robinson, Han. Ian Louis Rocher, Allen Charles Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scoll, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden, Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., Q.e. Spender, John Michael, Q.e. Street. Han. Anthony Austin TJlmbling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.e.
Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Han. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George West, Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.e.
Willis,Ralph Wilson, Han. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker,S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle, N.s.W. Bowman,Qld Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S. W. Canberra, A.e.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Watringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S. W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S. W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld La Trobe, Vic. Ryan,Qld Shorlland, N.S.W. St George, N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid, N.S.w. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S. W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. Sturt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP' LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Counlry Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins (to 8 September), Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Scott (from 8 September), Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY -Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Oonald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATloNs-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERs-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges,Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKs-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman (from 25 August), Senator Kilgariffand Senator Martyr (from 25 August), and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston (from 9 September), Senator Georges, Senator Hamer (from 8 September), and Senator Robertson (to 9 September), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman (from 20 August), Mr Dean (t020 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen (from 23 September), Senator Elstob, Senator Hill (from 23 September), Senator Kilgariff (to 23 September), Senator McIntosh, Senator Martin (to 23 September), Senator Martyr (from 23 September), Senator Sibraa, Senator Teague (from 23 September), and Senator Young (to 23 September) and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOusE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Mi~ister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin (from 25 August), Senator Missen, Senator Sibra. and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE A: Parliament-Mr Speaker, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Hurford, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Barry Jones, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister assisting the Prime Minister), Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Holding, Mr Hurford, Mrs Kelly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Foreign Affairs-Mr Street (Minister for Foreign Affairs), Mr Beazley, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Fry, Mr Jacobi, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Defence-Mr Killen (Minister for Defence), Mr Burr, Mr Campbell, Mr Connolly, Mr Kerin, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Morrison, Mr Peacock, Mr Scholes, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE B: Department of Social SecuritY-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport and Minister representing the Minister for Social Security), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Harris, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mildren, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.

Department of Health-Mr MacKellar (Minister for Health), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Cunningham, Mr Harris, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Veterans' Affairs-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology and Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mrs Darling, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Mr Macphee (Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs), Mr Adennann, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs), Mr Adermann, Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Milton, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE C: Department of the Capital Territory-Mr Hodgman (Minister for the Capital Territory), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Dr Cass, Mr Coleman, Mr Fry, Mr Harris, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lusher and Mr Scholes.
Department of Home Affairs and Environment-Mr Wilson (Minister for Home Affairs and Environment), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Howe, Mr Lusher, Mr Uren and MrWest.
Department of Science and Technology-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mrs Darling, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Mildren.
Department of Communications-Mr Sinclair (Minister for Communications), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Wallis.
Department of Administrative Services-Mr Newman (Minister for Administrative Services), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Humphreys, Mr Lusher, Mr Milton and Mr Scholes.
Attorney-Genera!'s Department-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister representing the Attorney General), Mr Birney, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Coleman, Mr Dean, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Holding and Mr Lusher.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE D: Department of the Treasury-Mr Howard (Treasurer). Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Mr Willis.
Department of Finance-Mr Howard (Treasurer and Minister representing the Minister for Finance), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Hurford, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Mr Shack and Mr Tambling.
Department of Transport-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Jull, Mr Morris, Mr Scott, Mr Shack, Mr Tamblingand Mr Wallis.
Department of Primary Industry-Mr Nixon (Minister for Primary Industry), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Kerin, Mr Mildren, Mr Tambling and Mr Wallis.
ESTIMA TES COMMITTEE E: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs-Mr N. A. Brown (Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Mildren and Mr Peacock.
Department of Industrial Relations-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations), Mr Burr, Mr Charles, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Dr Theophanous.
Department of Education-Mr Fife (Minister for Education), Mr Beazley, Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Dawkins, Mr Fisher, Mr Free, Mr Barry Jones, Mr McLean and Mr Peacock.
Department of Housing and Construction-Mr McVeigh (Minister for Housing and Construction), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Howe, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Mr Uren.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE F: Department oflndustry and Commerce-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs acting for the Minister for Industry and Commerce), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hicks, Mrs Kelly, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Trade and Resources-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of National Development and Energy-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources representing the Minister for National Development and Energy), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Howe, Mr Keating, Mr Milton, Mr O'Keefe, Mr Porter and Mr Uren.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. O. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (TableJ-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (ProceduraIJ-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk Assistant-A. R. Browning Clerk Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-I. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-I. C. Cochran Procedure Office-J. K. Porter
Table Office (ProgrammingJ-B. C. Wright (Acting) Table Office (Bills and PapersJ-J. W. Pender (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaJJ(HouseofRepresimtativesJ-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaJJ(SenateJ-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. de S. C. MacLean (Acting)
JOINT HOUSE
Secrelary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 123 of 1981)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Apple and Pear Export Charge Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 147 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Export Ch~rge Act 1976.
Apple and Pear Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1460f 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Levy Act 1976.
Appropriation Act (No.1) 1981-82 (Act No. 1640f 1981)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 165 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year endingon 30June 1981.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 145 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 124 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 126 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 125 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 130 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (lnsurance Bus;ness) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Life Insurance Business) Act 1981 (Act No. 128 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of certain life insurance business having a connection with the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981 (Act No. 129 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of the registration of certain vehicles in the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian CapitalTerritory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 127 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 150 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 50 of the Austrillian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1977.
Australian National University Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1660f 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Natiollal University Act 1946.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 168 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 177 of 1981)An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905, and for related purposes.
Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 151 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act 1905 in relation to the exportation of food.
Commonwealth Grants Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 173 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973.
Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 153 of 1981)- An Act to amend laws relating to companies and securities and for related purposes.
Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 182 of 1981)An Act to amend the Continental Shelf(Living Natural Resources) Act 1968 to facilitate the collection of levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and of amounts payable under certain agreements, and for certain other purposes.
Crimes (Currency) Aat 1981 (Act No. 1220f 1981)An Act to make provision with respect to offences connected with the counterfeiting of money or certain kinds of securities and other activities injurious to Australian currency, and for related purposes.
Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 152 of 1981)- An Act ~to amend the Cllstoms Act 1901 in relation to the exportation of food.
Customs (Valuations) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 157 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.
Defence Acts Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 178 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relat,ing to defence.

Derence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 144 or 1981)- An Act relating to retirement and death benefits in respect or members or the Derence Force.
Departure Tax Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 131 or 1981)An Act to amend the Departure Tax Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Departure Tax Collection Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 132 or 1981) An Act to amend the Departure Tax Collection Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981 (Act No. 148 or 1981)An Act to provide ror confidentiality in relation to certain epidemiological studies.
Export Grants Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 119 or 1981)- An Act relating to export grants.
Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1800r 1981)- An Act relating to payments under certain fisheries agreements.
Fisheries Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 181 00981)An Act to amend the Fisheries Act 1952 to racilitate the collection or levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and or amounts payable under certain agreements, and ror certain other purposes.
Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 (Act No. 179 or 1981)An Act to impose a levy on the grant or certain licences in respect or roreign fishing boats.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1750r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1981 (Act No. 156 or 1981)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes or companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation runds.
Income Tax (Indi dduals) Act 1981 (Act No. 15500981)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes or companies, or corporate unit trusts and or superannuation runds.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 143 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Internationa! Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act(No. 3) 1981 (Act No. 1540r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Judges' Pensions Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 158 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Judges' Pensions Act 1968.
Meat Export (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 149 or 1981)An Act to provide penalties ror certain offences against the Exports (Meat) Regulations.
National Health Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 163 or 1981)- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953.
Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 174 or 1981)- An Act to amend section 3 or the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966.
Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 161 or 1981)An Act to amend the Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1977, and ror related purposes.
Norrolk Island Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12000981)- An Act to amend the Norfolk Island Act 1979.
Queensland Grant (Special Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 172 or 1981)- An Act to grant financial assistance to Queensland.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 198i (Act No. 121 00981)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16000981)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.1) 1981 (Act No. 1330r 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 13400981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1981 (Act No. 13500981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1981 (Act No. 13600981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1981 (Act No. 137 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1981 (Act No. 138 or 1981)-
An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.

Sales Tax Amendme~t Act (No.7) 1981 (Act No. 1390f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1981 (Act No. 1400f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1981 (Act No. 141 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1420f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Services Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 159 of 1981)An Act to amend the Social Services Act 1947, and for related purposes.
Social Services Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 170 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 105A of the Social Services Act 1947.
States Grants (Capital Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 171 ofl981)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure of a capital nature and to authorize the borrowing of certain moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 1620f 1981)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act(No. 2) 1981 (Act No. 167 of 1981')- An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1760f 1981)An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 169 of 1981)An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Crimes Amendment Bill 1981__ )nitiated in the Senate. First Reading.
-Domicile Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Domicile (Consequential Amendments) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Dried Sultana Production Underwriting Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Read...g.
Freedom of Information Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. IA-9A) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.

Petitions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 557

Thursday, 20 August 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 10.30 a.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Trans Australia Airlines
'fo the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in-
(i) the c'reation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic airfares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Armitage, Dr Cass, Mrs Child, Mrs Darling, Mr Duffy, Dr Everingham, Mr Holding, Mr Humphreys, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Kent, Mr Les McMahon, .Mr Milton, Mr Morris, Mr Morrison, Mr Mountford~ Mr Scott and MtWillis.
Petitions received.
Diabetics: Insulin
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned Citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That in view of the recent standardisation of insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect of increasing the cost of both items to the Diabetic in general, and as every insulindependent Diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily according to medication.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that syringes be made available on the N.H.S. and that insulin prescriptions revert to 10 bottles as previously supplied.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hawke, Mr Holding, Mr Innes, Dr Jenkins, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Kent, Mr~Mildren, Mr Milton, Dr Theophanous and Mr Willis.
Petitions received.

Health Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits for the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test for free pu blic hospital care;
That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programmes will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce a system of health care based on ability to pay, and access to health care based on medical need.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free, Mr Howe, Mr Kent, Mr Mountford and Mr Scott.
Petitions received.

Pensions

To the honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives assembled.

The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is not
fulfilling its responsibility in ensuring an adequate standar<.l of
living for all Australians, which is causing untold hardship on relief agencies' limited resources, and require the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:

I. That the Commonwealth Government raise the level of all pensions and benefits atleast to the poverty line.

2. That the Commonwealth Government reconsider its recent decisions in relation to the health system and cuts to Commonwealth activity.

Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parlia-

ment take immediate and positive action to avert further pov-

erty and suffering in our community by implementation of the

above measures.

.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Duffy, Mr Holding, Mr Howe and Mr Willis.

Petitions received.

Health Care Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled: The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully requests that the Federal Government ensures that:
a. It honours its 1975 election promise to maintain Medibank-a free, universal health insurance scheme, and institute methods of improving hospital and health services for the Australian people.
b. The Community Health Program remains a Federal Government responsibility, with increased funding and expansion of services.
c. It abandons means-testing and the re-introduction of charges at public hospitals which will severely disadvantage low and middle income groups.

558 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Petitions

d. Every effort be made by the Federal Government to meet the health care needs and demands of the Australian community.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled will give earnest consideration to this most vital matter.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child, Mr Duffy and Mr Howe.
Petitions received.
South-west Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the right honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble petition of the under~igned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at proposed future hydro electric developments in south-west Tasmania. This area is on the Register of the National Estate and therefore is of national concern. We call on the Federal Government not to allocate funds or allow funds to be raised for development of roads or dams in the south-west but rather to provide such funds as would enable the preservation of this area. It is a national issue and therefore Tasmanians should not be made to bear any financial burden resultant from its preservation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Connolly, Mr MacKellar and Mr Ruddock.
Petitions received.
Family Allowances
To the right honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The Petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
No increases have been made to Family Allowances since 1976 and since then consumer prices have increased generally by over 50 per cent.
The current taxation system penalizes single-income families who must pay more tax than other families earning the same total income.
Your Petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should:
Ensure that the Government takes immediate action to restore the lost value of Family Allowances and to index them to cover future price rises,
Help single-income families by introducing optional income-splitting for taxation purposes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Armitage and Mr Connolly.
Petitions received.
Taxation: Child Care Expenses
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
Taxpayers who incur child-care expenses in order to earn income should be able to have those expenses exempt from income taxation in the same way as other business expenses.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Armitage and Mrs Darling.
Petitions received.

Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. the proposal to introduce fees for higher and second degrees will mean that access to post-graduate and recurrent education will be limited to the rich; Australian research and ability to cope with technology change will suffer; this proposal must be seen as a step in the direction of the introduction of fees for all tertiary students.
2. the proposed introduction of a loans scheme for students will mean graduating with a heavy debt or being denied a tertiary education if loans are refused because a student is seen as a 'poor risk' (particularly affecting women and those doing non-vocational courses); only the rich will be able to get a tertiary education without course restrictions and the burden of indebtedness.
3. in regard to the proposal to restrict eligibility for TEAS and the foreshadowing of reviewing TEAS levels only in the light of the availability of loans, it should be noted that any further downgrading of TEAS, which is already inadequate, can only further limit access to education.
4. the proposed restriction of Adult Secondary Assistance to those needing qualifications for employment will severely restrict access to a full high school education and necessary bridging education to tertiary education for those who left school early.
5. the proposal not to fund 30 Colleges of Advanced Education if they are not rationalised is an attack on teacher education. This attack will create teacher shortages in the mid 1980s, restrict access to education now and endanger the future quality of teaching available to Australian children.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
(i) post-secondary tuition fees not be introduced for any courses or for any category of students;
(ii) that the TEAS scheme be extended so as to more fully meet the real financial needs of students;
(iii) that a comprehensive loans scheme not be introduced;
(iv) that there be no restriction of Adult Secondary Assistance;
(v) that the proposal not to fund 30 CAEs unless they are rationalised be rescinded.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child and Mr Duffy.
Petitions received.
Eagle Farm Airport
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia showeth:
(a) That residents of densely populated suburbs in the vicinity of the airport and residents of other suburbs in the lIight path of international and domestic jets are experiencing an unreasonable degree of aircraft noise.
(b) Further, that these same residents will be SUbjected to prolonged bouts of. such aircraft noise if a decision is taken to extend the curfew at both the domestic and international airports.
(c) That this decision has been foreshadowed on two occasions as follows:
(i) In submissions to the Public Hearing held by the Public Works Committee of this Parliament in regard to Stage One-Redevelopment of Brisbane's

Petitions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 559

International Airport; these submissions proposed an extension of the existing curfew when the new runway is completed (approx. 1986). This proposal received the full support of the Queensland Government.
(ii) TAA's request for an extended curfew to coincide with the introduction of the Airbus.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will refuse to extend the existing curfew and will reconsider its siting plans for the proposed new runway so as to minimise noise pollution over high density suburbs.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling and Mr Humphreys.
Petitions received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned Australian citizens showeth:
1. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the list of the Australian Heritage Commission and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the Island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently approved sand mining on Moreton Island against the advice of conservationists.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Federal Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products mined from Moreton Island.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling and Mr Humphreys.
Petitions received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned Australian citizens showeth,that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is increasing Interest Rates on Home Mortgage Loans without due concern for its impact on the general community and ask that the Government re-consider its attitude to Low and Middle income earners.
Your Petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert any further effects of increases in interest rates on Home Mortgage Loans which cause Financial, Social and Psychological pressures on families.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Duffy and Mr Kent.
Petitions received...
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the basic rate of pensions and rent allowance is not sufficient to meet present day needs.

In light of the 20 per cent increase in M.Ps. salaries pensioners are being unfairly treated.
Therefore, your petitioners urge that:
1. Basic rate of pension be increased to 30 per cent of the average weekly earnings.
2. Rent allowance be increased from present $5.00 weekly to $20.00 weekly.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr White and Mr Willis.
Petitions received.
Toxic Shock Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned by the threats to women's health and lives posed by Toxic Shock Syndrome, and urg( the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
(I) Tampons, sanitary napkins, vaginal deodorants and similar sanitary products to be re-classified under Therapeutic Agents (not under 'Cosmetics' as at present), in order to bring them under the scrutiny of the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee. We believe manufacture must be under the strictest hygienic conditions.
(2) After re-classification, we urge an immediate government-funded inquiry into all aspects of manufacture and content of these products. This must lead to: (i) conte-nts of product and instructions for correct usage to be shown on packaging; (ii) removal of synthetic fibres, chemicals or ingredients that are potentially or actually harmful to users.
(3) Allocation of extra funding for ongoing research by the National Health and Medical Research Council into these products, results of this research to be made public to ensure all health workers and potential users are fully informed. This campaign on public education would necessitate multilingual distribution of the information where appropriate.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert possible threats posed t? women's health by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child,.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the age and invalid pensions are inadequate for the needs of the majority of pensioners, and your petitioners therefore humbly pray
That the Government will raise the amount of the pension to 30 per cent of average weekly earnings at the earliest opportunity.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

560 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Petitions

Commonwealth Superannuation Pensions To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That it is unfair and discriminatory to make cost of living adjustments to fortnightly payments of Commonwealth Superannuation on an annual basis, while most other members of the Australian community receive twice yearly adjustments to their ir\come.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will end this anomalous practice by instituting twice yearly adjustments for Commonwealth Superannuees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling. Petition received.
Pensions To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(I) That retired low and middle income superannuants are disadvantaged by-
(a) Inflation; (b) Double taxation, and (c) Low means test for the aged pension. (2) That the age pension means test has not been increased since September 1972. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will increase the means test for all pensions. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling. Petition received.
Pensions To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That those retired members of the community who provided and planned for their retirement by contributing to a superannuation scheme, either voluntarily or involuntarily, are being disadvantaged in respect of their age and service pensions, because superannuation increases along with the interest yielded from bank savings deposits are in many cases placing pensioners above the means test limit with the result that pensions arc being cut and they are losing pensioner concessions lind fringe benefits.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will increase the means test, and having done so, Index the means test in line with increases In the cost of living.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling. Petition received.
Pensioners: Telephone Concessions To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That pensioners are reliant on their telephones for emergencies.

That. the means test applied to telephone concessions for pensioners is too restrictive, and that the amount of the concession on telephone rental is minimal.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will relax the pensioner telephone concession means test and increase the telephone concession to 50 per cent of telephone rental charges.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling. Petition received.
Pensions To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the amount of permissible extra private income before the age and invalid pensions is reduced was last increased in September, 1972, and that a relaxation of the means test is long overdue.
And your petitioners therefore humbly pray: That the Government will increase the means test for pensions to the same relative level as applied in 1972, taking into account increases in the cost of living in excess of 100 per cent. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling. Petition received. Pancrease: Australian Drug Evaluation Committee
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That tests performed at the Royal Childrens Hospital, Brisbane, indicate that the drug, pancrease, can provide significant relief and assistance to sufferers of cystic fibrosis.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray: That the Government will require the processing of the drug, pancrease, by the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee of the Department of Health, as a matter of high priority. And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling. Petition received,
Telegram Services To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives In Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Government nnd Telecom management have presided over the deliberate scaling down of Australia's telegram services, to the disadvantage of those poorer people in the community who.cannot afford telex or telephone facilities and rely on the telegram service in time of emergency;
That the Government and Telecom management have underminded the telegram service by increasing the unit cost of telegrams by over 130 per cent in four years with the result that the use of telegrams os a form of communication has fallen by approximately 60 per cent in that time.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government and Telecom management retain the telegram service at a standar.d and cost that will not disadvantage the ordinary citizen.

Petitions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 561

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling. Petition received.
Department of Social Security To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citi~ens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That concern has been generated by the Government's decision to cut back expenditure in the Department of Social Security as outlined in the report of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Government Functions, ie, by reducing the rate of expansion of Regional Offices of the Department of Social Security, confining social work activity to that relating to departmental functions, scaling down the Social Welfare Division of the Department.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will rescind these decisions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling. Petition received.
Family Allowances To the Honourablethe Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizensof Australia respectfully showeth:
I. Because of an anomaly in tax rates a single income family pays nearly $10 a week more tax than a dual income family earning the same total amount.
2. Family allowances established in 1976 have not been increased since then, yet over the same period living costs have increased by nearly 60 per cent.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that: The Parliament should act:
I. To restore the lost value of family allowances and to index them for future price rises.
2. To increase the spouse rebate from $830 to $1,342 per year.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling. Petition received.
Post Office Services To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble PetItion of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the government's decision to provide brochures and information on government programs at post offices around Australia highlights further the government's excessive use of public money for Its own propaganda machine;
That the listing of this decision by the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Government Functions under the heading 'Post Offices as Agents for Government Activities' strongly implies the use of postal officers as government servants, not public servants.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the government will not abuse its authority in this way and will reverse this decision.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.

Petition received.
Review of Commonwealth Functions To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
The decisions of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Government Functions to discontinue the professional employment offices, to 'rationalise' and reduce occupational information services, to rationalise and reduce vocational psychology services, to discontinue the waterfront employment offices, to terminate the former regular servicemen's vocational training scheme, to discontinue the regular collection and publication of CES statistics of persons registered for unemployment and of unfilled vacancies, because such publication is embarrassing to the government, are blatantly political and will in the long term prove not to be cost effective.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the government will reverse these decisions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling. Petition received.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That serious concern has been generated _in the migrant community following the government's endorsement of decisions of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Government Functions to:
Restrict the role of the Commonwealth in adult migrant and refugee education programs to the arrangement and coordination only of such programs and relinquish responsibility for the conduct of individual programs;
Terminate some and rationalise other information services provided by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs,
Terminate forthwith the migrant assisted passage scheme,
Transfer the translation/interpreting services to private agencies or withdrawn altogether,
Reduce hours of operation of the telephone interpreting service,
Discontinue production of the national groups directory, Reduce overseas based staff associated with the recruitment and selection of persons for permanent settlement in Australia, which will result in greater delays in the processing of immigration applications. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the government respect the needs of Australia's migrants and accordingly rescind these decisions. And your petitioners as In duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling. Petition received.
Funding of Community Kindergartens To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That community kindergartens perform indispensable services in the preparation of children for education;
That, without sufficient Federal and State Government funding, community kindergartens will be placed beyond the

562 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Petitions

economic reach of many Families, to the disadvantage of their children;
That the Commonwealth Government's contribution to the Funding of community kindergartens has decreased greatly in recent years, causing concern among parents and those concerned with children's education.
Your petitioners thereFore humbly pray:
That the Commonwealth Government's support for funding of community kindergartens be restored to 1976 Funding levels, i.e., 75 per cent of total approved wages for kindergarten staff.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Legal Aid
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth:
That serious concern has been generated in the Australian community Following the announcement of the Government's decisions to:
Attempt to transFer responsibility For Legal Aid, presently provided by the Australian Legal Aid Office, to the States of New South Wales, Tasmania and the Government of the Northern Territory:
Abandon the new building For the institute of criminologyand
Apply pressure to state governments to contribute sixsevenths of all costs of the institute.
Your petitioners thereFore humbly pray that the government will rescind these regressive decisions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Control of Nuclear Activity
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members oFthe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth:
The decision of the committee of review of Commonwealth Government Functions to transFer the responsibility for the regulation and control of nuclear activities in Australia to State Governments represents a shameful abdication of national responsibility on the part of the National Government and, in respect of the State Governments of Queensland, Western Australia and South Australia, places an enormous and highly dangerous power in very dubious hands.
Your petitioners thereFore humbly pray that the Government will resume its proper and reasonable role of regulation and control of all nuclear activities in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Telecom Australia
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth:
That the decision of the committee of review of Commonwealth Government Functions to establish an inquiry into

Telecom to examine the extent to which private interests might become involved in or take over activities currently performed by Telecom is in itselF a waste of taxpayer's money and is oFhighly questionable value.
Your petitioners thereFore humbly pray that the Government will not dismantle Telecom for the benefit of private interests.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

Tertiary Education

To the honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth:

That public investment in tertiary educa!ion in the Form of Federal Government Funding is an investment in Australia's
future and enables Australia to meet the demands of technological innovation;

That grave concern has been generated as a result of the Government's decisions to:

(a) abolish the education research and development

committee,

(b) terminate special support For educational research,

(c) scale down in-house and contracted research activities

of the Department of Education,

'

(d) scale down participation in international education

activities, particularly UNESCO and OECD,

(e) Further tighten already restrictive eligibility guidelines

for T.E.A,S.,

(F) supplement T.E,A.S. assistance by means of a :Ioan

scheme,

(g) phase in tuition fees For students undertaking degrees

and diplomas supsequent to an initial tertiary

qualification,

(h) reduce grants to universities and colleges to take

account of Fee income,

(i) completely abolish 30 colleges of advanced education,

and

(j) scale down various engineering schools in colleges of

advanced education around Australia;

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the government will rescind these regressive decisions and desist From obvious attempts to pave the way For a complete reintroduction of tertiary Fees.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mrs Darling.

Petition received.

Health Care Services: Queensland
To the honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The 'petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth:
That we strongly condemn any action taken by the Federal Government which will lead to the destruction of the Free Hospital and Medical Services of the State of Queensland.
And your petitioners thereFore humbly pray:
That the Parliament reject the proposed health cost sharing arrangements between the Commonwealth and the State governments and guarantee the maintenance of the present scheme whereby all Queenslande'rs who wish to avail themselves oFthese services may do so.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.

Petitions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 563

Petition received.

Petition received.

Overseas Aid
To the honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That Australia, as an affluent and developed nation, should be able to expend more of its resources on the alleviation of human suffering and deprivation in other less developed countries.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government will:
increase overseas aid to 0.7 per cent of Australia's G.N.P. increase to 4 per cent the proportion of overseas aid channeled through recognised non-government organisations such as World Vision.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

Funding of Women's Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That Womens Refuges have provided on a 24 hour a day basis emergency accommodation, child care, financial aid, moral support, legal advice and guidance in dealing with Government departments for over 13,000 women and children in the past year at a cost to the National Government substantially less than $4 million which is half the cost of holding the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in Australia later this year.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will not proceed with its stated intention to withdraw from funding Women's Refuges and pass this responsibility to ill-equipped and sometimes unsympathetic state governments and will increase federal funding levels for women's refuges.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Australians' dream and tradition of owning their own homes is fast becoming an unattainable goal as the government imposed credit squeeze limits available housing finance, and as the government imposed hike in interest rates forces many home buyers and potential home buyers out of the housingmarket.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the government will take those initiatives which will result in greater availability of funds for lending institutions to lend home loans and reduce pressure on banks and other lending institutions and thereby reverse the trend of spiralling interest rates.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Air Navigation Charges
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That general aviation should make a reasonable contribution to the costs incurred by Transport Australia in servicing general aviation;
That Transport Australia has not correctly identified the costs relevant to general aviation;
That the cost recovery recommendations of the general aviation study prepared by the Bureau of Transport Economics are neither equitable nor efficient;
That the general aviation study recommendations would increase air navigation charges to an intolerable level causing widespread bankruptcy and unemployment.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Government will reject the recommendations of the General Aviation Study report in relation to substantial increases to general aviation's air navigation charges.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.

by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned Australian citizens showeth:
That the last increase in the Supplementary Assistance or rent allowance payable to Invalid and Age pensioners was made in 1974;
That since that time, average weekly rents, as gauged by increases in average Queensland Housing Commission rents, have risen by approximately 150% and continue to rise at an alarming rate.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will at the earliest opportunity index Supplementary Assistance to increases in the cost of living by the same bianual process applied to increases in the pension itself.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Remuneration Tribunal: Members of Parliament
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned Australian citizens showeth:
We of the staff of the CSIRO Divisions of Oceanography and Fisheries Research do protest at the huge salary increases -that Federal parliamentarians have awarded themselves. By way of contrast CSIRO scientists have recently been awarded a 5.6% work value increase above the normal wage indexation increases whereas back bench Federal parliamentarians received a massive 12% work value increase on iop of the indexation award. We consider that a 6% increase, above the wage indexation award, for Federal parliamentarians is fair and responsible in the present difficult economic conditions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dobie.
Petition received.

564 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Petitions

Sale of Publicly Owned Enterprises
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned Australian citizens showeth:
There is a limit to the capacity of Australia's drug manufacturing industry in Australian hands.
Accordingly our resources should be managed and developed under Australian ownership and control.
Publicly owned trading enterprises and corporations have been established and operated for the benefit of Australians since Federation.
The Commonwealth Serum Laboratories, Commonwealth Banking Corporation, Trans Australian Airlines, Qantas, Housing Loans Insurance Corporation, Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation, Australian Wheat Board, were all designed to operate to the benefit of our Nation as a whole under public ownership.
The Fraser government's irresponsible proposals to sell off our Nation's interest in the Ranger Uranium Mine, the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation, and to dispose of otller successful statutory corporations such as Trans Australia Airlines and the Fawnmac group of drug companies would be contrary to the Nation's interests. Fawnmac still makes a profit of about half the proposed sale price in a year and cost the Australian government several times the proposed sale price. It provides the Pharmaceutical Benefits pricing negotiators within the Health Department with inside information on drug manufacturing costs and so prevents collusive monopolistic pricing by major transnational drug firms. It complements the resources of the Commonwealth Serum Laboratories to make both Government owned drug firms more efficient and competitive by co-operation.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright proposals of the Fraser government to sell the Ranger Uranium Mine, the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation, Trans Australia Airlines and the Fawnmac group of companies.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Everingham.
Petition received.
International Relations
To the Speaker and Honourable Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. It is the petition of the undersigned electors of Australia that:
Australia increase diplomatic contracts with countries with whom we have differences, not reduce negotiations.
Australia's leaders declare in advance that they will strenuously work for, and be bound by decisions of, a respected mediator agreed on by both sides in any dispute with another nation.
At least as much time, thought, and money be avialable to find such mediators as Australia now spends to plan military defence and forge military alliances, and to appoint conciliators and arbitrators whenever our international negotiations falter or break ~own.
Experts of departments, faculties and institutes for peace studies have eual facilities and status with military experts in international negotiations of our country, especially for disarmanent talks or military pacts, and such studies have more gove"rnment support.
The United Nations organization develop into a body or bodies more democratically chosen by more enlightened peopl,es of all nations, with powers given to it by member

nations to improve. international law between consenting members, to provide adequate extension of the personnel, functions and facilities of the International Court of Justice to satisfy those countries which agree to abide by such courts' decisions on matters in dispute between those countries, with the powers and right to arrest, try, sentence and enforce pehalties upon individuals in those countries who breech such laws, and the right to raise revenues from licensing and controlling of international activities of types agreed between the nations concerned.
The mass media of communication of our country exchange comparable amounts of coverage of ney;s and views with comparable media in countries antagonistic to Australia, and try to put in depth all viewpoints before acceding to wartime style censorship, distortion or exhortation.
And your petitioners pray that you will act upon our plea and make public your response.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Everingham.
Petition received.
Melba Health Centre: Australian Capital Territory
To the Honourable Speaker of the members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
The Honourable Minister for Health, Mr M. J. R. MacKellar that we are concerned about the removal of the Melba Health Centre Pharmacist and that little financial gain will be made by this action. We also believe that undue hardship will be the result as we believe, in this special circumstance, that commercial enterprise will not be able to afford the same service.
Assurance is sought to investigate this matter in much more detail and that we be kept fully informed with all details in this matter.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrFry.
Petition received.
Belconnen Mall, Australian Capital Territory'
To the Honourble the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia resectfully showeth:
That the samll businessmen of the Belconnen Mall, who by their had work have built up excellent retail services, should be encouraged and assisted to own their own premises in the Belconnen Mall.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fry.
Petition received.
EISalvador
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the present government of EI Salvador has been responsible for the deaths of at least 10,000 people in 1980 alone; and that it has been condemned as one of the worst human rights violators in the world by organisations such as

Petitions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 565

Amnesty International and the US Conference of Catholic Bishops.
Therefore we humbly request that the government of the Commonwealth of Australia:
(i) urge the government of the United States of America to immediately cease all military aid to the government of EI Salvador;
(ii) support the freedom of the Salvadoran people against the governing military dictatorship.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Holding.
Petition received.
Labelling of Cosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any' regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of Cosmetic Companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were sUbjected to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:
Legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:
(I) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.
(2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Health Care
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That Federal Government proposals to shift the cost of health insurance onto the individual has placed a disproportionate and unfair financial burden on lower income groups, but particularly on large families; single income families; the chronically ill; those with recurrent illnesses and those on fixed incomes
2. That an estimated 15-20 per cent of Australians will not be able to afford insurance and will be forced to undertake extensive travel to avail themselves of outpatient services, the quality of which will be drastically reduced because of staff cuts
3. That doctors, who at this moment are awaiting a fee increase, will inevitably become more and more expensive
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government (i) will re-examine the effects of health proposals and of the necessity for compulsory health insurance on lower income groups who do not presently meet the description of disadvantaged, and (ii) redefine the criteria determining the genuinely needy and disadvantaged to encompass the categories of persons mentioned in (I.) above.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) The financial situation of students enrolled at Australian postsecondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) The imposition of tuition fees for second degrees and post graduate degrees will deter many able persons from enrolling-such courses and further preserve higher education for the rich.
(iii) The introduction of a loans scheme, subsequent review of the level of TEAS and the tightening of the eligibility criteria for TEAS will cause great financial hardship and will deter students from enrolling in tertiary institutions.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
I. Post-secondary tuition fees not be re-introduced for any courses or for any category of students.
2. The visa charges upon private overseas students be removed immediately.
3. The government reverse its decision to introduce a loans scheme and instead increase and extend TEAS scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
National Roads Construction Program
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The petition of the certain citizens respectfully showeth that your petitioners believe that:
The decision to subject the National Roads Construction program to the tendering system will:
(a) threaten the jobs of790 workers employed in 17 main road depots in New South Wales.
(b) Impair the day labour system and undermine the capacity of Departments of Main Roads to train staff and test road construction concepts.
(c) Have a disruptive effect on the employment opportunities available in small communities.
(d) Reduce the flexibility of the Department of Main Roads to handle emergencies caused by flood or fires.
(e) Ultimately increase the cost of road construction at taxpayers' expense.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Federal Government withdraw this disruptive proposal.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les Johnson.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The humble

566 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Petitions

petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the burden of interest payments on housing loans is now at such record levels that most citizens paying off their homes are becoming severely financially distressed.
That the burden of additional expense together with increases in health insurance and hospital charges is putting increasing stress on famify relationships.
That the policies of favouring overseas private investors to buy up our resources are causing inflationary pressures, declining public services and ever higher interest rates.
That we support all efforts to give relief to people making house repayments, particularly in the first five years of purchase, but also when expenses are higher after the first years of marriage.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government will give interest rate relief by way of tax concessions or a subsidy on mortgage repayments.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrKerin.
Petition received.
Plant Variety Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
(I) Note that legislation establishing plant variety rights in other countries has had adverse effects, namely:
(a) Virtual monopoly control of seed production has passed into the hands of a few large international cor-' porations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation.
(b) The varieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and will not grow without the aid of artificial fertilizers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers.
(c) The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, rendering them vulnerable to disease and other environmental threats.
(2) Recognise the maintenace of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to prevent exclusive control over plant genetic material from falling into private hands.
(3) Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gardeners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden produce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment of plant variety rights in Australia:
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Milton.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
The Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth that:
(I) Interest rates, rather than falling by 2 per cent as promised by the Prime Minister in November, 1977, are now

between 2 per cent and 5 per cent higher than when that promise was made, and are at historically higher levels.
(2) This prevents many potential home buyers from borrowing to purchase a house; causes severe hardship to many people who are paying off a housing loan, causing some to default and lose their home; prevents or restrains the establishment or expansion of many businesses; and is directly responsible for increasing numbers of bankruptcies.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that:
Minimisation of interest rates be adopted as one of the aims of economic policy;
the money supply target be relaxed to accommodate income growth without forcing credit restrictions and exorbitant interest rates;
regulation of borrowing rates be reintroduced to prevent the financial institutions raising lending rates to compensate for higher borrowing rates; and
foreign investment be more rigorously controlled in order to prevent destabilising inflows of foreign funds.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Scott.
Petition received.

Taxation

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of
Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble pet-
ition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

The proposed increase in sales tax on the white goods and
shelf goods industry, if implemented, wOl,lld have a devastating affect on employment in South Australia.

The white goods industry in South Australia is one of the largest industries the economy of this state relies on.

Any increase in sales tax would depress the industry further
and throw thousands of workers out of work, also dependent companies would go out of business.

We therefore call upon your Government not to increase

sales tax in this industry for the good of the workers employed

and the economy in South Australia.

~

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives'will reject outright any proposal to increase sales tax on white goods and shelf goods.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

byMrScott.

Petition received.

Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned members of Parents and Citizens Associations, respectfully showeth:
That retention of the Schools Commission and the Curriculum Development Centre in their present forms is essential for the balanced and progressive allocation of educational resources and facilities in the Australian community.
That serious concern has been generated by the decision within the School Commission guidelines, to cut funds to the general recurrent and capital programs by reallocation to transition, the decision not to implement the School lmprovement Program; and the diviseness created between government and non-government schools due to increases of $43.25m to non-government schools while government schools funds have not increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:

Petitions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 567

That the Government will reverse these decisions-will retain the Schools Commission and Curriculum Development Centre in their original forms; retain the Schools Commission proposals including recurrent and capital funding proposals; basket of services and the Schools Improvement Program.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully showeth:
I. That we are gravely concerned at the lack of children's services within the City of Northcote.
2. That we are dismayed at the refusal of the Department of Social Security (Child Care Division) to fund a Family Day Care Program within the city of Northcote.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will ensure adequate funds for children's services will be made available so that Family Day Care may be provided within the City of Northcote.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrHowe.
Petition received.
Staging of American B52 Bombers
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned in Queensland respectfully showeth:
That the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a refuelling and rest and recreation base for American B52 bombers:
Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the USA and another power.
Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of whether B52s: (a) Carried nuclear weapons; (b) Were engaged in bombing missions against another
State. Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign policies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy. Violates democratic procedures in committing the Australian nation to participation in future wars without due consultation and informed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the militarisation of the Indian Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region. Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin, in that noise pollution and the threat of accidential radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents. Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of Peace in the Pacific region and violates Australia's committment ot the Nuclear NonProliferation Treaty.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location in Australia, as a base or depot for American B52 bombers. And

that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bOl!nd will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
COMMUNITY YOUTH SUPPORT SCHEME
Notice of Motion
Mrs DARLING (Lilley)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House deplores the decision of the Government, announced by the Treasurer in the 1981-82 Budget, to abandon the only tangible indication of any Government concern for the existing and urgent needs of unemployed youth; that is, the 270 Community Youth Support Schemes throughout Australia.
SELF-SERVICE PETROL STATIONS
Notice of Motion
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) expresses its concern at a recent decision of the Queensland District Court that makes it legally permissible for a driver to fill up with petrol at a selfservice station and drive away without paying; and
(2) calls upon the Attorney-General, through his representative in this place, to examine the decision as a matter of urgency and, if necessary, introduce legislation to cover wha t appears to be a serious loophole in the law.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY BUSINESS LEASES
Notice of Motion
Mr FRY (Fraser)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) views with concern the existing Australian Capital Territory business leases legislation which allows the landlord to terminate leases without compensation;
(2) supports over 1,500 citizens of the suburb of Campbell in their petition against the decision of the owners of the Campbell shops not to give the present proprietors of the Campbell supermarket an opportunity to renew their lease; and
(3) calls on the 'Minister for the Capital Territory to review the business leases legislation to ensure that the interests of lessees are more adequately protected.
MEANS TEST ON PENSIONS
Notice of Motion
Mrs DARLING (Lilley)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House condemns the Government for its failure to raise the pension means test in the 1981-82 Budget to take account of inflation and increases in fixed income, such as that derived from superannuation.

568 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Questions Without Notice

DISTINGUISHED VISITORS
Mr SPEAKER-I inform the House that we have present in the gallery this morning a delegation from the United States Senate, led by Senator Mark Hatfield, accompanied by Senator Paula Hawkins. On behalf of the House, I extend a very warm welcome to members of the delegation.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!
Mr SPEAKER-I also have the pleasure to inform the House that we have present in the gallery this morning a Japanese tripartite industrial relations mission-that is, a mission comprising representatives of government, employers and unions-led by Mr Masayuki Fujio, Minister of Labour. On behalf of the House, I extend a very warm welcome to members of the mission.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
TAXATION
Mr HAYDEN-I refer the Treasurer to his answer to my question yesterday in which he said:
The decisions that were announced last night represent no more than a modest broadening of the taxation base in a very limited area.
Does this mean that he considers more than $800m in extra indirect tax to be modest? Does this mean that he considers the extension of indirect taxes to everything from car seat belts to pet food to school children's shoes, clothing and text books to be 'a very limited area'? If not, will he now restore his credibility and do what he promised in this House on 12 March this year and cut income tax by over $800m? If he persists in confirming this view, will he accept that his definition of 'modest' and 'limited' shows that he and his Government are totally out of touch with the Australian people?
Mr HOWARD-I repeat what I said in answer toa question from the Leader of the Opposition yesterday. When viewed against the background of what occurred in the indirect tax area last year and when viewed against the background of the total revenue raising of the Commonwealth and the structure of our indirect taxation system, the changes cannot in any way be likened to the major shift towards a broadly based indirect tax that was under contemplation at the end of last year and earlier this year. The fact is that indirect tax, according to the Budget Papers, in 1981-82 will rise at a slower rate than it did in 1980-81. Against that sort ofbackground, for the Leader of the Opposition to be suggesting that there is a lack of

credibility on this side of the House is to ignore the facts.
SALES TAX
Dr EDWARDS-Also on the sales tax issue, has the Treasurer seen reports that sales tax increases introduced in the Budget are estimated to cost the average family $3.50 a week? Can he comment on the accuracy of that figure?
Mr HOWARD-I have seen a number of reports to that effect and whilst precise quantification of such an outcome is very difficult for anybody to make, I think a couple of observations ought to be made about the figure of $3.50 which has been commonly bruited. That would mean, if it were true, that a person would be spending more than half of his weekly disposable income on items which are now to be made subject to that 2+ per cent sales tax or are to be made subject to increases of 2+ per cent in sales tax at each of the three steps in the range. Any examinationor household expenditure patterns indicates that such a proposition is patently absurd because to spend an additional $3.50 a week one would have to be spending $140 a week on items that for the first time are to be brought into the sales tax base by the changes announced on Tuesday night or on items which have been made subject to the increases.
I make that response because part of the pattern of response of the Opposition and of some others in the community is to suggest that the changes that were announced on Tuesday night alter in a very major way our taxation system and imply a very major impost upon the ordinary Australian family and upon normal members of the Australian community. I believe, as I said earlier at the commencement of my answer, that the precise quantification of the effect is very difficult indeed. But taking the evidence most recently available from household expenditure surveys, the suggestions of the figure of $3.50 a week are, in my view, absolutely unsustainable. The figure is more likely to be in the order of $1. 50 to $2 a week. Precisely what that figure is, of course, is very hard to pin down with more accuracy.
I think another observation that ought to be made against the background of these changes is that one has to look at the very significant rise in average weekly earnings over the last year, a rise which represents an increase of 4 per cent to 5 per cent in real terms or about $3,000m additional purchasing power for Australian families and for the average wage earner in Australia.

Questions Without Notice

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 569

MONEY SUPPLY
Mr WILLIS-I also address my question to the Treasurer. Is it a fact that the money supply, as measured by M3 plus the non-bank financial institutions, increased by almost 16 per cent in the last financial year, far in excess of the Government's monetary growth target of 9 per cent to II per cent? Is the Treasurer concerned that despite a large deficit reduction last year the Government failed completely both to keep interest rates down and to achieve its monetary targets?
Does he concede that achievement of his monetary targets would have involved much higher levels of interest rate rises? In view of his statement that much more emphasis will be placed this year on achieving his money supply targets, does he concede that further rises in interest rates are therefore likely?
Mr HOWARD-The projection contained in the last Budget was, of course, about growth in M3. I agree with what is implicit in the honourable gentleman's question, namely, that some of the other measures of monetary growth expanded at a faster rate than M3 did. I think it is quite proper, as the honourable member has done, to draw attention to the fact that M3 is only a fairly limited measure of monetary growth. It does not include any calculations for building society deposits or for the growth in merchant bank outstandings. I think this all tends to underline the inadequacies of that particular measure. As far as the position of monetary policy is concerned, I do not in any way resile from what I said on Tuesday night-that is, that it will be necessary to have some tightening of monetary policy. That has been made quite clear. The Government has made a very major contribution towards that goal by budgeting for a virtual overall balance in its Budget. The effect of that on the climate for interest rates will be very significant indeed.
MOTOR VEHICLE IMPORTS
Mr LUSHER-I refer the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs to an article in today's Sydney Morning Herald concerning apparent overcharging or, profiteering in the luxury car market in Australia. As these vehicles are imported under the highly artificial quota system, which severely restricts competition and availability, will the Minister make inquiries and, if necessary, take action to ensure that the market is not being distorted by those in the privileged position of holding quotas? Will the Minister inform the House at a later date .of any abuses of the quota system that his inquiries may reveal .in the interests of an informed Parliament on an issue of such importance?

Mr MOORE-I did see the article in this morning's Sydney Morning Herald. It points to some of the marketing problems in the car industry in Australia. As it currently stands, the market is divided 80-20 between local production and foreign imports. A quota is issued in respect of the imports and in recognition of the privileged position of importers, the Government charges a special 12+ per cent tax, which is revenue to the Government. The fact remains that the importers and the holders of foreign quotas still have to sell those cars and meet market competition. Therefore, the prices charged have to bear a relationship to what the market can afford or stand to pay. I know that those positions are understood by the honourable member. The Government has before it the Industries Assistance Commission's report. The questions raised by the honourable member will Certainly be taken into consideration in reaching a decision.
ZONE ALLOWANCES
Mr HUMPHREYS-I direct my question to the Treasurer. I refer to the Treasurer's statement in the Budget Speech in relation to the Public Inquiry into Income Tax Zone Allowances when he said:
The recommendations of the main report have largely been accepted by the Government . . .
In the light of the failure to elaborate on this statement, can the Treasurer inform the House whether the Government has decided to accept the special allowance of $750 for persons living more than 250 kilometres from a town of over 2,500 people? If not, what additional assistance does he propose to offer these especially disadvantaged people? Has the Government decided to accept the recommendation that residents of Darwin and Mount Isa be moved from zone A to zone B with a consequent rebate reduction of $180 and that residents of Townsville and Cairns be excluded altogether from the zone allowance scheme?
Mr HOWARD-I hope to make a more detailed statement next Tuesday on the matter as I foreshadowed in the Budget Speech.
APPOINTMENT OF HEALTH NURSE
Mr BAUME-Has the Minister for Health seen reports that the Culburra and District Community Health Service in my electorate is to close following the State Government's refusal to appoint a new community health nurse because of alleged cuts in federal health funding to New South Wales? Does the New South Wales Government have access to enough health funding to provide such a service?

570 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr MacKELLAR-I have had drawn to my

FAMILY ALLOWANCES

attention some suggested changes in the health arMr WALLIS-J refer the Prime Minister to

rangements in the honourable gentleman's electhe proposed Budget increase in family allow-

torate. I must say that he is assiduous in his repances. Is it a fact that despite the increase and the

resentations on behalf of his constituents. He has Government's boasts about it the erosion over the

particularly drawn to my attention some of the past five years of the real value of the family al-

real difficulties that will arise if this closure is put lowance is causing hardship to many families? Is

into effect. I make the point that the New South he aware, for instance, that by January next year

Wales Government has, in fact, complete autonomy to decide where and how it will supply public

a two child family will be more than $24 a month worse off in real terms than in 1976 when the

health services in that State, as do all the State governments under the new arrangements. I was

scheme was introduced, a three child family will be more than $28 a month worse off, a four child

surprised to see in the New South Wales Governor's speech at the recent opening of the New

family will be $32 a month worse off and a five child family will be more than $37 a month worse

South Wales Parliament a statement that, in fact, . off?

the New South Wales Government was being deprived of $77m by Commonwealth funding arrangements. In fact, the situation is very different from that. Under the new funding arrangements which are based on the fact that the amount of money made available under general revenue grants is supplied at the 1980.-81 levels plus 10 per

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Quite obviously the recognition of the fact that there hadi:i3en an erosion in the value of family allowances led the Government to make a decision to increase, by 50
per cent, the allowances for families with three or . more children.

cent, minus a component for extra charges Mr Hayden-The figures he quoted are after

introduced by the States, and taking into account allowing for that increase.

the extra charges introduced by New South Mr MALCOLM FRASER-It was that recog-

Wales, that State, in fact, has available to it an nition that led the Government to increase, by 50

extra $51m this financial year to spend if it so per cent, the allowances for a family with three or

wishes on the provision of health services.

more children. I beli~ve that increase will be ap-

preciated very much by those families.

It is a little unfair for the New South Wales

Government and its Health Minister to suggest

AUSTRALIA'S TRADING POLICIES

that somehow or other the funds have been Mr O'KEEFE-Can the Deputy Prime Minis-

reduced when, in fact, an additional $51m will be ter and Minister for Trade and Resources say

made available to that State. It is not unusual for whether there have been any recent indications of

some odd things to happen in the health area in progress in Australia's efforts to achieve a moder-

New South Wales particularly in relation to ation of the trading policies of the European

hospitals and the rationalisation of hospital beds. Economic Community?

We have had the recent saga of the Mater Misericordiae Hospital in New South Wales. I find the rationalisation of--

Mr Lionel Bowen-This is better than Blue Hills.
Mr ANTHONY-That may be the Australian

Dr Theophanous-I raise a point of order. What the Minister is talking about now is not relevant to the question.

Labor Party's attitude to the problems of the EEC but we take a much more positive approach, Mr Speaker. The attitude of the Labor Party clearly reflects its lack of interest in international trade,

Mr SPEAKER-The point of order is not upheld. The answer is relevant, but I ask the Minister to draw it to a conclusion.

particularly with agricultural commodities. There
has not been any change in the attitude of the EEC as far as its agricultural policy is concerned. But I report to the House that there is a rising tide

Mr MacKELLAR-J simply make the point that the rationalisation of hospital beds is a sensitive matter. J acknowledge that. It seems to me a little unusual that the first steps in the rationalisation program generally seem to take place in

of concern internationally about the behaviour of the EEC, especially the effects that its trade of subsidised agricultural commodities is having on third markets and on international commodity
prices.

non-Labor electorates when any objective analyDuring my visit to South America-Brazil and

sis of the actual situation would lead one to an Argentina-I found similar concern there to that

altered sense of priorities in that rationalisation of Australia and that there was a great willingness

process.

to work with Australia in the General Agreement

Questions Without Notice

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 571

on Tariffs and Trade and other areas to try to get some alteration or modification of what the EEC was doing. I was also pleased this week to hil.Ve talks with the Special United States Trade Representative, Ambassador Brock, who expressed in strong terms the new American administration's concern at the behaviour of the EEC and the effects that some of its exports of subsidised agricultural commodities are having on American trade. We now see some of the major food exporters around the world prepared to stand up and to express a point of view as to what the EEC is doing.
We know, of course, that many of the developing countries have had a similar point of view and have been deeply concerned but, because of the influence that the EEC has been able to exercise on many of these developing countries through its aid programs or through the Lome agreement, these developing countries have not been prepared to state a point of view publicly. But I believe now that the effects that its trade is having, the effect of $18 billion being used to support and to subsidise the fostering of agriculture in the EEC and also its very high support price programs compelling its consumers to pay exorbitant prices, are all having a reaction. Sooner or later there must be a modification. I am pleased to say that Australia has been expressing this point of view for a number of years and now it is starting to be supported by other countries. It does not say much for the Australian Labor Party when it is taking such a cynical and critical attitude. It just shows how out of step it is. If it had not been for our attitude, nothing would have been done and the Australian farmers would have continued to suffer.
GOVERNMENT ECONOMIC POLICIES
Mr ARMITAGE-My question, strangely enough, is directed to the Treasurer. I refer him to his statement in this House in June-I hope that he is listening--
Mr Howard-I am, intently.
Mr ARMITAGE-I refer the Treasurer to his statement in this House in June that it was the policy of his Government to continue the policies that produced a non-farm growth rate of 6.5 per cent in the first half of the 1980-81 financial year. Is it a fact that those same policies produced a growth rate of only 1.6 per cent in the second half of the 1980-81 financial year? Is it also a fact that Budget Paper No.2 argues in favour of policies to prevent 'overly rapid expansion of the economy'? Does the Treasurer consider an annual rate of growth of 1.6 per cent to be an overly rapid expansion of the economy? If not, why has he

delivered a Budget clearly designed to dampen economic activity even further?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. He was in order up till now.
Mr HOWARD-It has been and it will continue to be the objective of the Government to follow policies which encourage sustainable growth in the Australian economy, and that can be achieved only in circumstances in which the level of inflation is kept down and, in particular, remains below the average for the industrialised world. The fact is tharlast year, over the year as a whole, non-farm growth grew at over 4 per cent. We predict that, whilst the growth for the forthcoming year may not be quite as high as that, it will still be well above the average in Australia of the 1970s. What is necessary is to follow the sorts of policies which will continue that pattern and to reject the sorts of policies, such as the hostility of members of the Opposition to overseas investment, which,. if translated into Government action, would stop development and growth in this country dead in its tracks.
POST OFFICES
Mr FISHER-Has the Minister for Communications seen recent Press reports in which the Victorian State Secretary of the Australian Postal and Telecommunications Union was reported as saying that Australia Post intends to close 70 post offices throughout Victoria? Is this. report accurate? Have any decisipns been taken on this matter?
Mr SINCLAIR-It is true that, under the Act under which Australia Post is constituted, there is a requirement that Australia Post meet all of its operating costs and at least 50 per cent of its capital expenditure. Of course, it also is required to operate its services efficiently and economically. From time to time it assesses the way by which its obligations could best be met around Australia. A number of changes to policy currently are being considered, none of which entails !he obligatory closing of post offices. However, there is around Australia a great number of non-official post offices. At the moment there are approximately 3,635 of them, compared with 1,422 that are operated by Australia Post employees. Nonofficial post offices in fact operate on a very similar basis to official post offices other than that those who operate them are employed by contract instead of being employed directly by Australia Post on a wage basis. The services provided are identical and the range of facilities to customers are equal.

572 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Questions Without Notice

The economics, as far as Australia Post is conshot down the Libyan aircraft. The United States

cerned, lean towards introducing non-official post Government has said that the incident occurred

offices where the volume of business falls below a 60miles off the coast while the Libyan Govern-

certain level. There is no change in the required ment maintains the distance was approximately

standard of service. Indeed, it seems to me that 30 miles. We are, of course, very concerned about

one will find that the services provided by nonthis development which threatens to increase ten-

official post offices in many country areas are persions in an area where already tensions are at a

haps even better than those provided by official critically high level. I am also aware of Libyan

post offices. I certainly do not think that the Government claims to sovereignty over the Gulf

members of the public need to regard a suggested of Sidra. These claims have not been generally

change in the character of the service as a recognised by the international community. In

downgrading of the service provided to them. fact, several countries, including the United

Australia Post is looking at a number of policy States, have specifically rejected them.

changes with regard to the character of the level of business relating to official and non-official grades. I am told that it is examining whether official post offices might be converted to non-official operations when there is no longer sufficient full time work for two people. This policy change is still under review, but it relates specifically to the work load and does not relate to the provision of service~ to the Australian public. There is no suggested ch'ange in the mind of Australia Post that will involve the closing of Australian post offices. However, the basis on which the work they are required to do is undertaken is certainly under review, but not in any way with

From the information available to us it appears the incident occurred over international waters, that is, over waters where international law recognises the right of over-flight by military and com-
mercial aircraft. I agree with the Deputy Leader of the Opposition that this sort of incident illustrates .the need to conclude and ratify a comprehensive law of the sea convention and our efforts in the current meeting being held in Geneva are directed towards getting the United States delegation to resolve speedily the concerns that it has over the current draft so that a comprehensive ~ cbnvention can be introduced as soon as possible.

the consequence of reducing the available services to the Australian public.

BUILDERS LABOURERS FEDERATION . \
Mr COLEMAN-My question is direct'ecf to

DISPUTE BETWEEN THE LIBYAN AND UNITED STATES GOVERNMENTS
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-I direct my question to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. I refer to the air battle which has occurred in the last 24 hours between United States aircraft and Libyan aircraft in the Gulf of Sidra and which obviously has arisen over disputed claims which the Libyan Government makes with respect to the extent of its territorial waters. Is the Minister aware that the law of the sea treaty provides detailed mechanisms for the resolution of such disputes by peaceful means? Is it not a fact that the proposed treaty is one to which it is expected Libya will agree? Accordingly, will the Minister again make the strongest possible representations to the United States Government urging it to agree to the conclusion of this treaty without further delay?

the Minister for Industrial Relations. Has the Government given further consideration to the affairs of the Builders Labourers Federation? What action does the Government intend to take?
Mr VINER-Yesterday I informed the House that I expected to be in a position next week to notify the House that an application for deregistration of the Builders Labourers Federation had been lodged. Today I can inform the House that the Commonwealth Government has joined with the Victorian Government in instituting a royal commission into the Builders Labourers Federation. That action follows a joint police report into the activities of officials of the Federation. On the basis of the evidence revealed by that report the Commonwealth Government thought the matter to be of such seriousness thatJollowing the request of the Victorian Government we have decided to join that Government in a royal com-

Mr STREET-It might be of interest to the mission. This Govefl1ment is concerned at any al-

House to have what information we have in relegation or suspicion of illegal, improper or '

lation to the incident referred to by the Deputy corrupt activities. the ,terms of reference of the

Leader of the Opposition. The reports relate to an royal commission-I am reading from the terms

attack on 19 August by two Libyan SU22 aircraft of reference of the Victorian Government's

on United States Navy Fl4 aircraft participating commission-will be to inquire into whether the

in a naval exercise in the Gulf of Sidra. In reAustralian Building Construction Employees and

sponse to that attack the United States fighters Builders Labourers Federation, or any officer or

Questions Without Notice

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 573

member of the Federation in the course of or in relation to the affairs of the Federation, has engaged in any illegal, improper or corrupt activities.
In some quarters it is suggested that unions and their officials should really be above the law. That is not a view which this Government or the Victorian Government holds. If there is any suspicion or taint of corruption, improper activity or illegal activity, it is the responsibility of the Government to act firmly and promptly to see that that kind of conduct is searched out, rooted out and dealt with. No society can properly conduct its affairs when anything of that kind is going on. This Government is ready to join with the Victorian Government in pursuing the results of that police report. The application for deregistration of the Builders Labourers Federation, because of its appalling record in the industrial field, will be proceeded with and, as I have "notified the House, will be lodged next week. I describe the documentation as massive. The case will contain over 200 pages of particulars which indicates to the House the extent of the industrial misbehaviour of the union.
As we know, in Victoria it has created tremendous dislocation of industry and commerce. It has caused great concern and great commercial adversity to industrialists, to the Victorian Government and to the people of Victoria. This has occurred not only in that State but also has occurred in other States of the Commonwealth. If there is onething--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will resume his seat. I indicate to the Minister that, having stated to the House that an application for deregistration will be lodged in the court next week, he ought to consider whether the matter will be prejudiced by what he says in the House.
Mr VINER-Mr Speaker, I was conscious of the point that you have made. I will conclude by saying that the Government felt that it had an obligation to the people of Australia to take the action it has taken.
'MAJOR MANUFACTURING AND MINING INV~STMENt PROJECTS'
BOOKLET
Mr HURFORD-I refer the Treasurer to the Department of Industry and Commerce's booklet Major Manufacturing and Mining Investment Projects published in December 1980 which states on page 7:
The Department " . . is currently preparing a schedule of major public and private infrastructure projects which is to be published for the first time in March 1981.

Will the Treasurer confirm that this list of infrastructure projects has not been published to date-I emphasise 'to date' because I understand it is now to be published in an altered formbecause of objections from his Treasury Department, in particular in a letter from the Secretary of his Department to the Department of Industry and Commerce? If this is correct, why did the Treasurer issue a Press release on II August denying the facts that I had placed before the Australian public?
Mr HOWARD-The question of whether or not that surveyor booklet ultimately gets published is one for my colleague, the Minister for Industry and Commerce. I am perfectly happy to leave it to the very good judgment of my colleague to decide whether the booklet will be published. Obviously, there has been correspondence on the matter between departments; that normally happens. Permanent heads of departments tend to write to each other from time to time about these matters. I do not know whether the honourable member for Adelaide or, indeed, anybody else should get particularly excited about the timing of. the publication of a survey which, in effect, merely draws together on a national basis, figures about infrastructure proposals which would already be within the knowledge of the respective States whose decision-making processes decide whether or not those projects will come forward. I think the honourable member for Adelaide has put in a rather exaggerated light the statement that I made on 11 August. Rather than debate a fairly inconsequential matter with the honourable gentleman, I will simply seek leave to incorporate in Hansard my Press statement of 11 August so that there can be no argument as to precisely what I said on that occasion.
Leave granted.
The statefnent read as follows-
STATEMENT BY THE TREASURER, THE HONOURABLE JOHN HOWARD, M.P.
RESOURCES PROJECTS BOOKLET UNDER CONSIDERATION
Publication of the resources projects booklet referred to in a media release today by Mr C. J. Hurford, M.P., is still under consideration. The decision on its publication will eventually be taken by my colleague, the Minister for Industry and Commerce, Sir Phillip Lynch.
However, it is patently absurd for Mr Hurford to accuse me or the Treasury of attempting to suppress the figures from the various State Governments.
Since the figures for public sector infrastructure projects are obtained from the State Governments themselves, Mr Hurford seems to be accusing me of attempting to keep the States in ignorance of their own records.
Mr Hurford says that publication of the list would impress upon the public the need for greater funding for State infrastructure requirements.

574 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Questions Without Notice

In fact. it might also impress upon the public the extent to which pressure by State Governments to borrow money to fund these projects could help to drive up interest rates still further.
CANBERRA II August 1981
Mr Hurford-Mr Speaker, with your indulgence, I ask the Treasurer to table the other documents in relation to this matter, in particular, the correspondence between the Secretary to the Treasury and the Department of Industry and Commerce?
MrHOWARD-No.
COMMUNITY YOUTH SUPPORT SCHEME
Mr SHIPTON-My question, which is directed to the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, concerns the Community Youth Support Scheme.
Mr Humphreys-A Dorothy Dixer.
Mr SHIPTON~It is not a Dorothy Dixer. The honourable member should just wait and listen. It is something he ought to be concerned about. Will the Minister make appropriate transition arrangements and see that they take place for current participants in the Community Youth Support Scheme programs to transfer to the Government's other newer and more effective manpower and training programs?
Opposition members-Oh!
Mr SHIPTON-You do not like the truth.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Higgins will resume his seal. If the honourable member for Higgins speaks in that fashion in the future, I will rule his question out of order.
Mr N. A. BROWN-There are a number of aspects of this matter which may not be fully understood and which ought to be understood for a proper consideration of the issues. The first is the training and other programs that the Government already has in place and' to which the honourable member for Higgins has quite properly drawn attention. But I think what might not be fully understood is the very considerable expansion of these programs which has taken place in recent years, particularly in the most recent Budget. It may not be understood that this year there will be some 70,000 new training places under the Special Youth Employment Training Program. It may not be fully understood as yet that the Government pays a transition allowance to young people undertaking the wide range of pre-employment and pre-vocational courses which are available. It' may not be understood either as yet, but it should be fully understood,

that last year we paid an allowance to encourage young people to undertake those courses. We paid some 8,800 young people--
Mr Innes-Where will the courses be?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Melbourne will remain silent.
Mr Innes-He is telling lies.
Mr N. A. BROWN-This year we will be paying that allowance to some 16,000--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will resume his seat. The honourable member for Melbourne will withdraw"
Mr Innes-I withdraw.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Melbourne will stand in his place and withdraw.
Mr Innes-Would you like me to salute? Yes, 1 withdraw.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Melbourne will withdraw unqualifiedly.
Mr Innes-Can you describe how I withdraw unqualifiedly? 1just said: 'I withdraw'.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will pay proper respect to the House.
Mr Innes-You ought to pay proper respect--
Mr SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for Melbourne. I ask the honourable member for Melbourne to withdraw in the normal fashion.
Mr Innes-I withdraw.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member will resume his seat.
Mr N. A. BROWN-Mr Speaker, I was pointing out to the House that not only will there be"70,000 additional training places under the Special Youth Employment Training Program this year but also the Commonwealth will be approximately doubling the number of transition allowances payable to young people who undertake the wide range of courses available. It is also wise to understand-1 think some members of the Opposition probably do not understand this-that last year we paid allowances to some 8,800 trainees. This year, we will be paying allowances to some 16,000 trainees. It may not be understood that under the appropriations of the Department of Education there has been the provision of very substantial funds-in fact, up to $75m under the transition program. Furthermore, we will be assisting the employment of some 95,000 apprentices--

Questions Without Notice

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 575

Mr SPEAKER-I think the Minister should draw his answer to a conclusion. The information is available in the Budget documents.
Mr N. A. BROWN-I will, Mr Speaker, simply by making the point that those programs are in place. They are there. They are available to young people to use. It is a very firm commitment by the Government that the most substantial contribution that can be made to enable young people to obtain employment is to equip them with the skills; abilities and experience that they need. Appropriate arrangements will be made to encourage every young unemployed person to avail himself or herselr"of the opportunities under those very valuable programs.
NORTH-SOUTH DIALOGUE
Mr HAYDEN-I ask a question of the Prime Minister. I expect that he will recall his speech on North-South dialogue to the University of South Carolina last July. Before he made that speech, had he seen the comments of Mr Stone, the permanent head of the Treasury, solicited on his behalf, which denounced the speech in the most caustic terms? Is it correct that Mr Stone s~id that the speech 'suffered from a lack of substance', that 'unless we can show more political will than has been evident until now, the Australian emperor'-the Prime Minister-'is going to appear remarkably unclothed' and that the speech appeared to be no more than emotionally satisfying posturing? Does the steady reduction of direct Australian foreign aid by his Government from 0.65 per cent of gross domestic product in 1975 to a proposed 0.45 per cent, at the most, this year emphasise the force of these comments by one of the Government's most senior advisers? Finally, will the Prime Minister cease his emotionally satisfying but insubstantial posturing which is so embarrassing to our interests so soon before the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting and announce a firm timetable to raise direct aid according to the recommended United Nations target of 0.7 per cent of gross domestic product within this term of Parliament?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Treasurer has already announced that the foreign aid vote will be increased by around $1 OOm in this Budget and that that represents an increased proportion of gross domestic product. It is true that the foreign aid vote has been kept tight in recent years, although it has maintained its value in real terms.
Mr Hayden-That is not true. You have reduced it.

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will remain silent. He has asked his question.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-It has also enabled this Government to begin aid programs to the South Pacific of a kind which are importantJo that area and which had been seriously neglected by previous governments. Those programs are very much appreciated. It is not only a question of the direct aid vote; it is also a question of access to markets in Australia. For example, countries of the Association of South East Asian Nations have been increasing their exports to this market by 30 per cent to 40 per cent each year for the last 10 to 12 years. In spite of significant problems in the textiles, apparel and footwear industries, we purchase more goods from developing countries than does almost any other advanced industrial country. Figures that were taken out some time ago indicate that if the ASEAN countries had access to Europe and North America of the same per capita kind as they have to Australia they would sell an extra $1 ,000m worth of goods each year. Therefore, access to markets is very important. It is something to which this Government has given close attention.
Mr Hayden-John Stone said you are posturing and that is what you are doing now.
Mr SPEAKER-i Order! The Leader of the Opposition will remain silent. He asked his question and I ask him to listen to the answer in silence.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable gentleman tries to suggest that the figures are false. I suggest that he speak to people who are working in the textile industries of Australia, members of the Australian Textile Workers Union and employers in the textile countries.
Mr Hayden-You speak to John Stone. He says you are posturing without substance.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition is continually interjecting. I ask him to show an example to the House by being silent.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-People involved in the textile, apparel and footwear industries know quite well that more and more of this market is becoming open to imports. They also know that under the seven-year plan that was announced a year ago more of the market will be subject to import competition. They also know that under those arrangements preference to developing countries will be provided for the first time. They also know that developing countries, whether it is in the sensitive textile, apparel and footwear areas or with respect to other manufactured goods, gain access to this market which is

576 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Questions Without Notice

virtually unequalled amongst the developed countries. Of course, that is important to them because it is not only direct funds being provided in terms of aid but also access to markets that is important. In many regards Australia has set an example, although I know there are some who would wish us to move further.

I am not aware that the Leader of the Opposition has suggested that protection should be further diminished to assist in this regard. If that is what he wishes to propose, let him say that to the
officials and members of the Textile Workers Union and see what kind of response he gets. Whatever the Leader of the Opposition might say,
Australia's position in this regard is highly respected and is held in high esteem in nearly every country. Whatever the Leader of the Opposition may say, he will not diminish this Government or Australia in the process. He will only diminish himself. If the honourable gentleman really wishes to understand what the Secretary to the Treasury--

Mr Hayden-It is John Stone saying it. I am merely qU!Jting him.

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Mr Speaker, you asked the Leader of the Opposition to set an example some moments ago.

Mr SPEAKER-The right honourable gentleman will resume his seat.

Mr Hayden-I understand he says you are a humbug.

'Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I can only

suggest, Mr Speaker, that as the Leader of the Op-

position totally disregards your request he has set

an example to this House quite the opposite of

that which you intended, and I would like to know

whether you intend to allow that to continue to

happen.

.

Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition asked his question. It was a long and highly political question. It was asked in silence. The Prime Minister is entitled to reply in silence. I did ask the Leader of the Opposition to set an example as a leader in this Parliament to those who sit behind him. I ask him to continue to remain silent.

Mr Hayden-But, Mr Speaker,- surely this cuts both ways. John Stone said the Prime Minister is a humbug. I have only quoted him.

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will resume his seat. He asked his question. The right. honourable gentleman is answering it. He is entitled to be heardin silence.

Opposition members interjecting-

Mr SPEAKER-Members of the Opposition will remain silent. I call the Prime Minister.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-There are only two other points I would like to make briefly.
Mr Baume-It is a wonderful example you are setting to the kids in the gallery, Bill.
Mr Hayden-You tell them how you keep out of gaol despite breaking the rules, and become rich at the same time.
Mr SPEAKER-I ask the Leader of the Opposition to withdraw.
Mr Hayden-I did not interject on the Prime Minister. .
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman interjected across the chamber in terms that were unparliamentary. I ask him to withdraw.
Mr Hayden-I apologise for having said to the honourable member for Macarthur--
.Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is only worsening that procedure.
Mr Hayden-Thaf he is successful--
Mr SPEAKER-I ask the Leader of the Opposition to withdraw unqualifiedly.
Mr Hayden-I withdraw unqualifiedly.
Mr SPEAKER-I call the Prime Minister.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-There are only two other things I want to say.
Mr Uren-Tell us about John Stone.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Reid will remain silent.
Mr Uren-I just want to hear what John Stone said.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Reid will remain silent.
Mr Uren-What did John Stone say, Malcolm?
Mr SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for Reid to remain silent.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The speech that I gave at the University of South Carolina had been--
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! Honourable members of the Opposition will remain silent.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The speech that I gave at the University of Solith Carolina--
Mr Young-Come on, Andrew, make a run.
Mr SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for Port Adelaide to remain silent.
Mr Young-For God's sake.

Questions Without Notice

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 577

Mr SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for Port Adelaide to remain silent. I ask honourable members in the Opposition to remain silent. It is perfectly obvious to me that there is forced laughter and it is not in accordance with the dignity of the Parliament.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-I will not allow the proceedings to continue until the House comes to order, and the disorder is coming solely from my left. I call the Prime Minister.

THIRTY-FIFTH SESSION OF THE UNITED NATIONS GENERAL ASSEMBLY 1980
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs)-For the information of honourable members, I present the report of the Australian delegation to the thirty-fifth session of the United Nations General Assembly 1980.
JET NETWORK AIR FARES
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) -For the information of honourable members, I present a report by Price Waterhouse Associates on jet network air fares recommendations, July 1981.

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The speech that I gave at the University of South Carolina had been cleared through members of the Foreign Affairs and Defence Committee, and it was not, therefore, a speech of mine; it was a speech of the Government. In particular it had the approval and support of the Treasurer. I specifically wanted his views on these matters because of their financial implications. On many other matters we are given a great deal of advice. We select that which is good and reject that which is bad.
PARLIAMENT HOUSE CAR PARK
Mr LEO McLEAY-Mr Speaker, you will recall that during the last session I wrote to you regarding security in the car park behind Parliament House, particularly when female members of staff are leaving after late night sessions. I asked that that car park be floodlit. To date that has not been done. Can you indicate when that may be done and, in the meantime, have the police patrol the area at night so that female members of staff will not be harassed in that car park when they are going home?
Mr SPEAKER-I will give an interim reply because I will have to test my memory. After the honourable gentleman raised the matter I gave instructions that there be patrolling by the police of the area. I caused inquiries to be made about floodlighting. The inquiries led us to the proposition that it would probably be best to do some works in the car park to smooth the area, as it was not intended as a car park. My recollection is that that consideration has matured and that there will be a paving and a floodlighting of the area within a short time. What I have said is subject to my inquiring and giving the honourable gentleman more precise information.

JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY
Membership
Mr SPEAKER-I have received advice from the Government Whip that he has nominated Mr Coleman to be a member of the Joint Committee on the Australian Capital Territory in the place of MrDean.
GRIEVANCE DEBATE
Funding of Political Parties-Parliament House Car Park-Health Care
Services-Education-.:....state Electricity Commission of Victoria-Banking-Local
Government Finance-Aviation-Road Funding-Defence-Aluminium Industry
Question proposed:
That grievances be noted.
Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide) (11.39)-1 wish to raise again in this Parliament ~he all-important question which I have raised on a number of occasions in the almost eight years I have been here; that is, the question of funding of political parties. A new element has emerged in the debate in recent weeks in New South Wales. I have said over and over again that ultimately the pressures building up in Australia will have their effect in this Parliament, as they have had their effect in the parliaments of all the great democracies of the Western world, in that reform will be brought about under the Commonwealth Electoral Act whereby, firstly, the funding of political parties will at least be made more honest and, secondly, the step may be taken, as it has been taken in New South Wales, for the actual part-funding of political parties to be done by the public purse.
I have raised this question not just as a parliamentarian but rather as a practitioner of campaigns over a long period when I have seen political parties trying to use all forms and all means to

578 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Grievance Debate

raise the ever increasing level of funds that are required to conduct election campaigns in this country. Indeed, I understand that for the State election in New South Wales this year television costs in 1981 are exactly 50 per cent higher than they were at the last State election in 1978. The level of funds required by the political parties in New South Wales for television alone, which normally constitutes about 80 per cent of the total budgets of political parties, will be a great deal higher that what was required just three years ago. Millions of dollars have to be raised by the various political parties in this country to fight the campaigns.
We have said consistently over the years that people are entitled to know where the funds that the political parties spend at each election come from so that we know all the politicians and all the political parties in this country are being honest in their representation of the people of this country. It is alarming indeed to realise from the words of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) this week
that something like $6,500m has come into this country from overseas. We do not know whether any of the people or the organisations that are bringing this money into the country have any association with the political parties that operate here, but we ought to know. We ought to know whether any of these companies that are bringing these vast amounts of money into this country are making donations to political parties. The Government has always refused to acknowledge the need for reform in this area because the Liberal and National Country Parties have always had an enormous advantage over the opposition Labor Party in raising funds. They have always been able to attract vast amounts of money from major companies-national companies and multinational companies-to make up the moneys that are required to be spent on election campaigns.
It is estimated by the Labor Party administration that the Government parties in 1980 spent nationally something like $6m. It takes a lot of work to raise $6m. There is no doubt that some very major contributions were made by major companies to the Liberal and National Country Parties to make up that $6m. The people of Australia are entitled to know the names of the companies that made those donations. They are entitled to know whether this Government at any stage has made a decision which is favourable to any of those companies which made those major contributions. There is an easy way out for the Government. That is to adopt the suggestion that we have made over the last decade, namely, that there ought to be an exposure of those who make

donations to political parties-the Labor Party as well as the Government parties-and that we should introduce the scheme that has now been introduced in New South Wales, namely, public funding of political parties and a public register so that any citizen of New South Wales can ask to look at the register to ascertain the name of any person or any company that has made a donation of over $200 to any political party in that State. The citizens can then see whether the Wran Government has made any decision which might be beneficial in any way to a company that has made a major donation and can make that a matter of great debate. Nothing has been more honest in electoral reform than what the New South Wales Government has done in relation to the public funding of political parties in that State. It is something of which we in this chamber ought to be cognisant.
I referred earlier to the new elenient that had emerged in the debate about the funding of political parties. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Treasurer took time out to condemn the new scheme in New South Wales and, of course, the newly elected Leader of the Opposition in New South Wales, Mr McDonald, was most vehement in his criticism of this scheme for the public funding of political parties. He said that it was corrupt and should not be introduced and that if people who make donations want to keep their identity secret, that that should continue in Australia and specifically in New South Wales. He ignores completely the enormous reform that has taken place throughout the world. I cannot name one country in the western world where there is not sorrw form of public funding of political parties or where people who make donations to political parties must make them public. In the last couple of weeks the person who was most vehement about this scheme, Mr McDonald, the Leader of the Opposition in New South Wales, told us what a terrible system it would be if the citizens of New South Wales had to contribute something like 20c each-I repeat, 20c each-to a fund that would put politics in New South Wales on a level never before comprehended in any State or in the national Parliament. Everybody in New South Wales will know where all the funds come from. Auditors will be appointed by the Government. The Opposition will have as much power as the Government in viewing expenditure by political parties and candidates. There wi1i be no bias towards any political party, but rather an assistance to the operation of the Westminster system as it applies in New South Wales.
But what comes to light? After witnessing Mr McDonald running up and down New South

Grievance Debate

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 579

Wales, spending $50,000 or $60,000 on a publicity campaign to tell us how corrupt the system of public funding of political parties is, we now find that he has been breaking the law in raising his political funds. Firstly he denied, but then he was forced to admit, that he had been going to illegal gambling nights to raise the funds that are necessary for the Liberal Party in New South Wales. He says that it is not right that everybody in New South Wales should know where the funds are coming from, that we should fall into line with the United States of America, West Germany, Sweden or some of the great democracies of the western world by doing in New South Wales what is being done in those countries. Rather, it appears that Mr McDonald prefers to play two-up, roulette or black jack to raise funds for his party in some scungey little shed out the back of a building in New South Wales where those participating are likely to be charged with breaking the law. That is the avenue for the raising of funds the Liberal Party in New South Wales apparently sees open
to it.
Of course, Mr McDonald is just on the bandwagon of what is a huge joke as far as the Liberal and National Country Parties are concerned. Everyone in this country knows that illegal gambling nights are held by many organisations, not the least of which would be the Catholic Church. We are not greatly concerned about that but it is an insult to our intelligence for Mr McDonald to be putting on such a turn in New South Wales about public funding of political parties while he is out playing two-up. If he is to be serious about the system, if he wants to put forward some constructive criticism of it, if he wants to change it for the better, let him put forward his ideas rather than putting out Press releases from two-up games about how corrupt the system is when he is running away from the police.
The system that has been introduced into New South Wales is an enormously good one. It will be
introduced, irrespective of the attitudes of honourable members opposite, into all States of Australia and into this Parliament, because the people of Australia want to know what donations are being made. At election time, when the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) put out their hands to receive large donations from major overseas companies, the people of Australia are entitled to know who is making those donations and what they are getting in return. The New South Wales system is an enormously good system. Now that Mr McDonald has been exposed as a person who would prefer to break the law than to comply with the newly introduced good system of public

funding of political parties, we can see that the opposition to what Mr Wran has done in New South Wales is a complete sham.
Mr SPEAKER-Just before the Order of the Day was called on, the honourable member for Grayndler (Mr Leo McLeay) raised with me as a matter of indulgence the question of the car parking area to the rear of the House. I gave him an interim reply. Since then I have asked the Serjeantat-Arms to check the matter for me. I am informed that a circular dated 6 August 1981 was sent to all honourable members. It reads as follows:
All staff accommodated in rooms under Mr Speaker's control
The following notice from the secretary of the Joint House Department is circulated for the information of all staff.
Ian C. Cochran Serjeant-at-Arms
Then there is a photocopy of a minute to the Clerk of the House of Representatives from Mr J. M. Jorgensen, secretary to the Joint House Department. It is dated 4 August 1981 and reads as follows:
Parking behind Parliament House
The National Capital Development Commission has undertaken the works necessary to provide the new car park on Camp Hill, with the assurance that the work would be finished in time for the budget session.
I regret to advise that the Commission has indicated a delay in these works because of the demarcation dispute in the building industry. It is not possible to say when construction will be completed.
The inconvenience arising from this situation is regretted, however, every effort will be made to complete the project as early as practicable.
I regret to inform the House that my inquiries disclose that there has been no change in that situation. The area has been formed and accordingly can be used for parking, but because of the dispute it has not been completed. The area is still not paved and there is ~till no lighting. When the demarcation dispute enos immediate action will be taken to pave and to provide the lighting.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (11.52) -Some months ago the Government decided on a new procedure in relation to health care in this nation. The various health funds in Australia have embarked, quite properly, upon programs of promotion to entice people to join them. I have absolutely no argument about that. At the end of last year the Health Insurance CommissionMedibank Private-presented its report on its operations for the year 1979-80. In early June this year this House was presented with the report which was entitled 'Operations of the Registered Medical Benefits and Hospital Benefits Organiza-
a tions 1979-80;' When those reports were read in
conjunction with each other fairly poor picture

580 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Grievance Debate

emerged in terms of the operations of the Government's own health fund, Medibank.
I willingly concede that the reports I refer to deal with the operations of the previous financial year but they are the only ones presently before the House. An examination of the report showed that for that year Medibank finished with a surplus of only $2.3m compared with a surplus of a little over $3m the previous year. This figure was arrived at by virtue of profit on its medical benefits fund of slightly over $lOm and a loss on its hospital benefits fund of almost $8m. Further exatnination of that report indicates that when one adds Medibank's private claims experience for that year to its operating expenses and takes away its net investment income and miscellaneous operating income it has an average monthly break-even figure of approximately $24m. That means that every month claims on Medibank and the costs of running Medibank will be in the area of$24m.
The report that I have alluded to showed that at the end of 30 June 1980 Medibank had reserves of only $9.9m-Iess than a fortnight's reserves. We all know that the Government itself requires the health funds to have at least two months reserves. So, the Government health fund had reserves of only two weeks. One could suggest that an unforeseen epidemic could well have been an epidemic for the Medibank Private fund in terms of its suddenly reaching a stage where it would no longer have an ability to meet its obligations.
The other report which was presented only in June and which is entitled 'Operations of the Registered Medical Benefits and Hospital Benefits Organizations' shows the performances of all the health funds in Australia. They are all listed for examination. Let us examine the costs of administration and management expenditure and compare Medibank with the other major health funds. In New South Wales the cost of administration and management to total income for the Medical Benefits Fund of Australia Ltd is in the vicinity of 8c in the dollar, for the Hospitals Contribution Fund of Australia it is in the vicinity of 9c, for the NIB Health Funds Ltd it is slightly in excess of 9c, for the Manchester Unity Institute of Oddfellows it is almost lOcand for the Grand United Order of Oddfellows it is in the vicinity of 9.6c. Yet the cost of management to Medibank is in excess of 17c in every dollar.
Let me turn to Queensland, my home State. The expenses for the large private medical benefits fund are in the vicinity of 8c in the dollar; Medibank is closer to 19c in the dollar. In Victoria there is a picture of more closely aligned costs. It

is not improper to note that Victoria was the only State where Medibank really did well. In New
South Wales Medibank lost almost $4m in the
year we are talking about. In Queensland'Ji' Medibank lost $2.75m. In Tasmania, Medibank" lost in excess of $600,000. In South Australia it made a profit of $385,000 and in Western Australia slightly over $lm. When we are in the
midst of enticing people to join health funds it is proper to examine those health funds to see how
they are performing.

I remind the House that in the last two or three
years three private health funds have gone to the wall. The members of those health' funds have
been left on their own. The Government made a
deliberate decision not to assist the members of those health funds, and those people h~d to make their own arrangements. Some of them had
accounts in four figure amounts and they had to live without. In June or July I asked the Government what it would do if Medibank went broke.
Will it treat the membership of Medibank any differently from the way it treated the member-
ship of those private health funds? This was quite a legitimate inquiry from a member of this Parliament who wanted to protect his constituents and
who wanted to know exactly what the Government's attitude would be if Medibank, which at
the end of the time mentioned had only two weeks reserves went to the wall.

During the'recess I have been subjected to in-

timidation by the Health Insurance Commission

of this country through its solicitors. The Daily

Telegraph, which is a Sydney paper, printed a

story reporting my comments and though the re-

port in some parts was inaccurate in presentation

I, as a member of this Parliament, received a

lengthly telegram threatening me if I did not take

certain action. It reads:

'

if you do not comply with this demand, you may anticipate institution of legal proceedings.

This government-owned and operated health scheme does not even have the manners to ring a member and ask: 'What did you really say?' I seek leave to incorporate the text of this telegram in
Hansard.

Leave granted.

The telegram read as follows-

Mr Don Cameron Commonwealth Parliamentary Offices Ann Street Brisbane

We act for the Health Insurance Commission and refer to the report appearing on page 11 of "The Daily Telegraph" published today under the Heading "Medibank on its Deathbed: MP".

Grievance Debate

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 581

The heading of that report and the malter therein altributed to you are grossly defamatory of the Health Insurance Commission, carrying on business under the name Medibank Private.

Medibank Private is not on its deathbed, it does not face bankruptcy and is not in trouble. There is no prospect of the
fund going to the wall.

Our client demands that you publish an apology in the following terms:

Apology to Medibank Private I have been reported as saying words to the effect that Medibank Private was financially unsound.
I now accept that this is totally without foundation. I accept that Medibank Private is financially strong and that its business is being conducted efficiently.
I unreservedly withdraw any imputation against Medibank Private and apologise for any harm which may have been occasioned.

You should cause this apology to be published with the same

prominence given to the report complained of. Publication

should be in all issues of the Daily Telegraph published on

either Friday 10 July or Monday 13 July.

.

If you do not comply with this demand, you may anticipate the institution of legal proceedings.

A.A. Howie Minter Simpson and Co. 8Julyl981

Mr DONALD CAMERON-I thank the House. It is not improper to ask: How much
money does Medibank or the Health Insurance Commission in this country consume in legal fees, if every time somebody makes an observation that
such an organisation does not like, it is off to see
its lawyers to start legal proceedings. Thankfully
the threatened proceedings relating to me were dropped in view of explanations which were
forthcoming from me. But if every time somebody
upsets that health fund it resorts to the cost of advice from lawyers-and, heaven forbid, that
cost can be high-I wonder what the future of
Medibank in this country really is.

If the Health Insurance Commission had pursued the line on which it started off, its action
could well have broken me financially. I could have consumed thousands and thousands of dollar
in simply fighting to prove that I had done nothing
wrong. This is a risk that faces members of Parlia-
ment. Once upon a time a private individual would threaten legal action but we seem to have
reached the stage where even government
instrumentalities threaten legal action against
members of Parliament who, in the pursuit of the
interests of their constituents, make certain observations and then are suddenly in the lions den. I
clearly recall the courtcase in which I was in-
volved some years ago. It related to the expenditureof--

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-
Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Mrs CHILD (Henty)(12.2)-The Government has announced that it will not continue to fund 30 colleges of advanced education throughout Australia. The Minister for Education (Mr Fife) has produced this as a recommendation from the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission, but I would like to put it on record that this is not correct. For the record, the Tertiary Education Committee has been advocating a redirection of effort away from teacher education and has advised that the amalgamation of some colleges can assist in this process. It hils also recommended that the colleges involved should have three years to adjust to the merger. Colleges faced with mergers need time to plan and reorganise in time to achieve education improvements. While some rationalisation of the college sector is both necessary and desirable, several of the proposed mergers should not proceed. As well, the heavy handed threats by the Government to the colleges are quite unjustified.
A responsible government would only implement drastic changes to out education system after long study and extensive consultation and would ensure that such changes were not made until adequate notice had been given. This Government policies thought up in screcy by a group of Ministers who have no expertise in the field and as part of a grab-all money saving exercise. Meanwhile recommendations from experts get filed in the rubbish bin. I quote from an Age editorial of Thursday 30 July 1981, which states:
Seemingly with no thought for the consequences, and in the simple-minded belief that wholesaler mergers would save money, the Razor Gang decided that if the viability of some
colleges was in doubt, all of them might as well be combined, either one with another or with other institutions. In the three
months since, the Government has given no educational rationale for its mergers decision, no estimate of the cost benefits, no indication that the community will be in any way
l:"Jetter off by forcing these shot-gun marriages on a hapless and
dispirited college system.
The Government has withdrawn the requirement for the Institute of Catholic Education to merge with some other body, as indeed anyone with any sense or knowledge of the Institute would have forecast would happen. Its inclusion in the lest was illogical and imptacticable and I believe it was included in error. It is equally illogical and impractical to ask the Institute of Early CHildhood Development to merge with any other body and I believe it has also been included in error. I take this opportunity to urge the Minister for Education and the Government to reverse the decision to ask the Institute to amalgamate with another Victorian college. Australia should be willing to learn from the experience of overseas amalgamation. I suggest that there is overwhelming evidence from Britain and the United States of

582 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Grievance Debate

America to show that following amalgamations early childhood courses have become watered down until they can no longer provide adequate preparation for the work with young children and their families.
Following amalgamation, it has been found that the early childhood departments become such a small part of the bigger institutions that they do not have a strong enough voice in administration to maintain the quality of their staffing and courses. The pattern everwhere has been for specialist early childhood staff to be lost and to be replaced by redundant, tenured staff from other areas with no background or without any applied experience in the area of early Education, amalgamation has resulted in the disintegration of the early childhood course. There is very little left of it and what is left is disappearing rapidly. Tenured staff in the larger institution was moved into early childhood teaching, regardless of the fact that staff members had no experience or expertise in early childhood teaching. It is imperative that the Institute of Early Childhood Development is staffed with experts, accustomed to early childhood courses.
The disappearance of specialist early childhood colleges and institutes in Britain, due to amalgamations and cutbacks, has resulted in a loss of quality in the early childhood courses now offered for the preparation of personnel to work in the early childhood field. The effects of the weakening of college courses are now evident in the nursery schools and infant classrooms. There is a serious concern in all inspectorates at the shortage of adequately trained specialists in early education. Britain found that the child development components required for early childhood education ilre weakened after amalgamation, to provide time for the curriculum subjects necessary for teaching older children. The corresponding drop in quality in early childhood courses appears to be a contributing factor in the decrease in the numbers of students now entering early childhood courses in Britain. It is very likely that in the near future Britain will face a serious shortage of early childhood teachers. There is also current evidence in Britain to show that amalgamation of teacher training colleges into larger institutions has not saved money as we are assured it will do by the Minister for Education. I must say here that despite repeated requests the Government has not produced any costing of its proposals. The amalgamations in Britain have resulted in such a serious depletion of college staff with early childhood expertise that it is difficult to see how the position can be salvaged. There is no one to train

the trainers, who in turn will train the early childhood teachers of tomorrow. Thus, expertise is not being passed down and the knowledge and experience built up over years is lost.
Australia has only one specialist centre for early childhood studies, the Institute of Early Childhood Development. It represents over 60 years of work by the community to foster its development to its present standard where it serves not only Australia but also South East Asia and the South Pacific region. We in Australia, are regarded as an acknowledged leader in the provision of early childhood education and services. An integral part of this provision is the professional preparation at the Institute of Early Childhood Development of the special staff' required to meet the needs of the early childhood field. The Institute has national and international responsibilities with its acceptance of students from the other Australian States and abroad.
The Institute of Early Childhood Development is recognised throughout the world as a centre of excellence in the quality of its graduates and its capacity to undertake special studies related to early childhood development. In my two years as the Executive Officer for the State College of Victoria Staff Associations Council, I came to know the work of the Institute very well and to appreciate the work done there. I urge the Minister and the Government tO,reverse the decision for the Institute of Early Childhood Development to amalgamate. If this is not done, we will probably have to re-establish and rebuild the Institute in years to come and this will prove, as it as proving in Britain, to be a difficult and costly exercise. Specialists with an early childhood orientation, once dispersed, are not easily brought together again. Australia should not waste the resources it has taken fifty many years to build up.
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins) (12.9)-1 wish to raise today, in this grievance debate, the announcement by the State Electricity Commission of Victoria of a 20 per cent tariff increase. The Chairman of the SEC in Victoria, Mr Trethowan, has blamed the Federal Government for the increases. I know it is fashionable for people to criticise the Federal Government, but I point out to Mr Trethowan that it is totally incorrect and it is false to accuse the Federal Government of being responsible for the increase in the price of power in Victoria. I believe that Mr Trethowan should withdraw that claim. I say to him that people in glass houses should not throw stones and that he ought to get his own house in order. The rise has

Grievance Debate

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 583

not been brought about by the Federal Government; it has been brought about by the SEC's incompetence. It is due, I believe, to the bad management of the SEC. It is due, in part, to industrial relations and union activity in the Latrobe Valley, but Mr Trethowan did not even have the courage to blame the unions for part of the SEC's problems. The industrial relations record in the Latrobe Valley is bad.
One of the key factors of the increase is the bad financial management of the SEC. It has had inadequate pricing policies over a long period. It was interesting to read in one of this morning's newspapers that Mr Trethowan, in giving evidence yesterday to a State parliamentary committee, talked about the problems and the effect of exchange rate losses. It would seem to me from what I read that in fact the SEC has been speculating in currency. I would have thought that that is something that a statutory body such as that should not be doing. There is evidence of inadequate financial management. The SEC has been funding its current projects out of loans and borrowings rather than out of revenue. This has effect not only on industry but also on families, households and pensioners. I shall quote from an article in the Age. I do not always find everything I read in the Age agreeable, but this morning's editorial states:
. '. . the SEC held down its prices, and ternporised with a number of innovative financial techniques. It ran down its financial assets, drew heavily on trade credit, put off paying bills and used up bank overdrafts. Its dependence on borrowing grew so heavy that last year 80 per cent of its $626m capital investment was raised from loan funds; only 2 per cent came from our electricity bills.
I think that speaks for itself. Of course, the SEC also engaged in competition with the Gas and Fuel Corporation of Victoria to encourage use of electricity. Electricity is one of Victoria's great assets. Cheap power for industry is one of the assets that Victoria offers manufacturing industry. The SEC, I think, has put that in jeopardy in an irresponsible fashion by its increases. It has put the Alcoa Australia project at Portland iqto jeopardy and has put 2,000 to 3,000 jobs at risk. I am sure that the SEC would be aware of the downstream or domino effect when a project is put in jeopardy or does not go ahead. There are suppliers to projects such as that. There are subcontractors, contractors, and firms which, in addition to supplying materials, supply services. Many firms, large and small, plan to supply materials and services, and they now will face some uncertainty.
The effect is not only on Victoria. There is the potential effect on the interstate suppliers of materials, and there is a great potential effect on Western Australia, because Wagerup is to provide

substantial amounts of alumina for the Portland project. Large and small firms are entitled to plan for the future and to plan on the basis of statements of future pricing policies and trends as announced by the SEC. The SEC has gone back on its word in regard to that matter and has caused uncertainties in regard to large and small manufacturing industries and jobs. Similarly, there is uncertainty in households. Families are entitled to plan how much of the weekly budget they can spend on power bills. Pensioners are affected. I had a call to my office yesterday from a lady asking how she was to pay her power bill.
Mr Howe-There is an incompetent government in Victoria.
Mr SHIPTON-No, it is not incompetent at all. I will come back to that matter. I must ask whether the SEC has the ability to get on line future power stations in Victoria. What is the state of management of the SEC? It is an uncontrollable qango, in my view. This latest problem of a massive rise in the tariff puts a number of things at risk. One thing which Victoria has is reasonably cheap power, by world standards, to offer to manufacturing industry. The industrial future of Victoria is put at risk, not by the action of the Government, but by this qango. Now there is a need for a massive restructuring of the management of the SEC. This provides the opportunity for the Victorian Government to take control of this qango, A drastic reshuffle is needed at the SEC. There is a chance, under the new, effective, strong and fresh leadership of Lindsay Thompson in Victoria, to get this qango in order and under control.
, In the time remaining I should like to raise
another issue, a national one, and that is the issue of foreign banks participating in banking operations in Australia. I raise the issue today to encourage debate on the subject in the community, In so doing I congratulate the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System for bringing the issue into the public domain, but I do not think there has been enough discussion on that subject. I believe that following the recent bank mergers in Australia there has been expectation in the community; it has been implied that the Government, by allowing these recent domestic bank mergers to take place, would in fact allow further competition in banking in Australia by letting foreign banks compete in some form in the market place here. I believe that the participation of foreign banks with Australian partners would bring to Australia expertise, knowledge and funds which may well mean that more funds will be available for housing and agriculture. Similarly, expertise developed by

584 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Grievance Debate

merchant bankers in making venture funds available for business could be built on and could help medium and small businesses.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (12.l9)-The issue of reducing levels of Commonwealth assistance to local municipal councils is an aspect of the Government's new federalism policy which is causing immense concern throughout the country. The practical result of the Government's attitude to the devolution of financial and political accountability to State and local governments is that local municpalities have to fall back on their own resources to provide major services. Councils are being forced to bear the cost of an increasing number of programs for which there is a definite government commitment for funding and for which government repeatedly advises that insufficient funds are available. In some cases councils are obliged to provide bridging finance for programs where Commonwealth or State assistance will most probably not be received for some time. The original principle of capital subsidies for municipal councils was seen as a spread of responsibility between the senior partners in the government system and the local government. However, costs have increased substantially but no matching increase has occurred in the subsidy level. For example, the funds which are available for road construction and maintenance, while increasing marginally, have in no way kept up with the cost of wages and materials. These allocations have effectively provided less money year after year and are totally inadequate. Improvement to roads is a vital necessity in a tourist oriented electorate such as La Trobe, which includes the Dandenong Ranges. The lack of Federal spending on roads, despite the massive motoring taxes levied by the Government, must be condemned. The ultimate cost of such neglect will be catastrophic in terms of road safety, accidents and the eventual cost of major road replacement.
Fuel is a major proportion of a local municipality's normal operating expenditure. Rapid increases in fuel prices have effectively doubled the cost to councils over the past four years. Local government has traditionally been free from taxation levies on the basis that such levies would quite rightly be seen by ratepayers as double taxation. Ratepayers are now being sUbjected to a form of unacceptable indirect taxation as a result of the Federal Government's petrol parity pricing policy. The Victorian Liberal Government's response to the inadequacy of Federal funds has resulted in a ceiling on rate remissions. This has meant a further imposition on local councils which, in most cases, have decided to make up the difference to 50 per cent where necessary. Once

again, ratepayers are subsidising the Government for its own policies.
In outer suburban areas, such as La Trobe, population increases are high. The increases are largely in new residential areas where services have to be started from the beginning. Ratepayers, who are paying higher and higher rates each year, expect basic services such as sewerage, roadworks and community facilities to be provided. Local municipalities accept a responsibility for the provision of these services. However, more and more the responsibility for these services has become an impossibility for local government which has been financially abandoned by its Federal counterpart. Many programs in public works have had to be severely curtailed or abandoned simply because council spending power has reached an all time low.
The welfare services of local municipalities are now more than ever vitally necessary. The Federal Government cutbacks in every sphere of social justice have meant vast increases in the numbers of people in crisis situations. Without policies of support or a genuine commitment to viable welfare facilities provided at the Federal level people are turning more and more to their local councils for help. Council departments have endeavoured to meet this demand. However, the reports of council social workers involved in such activities indicate quite strongly that the needs are not being met. The massive increase in the number of people who are in genuine need can be correlated with the problems of increased unemployment, high rents, high mortgage repayments, a lack of public welfare housing, the high cost of providing public utilities for low income families, deflated wages and a lack of realistic pension or benefit payments. The cost of emergency relief in one local municipality in my electorate has increased by $1,000 a month. Undoubtedly the pattern is a national one. The inadequacy of Government finance in this area reaches even to the level of insufficient funding for the provision of food vouchers, clothing, furniture and transport facilities in emergency situations. Families are more frequently being confronted with problems relating to unemployment and involving quick payment of social security benefits. Pressure on councils for rental accommodation has increased significantly. In many areas in my electorate accommodation for single people is almost non-existent or is available at rentals far in excess of their ability to pay.
The Early Childhood Development Program, faced with cutbacks in funding after the razor gang report, is a vitally important provision for the young people of our nation. Many children

Grievance Debate

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 585

are now in danger of missing out on the services which the program could offer. We must not allow this to happen. The Federal Government must indicate a constant intention to provide such services universally. The problems of homeless youth have recently been given national publicity in the media. Local municipalities, which daily face this problem on their doorstep, are helpless. Recent Federal Government responses to the problems of such young people have included the abolition of the Commonwealth Youth Suppqrt Scheme, which provided much needed local support and there has been no increase in the $36 a week unemployment benefit to the under 18 year olds. Such is the record of the Federal Government in all welfare service provisions.
The responsible municipal councils which are close to the problem and which see on a day to day basis the real needs of their communities are in the invidious situation of trying to provide services as a moral obligation at a time when their funding is being squeezed dry. Basically this means that local municipalities have had to fall back on their own resources to provide for vital projects. This has meant higher payments for ratepayers through the imposition of or increases in fees for service areas. Most councils have, where possible, continued their commitment to services for the people. This heavy added burden which is now being felt is a direct result of the Federal Government's abrogation of financial support. More and more local government has become the ball in a financial ping-pong game between Federal and State governments. Such an attitude indicates a total misconception of the real needs of the people in growing urban municipalities.
Under the present Government's policy on new federalism and the partnership relationships between the three tiers of government, local municipalities are in a most invidious position. Responsibility for the provision of major services and facilities has been fobbed off to them without corresponding finance. The overall picture for local government funding from the Federal and State governments to support the implementation of new Federal policies with the delegation of responsibility to the lower forms of government must be one of real concern to this nation. In rec~nt years many new initiatives have been taken by local councils. Many have made detailed studies of the needs in their areas and the potential of human and physical resources to cater better for their needs. These projects include planning for expanded employment opportunities, improved transport and recreation facilities, child care centres and many other facilities. There are many exciting possibilities. Local government has

the responsibility to ensure that the needs of all the people in their localities are adequately met. It can become the most vital area of people's involvement in the process of government.. The Federal Government's policy of cutting back local funds is destroying this potential.
Mr KATTER (Kennedy) (12.28)-The four subjects that I propose to refer to fairly briefly may appear to be matters of parochial interest but this is not so because in each case they are of immense importance to this nation. I would like to place on record the appreciation of all the people throughout the length and breadth of this nation at the decision that was made recently by the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) and the Government in relation to general aviation charges and conditions. There was grave apprehension throughout the land as to what may result from the report on aviation charges that was submitted to the Government. The people of this country are grateful that the recommendations in that report were rejected and I hope they continue to be rejected.
While I am speaking on the subject of aviation I again must refer to the appreherision that has permeated all the inland areas of this nation. I again must point out that this is not a parochial matter because the areas with which I am involved are those areas which pour great wealth into this nation. I know, Mr Deputy Speaker, from my personal contact with you that you would appreciate my point. The industries I refer to are the great mining industries, the beef cattle industry, the sugar industry, the grains industry and so on. Let us be sensible about this. Anyone who has any sort of appreciation of where the wealth of this nation comes from must accept the fact that the remote areas of this nation to which I am referring are inevitably tied up with the general progress and prosperity of this great coun~ry.
Our air services are vital. When I say 'air services' I refer to the air services beyond'the metropolitan and provincial cities of this great nation. They are in jeopardy. There exists now ,a provision that if Trans Australia Airlines, Ansett Airlines of Australia or any other airline can show a lack of profitability over six months on a certain route, that service may be lost. The airline concerned has the right to withdraw from the route. I ask honourable members in retrospect to consider what has happened and, first of all, to monitor the situation and safeguard the interests of the people involved. I place on record clearly and decisively that we cannot go beyond what we have at the moment. It is silly to talk about giving us lighter aircraft or to cut down on our services that do exist at the moment. What has happened is that a

586 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Grievance Debate

few months ago we formed a monitoring committee. This committee consists, I am pleased to say, of the assistant general manager of TAA, Mr Frank Ball, the operations manager of Ansett, me, the honourable member for Maranoa (Mr Ian Cameron), other Queenslanders and people who are involved. The purpose of that committee is to watch what will happen over the next six months-whether there will be a lack of profitability on these remote air services-and to consider the possibility of these services disappearing from the scene altogether. We will be watching the position very closely.
My colleague and very valued friend the honourable member for Higgins (Mr Shipton) expressed the hope only a few minutes ago that there would be a debate on the general reshuffling of the banking situation in this nation. Mr Deputy Speaker, again you will be very interested in this next matter I wish to raise because of your very distinguished ancestor. We saw his signature on so many of our bank notes for many years. The constituents in my electorate experience many worries about things that are almost critical to their survival. Great worries exist right throughout this nation in areas beyond the great financial centres of this country. I am concerned about whether these bank mergers that are taking place will result not only in the closure of branches, resulting in a shrinking of employment opportunities for our young people, but also I am concerned about whether they will result in a bank saying: 'Look, we have merged; we have become a great powerful financial institution. Although we will be concerned about the small landholder and the small businessman, regrettably they are now secondary considerations'. I do not say that that will happen but it is a serious possibility that it will happen. It is something that we have to watch closely.
I appeal to those who are involved in these mergers, especially the banks, to state clearly and decisively that future banking attitudes will not change as they relate to the development of this great country through the small landholder, the small businessman and the battler who is trying to build his home. Building homes is terribly important today. I want to see the banks make a clear declaration in relation to this aspect of mergers; never mind the airy fairy <:xpressions of policy aI).d so on. I want declarations made that banks will continue to operate branches in towns such as Cloncurry and Mount Isa and that they will have trained officers in these branches to understand and appreciate our difficulties. I want declarations made that specific funds will be channelled into our specific need programs being developed by the small landholder, the small businessman

and the ordinary battler who wants a loan to survive.
The third poin.t I raise is one of tremendous importance to this nation. I speak not only as a member who represents an area which probably has distances of roads running through it as long as those in any other area of Australia. I am the chairman of the Canberra Committee on Local Government which, in effect and within certain categories is the mouthpiece of the local government movement of this nation. There aTe grave worries. I know that the Government is now beginning to appreciate the fact that allocations for roads which have been foreshadowed will not nearly meet the requirements for maintenance and for the survival of roads let alone meet the improvement costs or the costs for extensions to our national roads and rural arterial roads. I am not talking about the future development of additional roads. These funds will not meet the costs of maintenance or the survival of our present road system. There will have to be a complete review made of road funding as it has been predicated for this nation. It is a vital and critical issue. I hope that already the Government is beginning to look at this problem.
Mr Braithwaite-Queensland has a particular need in that regard.
Mr KATTER---I thank my colleague and curly-haired friend, the honourable member for Dawson, most sincerely for raising the matter of Queensland. It has been concedt;d that Queenslanders have been robbed-that is an unfortunate term-by a mistake; a clerical error, no doubt. We are many millions of dollars behind that which we should have been grantedover past years
The final point I wish to raise relates to the defence of this country. No doubt you, Mr Deputy Speaker, are asdelighted as I to learn that a special battalion called the Norforce is to be formed in the northern part of Australia. I thank the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) and all those who were concerned with this decision. I am pleased to see that you, Mr Deputy Speaker, are in the chair because in .respect of each of these matters I know you have made a very valuable contribution particularly in the defence of Northern Australia. I thank the Minister and his department for arriving at a decision on this matter. I am sure that this will develop into the sort of operation that we, the people who are inevitably associated with the north, its defence, its vulnerability and all that goes with it, have always wanted. This battalian is special. Its training and eventual operation will be associated with such

Grievance Debate

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 587

things as surveillance and understanding the peculiarities of those great and isolated areas. It will include many of our Aborigines. Who better will be able to observe the changes in any environment that would suggest enemy infiltr,ation or a change of circumstances that could offer even a low grade threat to this nation. I hope that this develops into something that is very worthwhile. I place those few thoughts on record because I think they involve not only the isolated areas of this nation but also the nation as a whole.
Suspension Of Standing Orders
Motion (by Mr Street)-by leave-agreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the consideration of Order of the Day No. I, Government Business, Grievance Debate, being continued until one o'clock p.m.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (12.38)-During the past three or four years the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony), in particular, have made considerable claims for the resources boom as the key to economic growth and prosperity. It is unfortunate that an effective debate on the issues involved in this strategy has not been encouraged by the Government. In my view, there are already appearing contradictions which place in question the whole thrust of the Government's policies. I want to use this Grievance Debate in an endeavour to raise some of these issues which I believe this Parliament should be developing. I do so in the knowledge that all political parties are united in a desire to see Australians' living standards raised and also in the knowledge that this cannot occur without economic growth. However, as the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) has emphasised, we should be concerned not merely about growth in the abstract but also growth as an instrument through which the living standards of the overwhelming majority of Australians can be improved. In my view this means that we should consider not merely the way in which the benefits of new wealth are distributed. We should be concerned also to observe how particular patterns of development have built into them different dis: tributional consequences.
I believe that to pursue a path of unplanned, uncontrolled and unregulated development, based on the rapid exploitation of our limited resources, is the wrong path to take. That is a path which, if pursued, will benefit the few rather than the many and will result in the rapid depletion of our natural resources, resulting eventually in a lower living standard for future generations of Australians. Yet it is just this course of action which is being advocated by the Government parties. They argue, ever more stridently, that the

market should be allowed to dominate, that regulation and planning controls should be reduced and that the Government should restrict its activities to make room for the private sector.
During the past year or so, I have been looking at one industry which has often been cited as the classical example of a growth industry, symbolising the resources boom, that is, the aluminium industry. I ask honourable members to apply the principles I have just outlined to the case of aluminium. There is no doubt that Australia is strongly placed to playa leading role in the world aluminium industry. We have more than 40 per cent of the world's bauxite reserves. We have already considerable refining capacity with massive refineries in Queensland and Western Australia. We have abundant supplies of coal which provide the basis for supplying power for what is an energy hungry industry. Forty per cent of the costs of a tonne of aluminium are energy costs. There would be considerable advantages in ensuring that a higher proportion of our bauxite reserves were processed into aluminium locally rather than being exported overseas either as bauxite or as alumina. The problems do not arise from any lack of natural economic advantage. Rather, they arise from the fact that the proposed expansion of the industry is not being planned with Australia's economic or social interests at heart. They are being planned by the so-called six sisters-the international aluminium companies which dominate the industry with regard to a rate and scale of development which is in the interests of those corporations rather than of the Australian people.
For a variety of reasons, it would seem that the various governments of Australia ope,rate as observers or spectators rather than as effective planners of the development of this industry. Let me illustrate what I mean by that. First o(all, the primary initiative to secure investment in this industry is coming from these companies and not from the Australian Government. No one, as far as I know, at a Federal Government level has sat down and worked out what scale of industry we want to have in Australia and at what rate that industry should be allowed to develop. No one has worked out what extent of public investment would be required and what the implications of that scale of public investment may be on the needs for public investment throughout the nation. Nor, for that matter, has anyone sat down and coolly sought to work out how Australia would achieve the maximum level of return from these companies. Despite our membership of the International Bauxite Association and our knowledge of the salutary experience of Jamaica, no one

588 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Grievance Debate

appears to recognise what the problems are in room for substantial expansion of the industry

dealing with this international oligopoly.

from around 300,000 tonnes to more than 800,000

The issue of mechanisms used by these
companies to ensure that they achieve the maximum return for their investment appears hardly

tonnes by 1984. But what if there are further cancellations? I referred only yesterday to Alcoa's uncertainty about Portland.

to have been raised as a question in Australia. This is notwithstanding the well-known practices of transfer pricing which are characteristic of this industry. Certainly, there has been the experience of Comalco's use of a shelf company in Hong Kong to avoid tax, revealing a weakness in Commonwealth taxation legislation. But it was after all the Icelandic Government which had to draw the attention of the Australian Government to the existence of transfer pricing as between Nabalco and the Alusuisse subsidy ISAL. Despite the skill of these companies and their considerable capacity for corporate planning and manipulation;
the national Government has left detailed negotiations between these corporate giants and local interests to the various State governments.
It is in my view problematic whether we have even in the national bureaucracy the knowledge and the skills and indeed the will to negotiate effectively with these companies. It is an absolute certainty that the State governments do not have

Further, the Federal Government, having
introduced special infrastructure loans to encourage the States to expand power generation facilities, is now seeking to encourage the States via
increased interest rates to reduce the rate of expansion of power facilities and is even encour-
aging them to allow the construction of privately owned power stations with all the implications that that involves. Furthermore, the Federal Government by the use of tight fiscal and monet-
ary policy is now forcing a severe contraction of spending not only in areas of government social
expenditure but also in non-resource areas of the private sector, particularly in the area of manufacturing industry. Thus the resources boom is
likely in the immediate future-certainly under this Government's policies-to result in a severe
contraction in the economy with mounting unemployment despite the fact that unemployment is still at very high levels.

the skills and the resources to deal successfully In summary, the Government, having rushed with them. The result has been a series of deals into a capital, energy and export oriented form of

with State governments, particularly with respect development represented by the aluminium in-

to the supply of energy, which has certainly, as far dustry is now being forced to count some of the

as we can tell without published tariffs, resulted in costs. Perhaps it ought to have looked overseas to

massive subsidies being provided in the form of what was happening in some depth in the inter-

cheaper power. That is certainly the view of the Commonwealth Treasury. It is certainly the view of every informed commentator who has carefully

national aluminium industry before seizing on it . as a straw in the wind. It would appear that the
production of power in Australia, despite the

looked at the information that is available.

advantages we have, is not possible at bargain

I refer to an abdication of responsibility by the basement prices without government subsidies,

national Government which has resulted in a situand a 20 per cent increase in Victorian power

ation whereby the companies have been able to prices following last year's 19 per cent increase is

set one State government against another. It has an indication of .that fact. Why should we be pro-

also produced considerable uncertainty in viding subsidies to these international giants while

predicting which projects will actually go ahead our domestic consumers are being faced with

and which will not. Mr Thompson yesterday sharply rising power bills? Perhaps also we ought

threw the Alcoa project into jeopardy in Victoria, to seek to determine what proportion of our dom-

so it is suggested by the honourable member for estic power resources we wish to devote to this

Higgins (Mr Shipton). On the same day, we had industry. The commitment of the Tasmanian

Mr Wran suggesting that various projects will go Government to Comalco is now a major factor in

ahead in New South Wales. As recentlyas.May the proposed flooding of the Franklin River in

the Deputy Prime Minister, in ansWer to a quesTasmania. In Western Australia, with very lim-

tion from me, indicated that he did' not believe ited coal reserve the development of a smelting'

that the fall in the international deJ;Iland for aluindustry seems madness. In Victoria there are

minium would result in the cancellation of projalternative uses for brown coal being considered--

ects. However, the reality is that the cancellation and no overall energy policy. In New South Wales

of proposed smelters hl)s resulted in revised estiwhere abundant coal is located there is the

mates of production of more than 40 per cent just alternative of exporting coal at higher prices. The

since the beginning of this year-that is, for industry requires massive public investment and

expected production by 1984. This still leaves my fear is that it is the public sector which is to

\

Public Awareness Program on Housing

20 A\lgust 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 589

take the risk with this expansion rather more than the private sector.
What would be the implications of an extended recession in the aluminium industry for the planning that is taking place? There are a whole range of questions which do not seem to be asked. Why are these major internatoinal companies being allowed to come into the country and reduce international competition? Why have we not had a proper evaluation of this industry?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Armitage)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Sitting suspended from 12.50 to 2.15 p.m.
PUBLIC AWARENESS PROGRAM ON MANUFACTURED HOUSING
Ministerial Statement
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction)-by leave-I have sought this opportunity to inform the House of a public awareness program by the Government on manufactured housing and to invite honourable members. to view a prototype manufactured house that has been built for the Commonwealth to provide a focus for the program.
The Government believes that manufactured housing could make a major contribution to reducing housing costs, particularly in rural, remote, resource development and resort areas. Only the week before last I was in the Diamantina Shire Council Chambers in outback Queensland. The Shire President told me that building costs in that area were up to 80 per cent higher than those in a major city. The Victorian Ministry of Housing has informed us that it costs it about $36,000 to build a standard three-bedroom timber house in Portland and even more in the Latrobe Valley. In the private sector, the average cost of a 110 square metres brick veneer house is $36,000 in Sydney and $33,000 in Melbourne. These costs do not include land costs. Right now our prototype manufactured house could be produced on a one-off basis and installed on a site up to 300 kilometres from the factory for $28,000. With some economies of scale from repetition of the order, this could be reduced to $25,000. With volume production and a greater use of factory design details pioneered in the United States costs could come down more.
The prototype manufactured house is a 98 square metres three-bedroom house which is fully factory built. The actual interior space it provides is the equivalent of a 110 square metres brick veneer home or close to 12 imperial squares. The

house was built and delivered in two 3.7-metre wide sections which were bolted together on site. It takes a 3-man team five hours to set up a house on site. The thermal performance of the housethat is, how well it keeps cool in summer and warm in winter-makes it suitable for location in most areas of Australia. Some minor modifications can be easily made for use in tropical areas. There are fibreglass batts in the walls and the ceiling system incorporates 75 millimetres of insulation. Also, the vertical placing of the external metal cladding assists thermal performance in hot conditions by providing channels for air movement. The thermal performance of the house is comparable to that of a standard brick veneer dwelling. The prototype uses 11 highly efficient heat pump air conditioner which provides both heating and cooling.
The method of construction used for this prototype meets existing building regulations but there are difficulties with the approval process which I will explain later. We have taken the opportunity with this house to demonstrate several cost saving features which meet the construction and safety standards in the United States and which I understand do not put at risk standards of health and safety. Compact laundry facilities have been concealed behind a concertina door off one end of the kitchen. This space saving arrangement is commonly used overseas, but our regulations have yet to be modified to permit it. Also the bathroom floor has not been graded to a floor drain. This is a cost saving feature which is universal in North America and accepted in Australia in some States. The prototype house does not have guttering. In many areas of Australia guttering is just not necessary. In areas of heavy rainfall and where it is necessary to-collect roof run off for domestic water gutters can be easily attached.
The house was built for the Commonwealth by Yarrawonga Housing Industries of Victoria, which was chosen to build the prototype after an exhaustive selection process based on open expressions of interest from the industry. It was selected to build the prototype because its design, production and delivery approaches represented a close but sensible adaptation to the Australian scene of the very successful United States of America techniques at reasonable cost. The key structural design principles of North American manufactured houses are a lightweight stressed skin construction using a box beam design with an integrated steel chassis. Prefinished materials are used for inner and outer walls and ceilings. The integrated steel chassis permits the use of low cost

/

590 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Public Awareness Program on Housing

foundation systems, including cyclone proof tieClearly, if we could get similar cost advantages,

downs and the fixing of running gear for transpormanufactured housing could make a big contri-

tation. The structural integrity of the dwellings bution to cutting Australian housing costs. For

eliminates the risk of damage during transit and this reason the Commonwealth-State Ministerial

set up on site.

Council on housing costs, which was set up to pur-

The requirements for on-sitdabour and installation costs are minimised by having a single connection point for each of the services, that is,

sue the recommendations of the housing cost inquiry, has had manufactured housing as one of its major issues for discussion.

water, sewerage and electricity. Stressed skin, box beam design principles, integrated transport systems and assembly line production are not used in transportable houses in Australia; nor, of course, in site built housing. These techniques are particularly suited to assembly line production where significant savings are achieved through standard-
isation of design, extensive use of mechanical aids, specialisation of semi-skilled labour, continuing production in a controlled environment and economies of bulk purchasing of materials.

The work done for the Council shows that governments will have to tackle a number of problems if an industry is to develop. The most
important constraints are government regulations. Building regulations, land use controls and transport regulations effectively inhibit development of a manufactured housing industry in Australia. Building regulations do not include specific construction requirements for manufactured housing. Obtaining the necessary approvals can be difficult and time consuming. One problem

In the United States federal construction and safety standards for manufactured housing have
been in force since 1976. The standards are
implemented through the review and approval of
designs and through inspection within the factor-
ies. Most factories service reasonably small market areas and produce fewer than 1,000 houses per year. In the United States this form of factory manufactured house is called a mobile home. We
do not like that word because we believe it gives the wrong impression. People think of large cara-
vans, an itinerant lifestyle and caravan park liv-
ing. This is not the case. Fewer than 3 per cent of
the United States mobile homes ever move from
their original sites. About half the annual production in the United States goes directly on to
private allotments. When mounted on permanent

in getting approvals from local government building surveyors is that, unlike the situation with a site built house, they usually do not have the opportunity to inspect the dwelling while it is being built. Common Australia-wide regulations and inspection arrangements would obviously be highly desirable. Current planning controls do not specifically permit manufactured home park development. With appropriate' attention to planning and environmental issues, the manufactured house, either in a conventional suburban setting or in special higher density estates, could offer an acceptable and economic housing alternative in areas where conventional building and land costs are high. Transportation to the site is hampered by the varying State transportation regulations for
large loads.

foundations many manufactured houses, particu-
larly multiple unit ones, are indistinguishable from conventional dwellings.

Other inhibiting factors include the attitude of financiers and consumer attitudes. Consumer financing for m~nufactured houses has not been

Like site built housing, manufactured housing fully developed and often hire purchase type

can offer wide variations in design and size. financing is offered instead of mortgage financing.

Houses are produced as single modules called Most Australian home owners live in brick homes.

single wides or with two or more modules joined Americans on the other hand are more willing to

together. The single wides at the low cost end of accept metal, timber and other external finishes.

the market are commonly very functional two- ' If the price is right and the quality is satisfactory

bedroom units similar in size to a two-bedroom Australians may be prepared to consider these

town house. At the higher end of the market, other materials. The public awareness program

multi-section manufactured houses can offer we are about to launch is designed to help over-

homes of over 140 square metres, with all the decome these constraints. Its aim is to demonstrate

sign features sought by home buyers~an en suite the features of modern manufactured housing.

off the main bedroom, entrance vestibule, separThe prototype manufactured house is the key el-

ate dining room, special decorating effects and so ement in the public awareness program. We

on. In the United States around one out of four would like to transport the house to a number Of

detached houses is factory built. The cost of these States for display. We are looking to State govern-

house is about 40 per cent lower per square meter - ments and industry to assist in the display and

than that for conventional site built houses.

awareness program. The Commonwealth has

,

Public Awareness Program on Housing

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 591

allocated $35,000 in this year's Budget as its contribution to the program. The house is located adjacent to the Sirius Building on the corner of Worgan and Bowes Streets, Phillip, in the Australian Capital Territory.
The concept of the manufactured house was new to me. However after seeing the home and what has been achieved in North America I am sure it is a concept that could provide a suitable alternative form of housing in many areas of Australia. Honourable members, especially those with an interest in housing, would be impressed by the concept, and I urge them to find the time to inspect the house. I present the following paper:
Public Awareness Program on Manufactured HousingMinisterial Statement, 20 August 1981.
Motion (by Mr Fife) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Mr UREN (Reid) (2.28)-At the outset I want to thank the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) and his staff for the courtesy of making his important statement available to me early and for taking my colleague the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe) and me on an inspection yesterday of the project house at Phillip. The Minister has announced what he calls a public awareness program by the Government on manufactured housing. We on this side of the House welcome the fact that the Minister has brought to public attention a very significant proposal for the Australian housing market and for the home building industry. The firm that built this high standard manufactured or mobile home, Yarrawonga Housing Industries of Victoria, is a decentralised industry and the honourable member who represents the electorate in which it is situated is going to speak after me. I am always pleased to see an initiative being taken by a decentralised industry.
Although I have partial support for this project, on the other hand I have strong-I emphasise that word-opposition to the broad philosophical approach. I question the Minister's use of the term 'awareness program'; it is more a public relations exercise. It is designed to prepare public attitude for an expansion of the production and marketing of manufactured transportable homes. I am sad to say that it appears to me to be a sophisticated campaign aimed at lowering the housing expectations of the Australian people. As I said, yesterday my colleague the honourable member for Batman and I examined this high standard mobile home. We were told that it is representative of the upper end of the range of assembly line transportable homes in the United States of Amedca. I am sure that many people who inspect

this American-style, mass-produced home on display will find it superficially appealing, which is the purpose of this pre-marketing program. But the longer term implications of the proposal are far-reaching.

If we could be sure that the standard of the prototype would be maintained in any expansion in the production of this style of housing, we might be less concerned about it in the long term. If we could be sure that the style of housing would be confined to use as holiday homes, on farming properties or in remote areas where skilled labour is not available, we might have fewer reservations. I say to my colleague who will follow me in this debate that if its use were restricted to those three areas we on this side of the House would support the concept. But the Minister in the early part of his statement said that mobile homes were being considered for Portland and the Latrobe Valley by the Victorian authorities. I would be opposed to this type of housing being used in such areas as Portland and the Latrobe Valley in Victoria, Lithgow and the Hunter Valley in New South Wales and Gladstone in Queensland. I am concerned because in the statement the Minister said:

Common Australia-wide regulations and inspection ar-
rangements would obviously be highly desirable. Current planning controls do not specifically permit manufactured
homes park development. With appropriate allention to planning and environmental issues, the manufactured house, either in a conventional suburban selling or in special higher
density estates, could offer 'an acceptable and economic hous-
ing alternative in areas where conventional building and land costs are high.

I want to deal with that philosophical statement.

Frankly, it seems that this Minister and this

Government have learnt little from the public

housing experiences in the 1950s and 1960s. If we

examine the Green Valley, Lalor Park and Seven

Hills areas in Sydney, the West Heidelberg and

East Preston areas in Melbourne and the Inala

housing project in the electorate of the Leader of

the Opposition (Mr Hayden) in Queensland, we

see the enormous social problems created by such

housing. Anyone who has seen the mobile homes

park ghettos in the United States will have a clear

picture of what this kind of future means. Anyone

who can read about life in those places will be

aware of the social problems associated with the

permanent sense of living as a temporary-the

high dependency on drugs, the high incidence of

alcoholism, the domestic violence, the stress

caused by noise, the depression and the sense of

second class citizenship. Similar problems arose in

the housing estates J mentioned earlier, created in

the 1950s and 1960s in the suburbs of our major

cities.

.

592 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Public Awareness Program on Housing

It was not until the Australian Labor Party came to office in 1973 that an attempt was made to overcome some of those social problems and improve urban infrastructures. To start with we established an area improvement program to be implemented through local governments in the western suburbs of Sydney and Melbourne. We later extended that program to 13 other regions throughout Australia, but we used those two regions first as a social laboratory to try to overcome some of the great social problems that I have speJt out. Some people think that because there is a squeeze on housing they can avoid the problem of housing by putting people in boxes. But this creates further social problems and further costs for the Department of Social Security and the Department of Health. Therefore, we have to make sure that we overcome the problems created by this ghetto type housing which lacks a proper social infrastructure.
In Gladstone, Queensland, the workers have been on strike demanding better social and urban living conditions. What about the Government being concerned about the conditions there? It is creating industry at Boyne Island south-east of Gladstone. The prevailing south-easterly breeze in the area carries pollution from the industry to that township. This is the sad situation created by this Government and the Queensland Government.
I wish to deal with two aspects of home ownership. Mr Deputy Speaker, you were in the chair yesterday when I had to make a personal explanation because the Minister for Housing and Construction said that members of the Labor Party were not concerned about home ownership. You might recall that I said in my personal explanation that we on this side of the House were in favour of workers, wherever possible, owning their own homes. We believe that home ownership allows them to share in with the capital appreciation of a home, creates the prosperity of the country. The price of land and houses rises in value. Workers' homes are the only real saving they can make in their lifetime, the only real saving from which they are able to gain a benefit.
The fact is that if we put workers into these temporary dwellings, these mobile homes, they will not be able to benefit from that real capital appreciation. I ask the Minister again to look at what has happened internationally. I ask him to look at the situation in Wales and in Great Britain where the depreciation on these types of homes is about 14 per cent a year. There is no capital appreciation but a depreciation and in many cases the people do not own the land on which their mobile home is located. It is owned either by the

government, the private sector or by the local council. People have to pay a rental charge for having their homes connected to the essential services. The conservative elements of this country claim that they believe in the private enterprise system of home ownership. The people who occupy those temporary dwellings will not share the real benefits of the capital appreciation of home ownership. As I said yesterday, the worker's real saving in his lifetime is the home in which he lives.
There is another advantage of home ownership. I refer to the qualify of life of the worker who owns his home. We on this side of the House believe that there is something about a person's own personality that develops and expresses itself in his own home. People want to plant their trees and shrubs, and add their own expressions of art or add sophistication to their homes. They do not want to live in a ghetto where all the houses are lined up like them came from a sausage machine. They want variety and diversity. That brings me to another aspect. In this day and age of conservation, in a cold cliI:nate such as that in the La Trobe Valley or at Portland, people would want to make sure that they maximised natural warmth to their home by placing windows on the northern side of the house so that they could get the maximum benefit of the sunshine in winter. But that is sometimes hard to achieve.
On the question of price, the Minister talked about the cost of $28,000 for a manufactured house on a block of land compared with the cost of $36,000 for a house and land in Victoria. This morning a member of my staff phoned the New South Wales Housing Commission and asked what was the current price of the placement of a house on a block of land. The officer to whom we spoke said that a typical three bedroom brick veneer cottage on standard foundations without site works would cost $22,150. A three bedroom, single storey townhouse in the Bonnyrigg area is valued at $24,950. The first house would be placed on a quarter acre block. The second house would be located in a higher density area such as the Minister spoke of in order to get better town planning. From talking to the Minister's officers yesterday, it seems to me that economics are to play an important part in this new concept.
I am not knocking this proposal. If it is going to take the initiative only in relation to the three areas itemised, I would be supportive of it. I want the Minister to reread his speech. He spoke of subdivisions of higher density. We do not build higher density housing on farmlands. The philos-

Public Awareness Program on Housing

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 593

ophy behind such housing is to build in areas of resource development such as the areas to which I
have referred. When we build homes we have to
have a proper social and urban infrastructure. I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard a

table showing expenditure on urban and regional development, in current and constant prices, from the year 1974-75 to the year 1981-82.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

EXPENDITURE ON URBAN AND REGIONAL DEVELOPMENT

1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1981-82

Current prices ($m)

205

218

144

118

85

80

74

48

Constant prices ($m) 1981-82

412

381

226

172

117

100

82

48

Real charge on previous year (per

cent) . . . . . .

7.5

40.7

23.9

32.0

14.5

18.0

70.8

Real charge on 1974-75

7.5

45.1

58.2

71.6

75.7

82.0

88.3

Proportion of total outlays (per

cent) . . . . . .

1.15

1.00

0.60

0.44

0.29

0.25

0.20

0.11

Mr UREN-J thank the House. Honourable members will note that this Government has cut back dramatically funds, expressed in constant prices, for public sector housing. In 1974-75, the last full year of the Labor Government, we made available $850m, in constant terms, compared with the $262m that has been made available this year. Added to that, the amount of $412m in constant prices that we made available for urban regional affairs in 1974-75 is down this year to $48m.
Frankly, the priorities of this Government on both housing and urban development are an utter disgrace. It is no good this Government trying to find housing for people on the cheap. As I said yesterday, next to unemployment, housing is the most serious social problem in this country. It is about time that this Government gave a higher priority to housing and living conditions of people in this country. I join with the Minister in asking honourable members to look at this prototype of mobile housing. I commend the program for the limited reasons J have put forward.
Mr EWEN CAMERON (Indi) (2.44)-1 wish to join with the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren), the shadow Minister for Housing and Construction, in congratulating the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) and his Department on their initiative in putting an example of manufactured housing on display in the Canberra suburb of Woden. I am sure that the public awareness program which the Minister has now implemented is long overdue. The company which manufactured the house which is on display has been manufacturing since 1963. Mr Allan Hall started the production of these houses in Bayswater, a suburb of Melbourne, in 1963 and decentralised his factory to Yarrawonga in 1974. Since 1974 the company has been producing approximately 50 houses a year and the demand and the backlog have been so great that the company

now wishes to expand so that it can raise its production to 74 houses a year. The reason for this demand and the need to e'xpand is because of the extremely high quality that Mr Hall has retained in his product. The company has been selling houses throughout Victoria, New South Wales, Queensland and South Australia.
Mr Good luck-Not Tasmania.
Mr EWEN CAMERON-Not Tasmania yet; nevertheless, it will not be long. In all of those areas only once have I been informed of any queries or problems with building regulations. I understand that one particular objection was by the local government housing inspector who did not like manufactured housing. I was interested to hear the honourable member for Reid comment on the cost of these houses. He mentioned a figure of $28,000. One notes that the Minister mentioned a figure of $28,000 with the possibility of a reduction. The house at Woden is a prototype house built to specifications requested by the Department. I add that they are very good specifications but they are over and above and a change to those of the standard house produced by Yarrawonga Housing Industries. The standard threebedroom home produced by Yarrawonga Housing Industries costs $24,690, and that is delivered on site for up to 300 kilometres. The company informed me that the prototype house at Woden was an extra cost. A greater demand for a house of that particular design is expected so the company should be able to reduce its prices.
The remarkable feature of these homes is that it takes a team of three persons five hours to set up the house on site. That is very remarkable. At the moment interest rates are forcing many young people to consider whether they should venture into purchasing their own home and must force them, I feel, to consider the manufactured house. This should fill a massive area throughout all the States of Australia because Yarrawonga Housing

594 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Public Awareness Program on Housing

Industries is not the only manufacturer in Australia.
Once again I congratulate the Minister and his Department. I would like as many people as possible to view the prototype house at Woden or to view the product of the standard house from this company anywhere in north-eastern Victoria in the electorate of Indi, which I am proud to represent. It is a house of which any owner should be proud. Not one of my constituents has said other than that is is of the very highest quality. I was interested to hear the honourable member for Reid say that if one brings the material to a site-in other words, one might call it a mobile house although that is not a good termthe resulting house is of inferior quality to .a house that is built on that site. I find that hard to follow. If one brings the material in a non-put together form on to the house site, according to the honourable member for Reid the house should be of a higher quality. I cannot quite follow that. I know that the people who own the houses are very proud of them. 1 am proud to be associated with this program.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (2.50)-1 am' also pleased to be able to make a few comments within the context of this debate. 1 regard the issue that the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) has raised as extremely important. I will begin by briefly referring to a paper that was given to a conference in 1978 on the subject of residential caravans or mobile homes. It puts the matter into some kind of context. The paper, by Burke and Hulse, states:
IL is highly probable that more and more Australians will become mobile home residents. We are not suggesting that the size of the mobile home sector in Australia will approach the US. situation but thaI there are structural long-term changes in the Australian economy and housing market such that an increase in the proportion of people resident in caravans seems inevitable.
Part of this change derives from the increasing inequities in disposable income brought about by the current world capitalist crisis. The rapid growth of international trade . . . disguised structural deficiencies in the Australian economy particularly in manufacturing.
It continues:
The result of sustained structunil unemployment has been to deny the working class, and particularly the young working class who have borne the brunt of unemployment, access to ownership of traditional housing.
At this very minute the Liberal Party headquarters here in Canberra is occupied by young people who simply want to get access to jobs, access to support-through the Community Youth Support Scheme and access to accommodation on a reasonable basis with the rest of the population. I follow that quotation by referring to what Hugh

Stretton had to say on the subject of mobile homes. He said:
Plenty of people own their caravans, but caravans rot faster than houses, and they have to be bought on hire purchase instead of on mortgage, so their owners pay double interest rates, to get an asset whose value then deteriorates instead of increasing as the values of many houses do. They can thus be sold shelter without gelling any share in the rising value of land under it; and there's more profit in making vans than in making small houses, both for the builders and for the moneylenders. It's on ruthless principles of inequality, not really for any other reason, that the American society, which is a great deal richer per head and has more solid housing per head than ours, chooses to bring up more caravan and shantytown children than Australia has people.
If one looks at the United States as opposed to Great Britain one sees a very important difference. In England between 1959 and 1971 the population of people living in mobile housing remained more or less constant and the annual production remained constant. In the United States in 1955 three million people were living in mobile homes; in 1971 the figure was six million. In 1955 the annual production was 90,000 mobile homes. By 1971 it had reached 500,000. The reason for that considerable difference between the trend in the United States and in Britain is very much related to attitude to building regulations and local government.
in Britain the Government, particularly at the local level, has taken a highly restrictive attitude to the development of this kind of housing. In the United States where mobile homing has been zoned out as it were and almost inevitably located on the outskirts of cities and in some of the least desirable sites building codes have been modified to allow the mobile home to be developed on a scale which makes a very significant proportion of the population go into mobile homes each year. The Minister indicated the number of people moving into new homes throughout the United States. The number of mobile homes has grown significantly in the United States. It has grown because the governments there have been more flexible at the local and federal level. That does not mean that mobile housing in the United States has been a tremendous success.
One could argue that mobile homes have provided functions for different sections of the population. No one can suggest that the house the Minister has on display is not suitable as a holiday house, nor canone suggest that it is not' suitable in various circumstances for particular groups of people. I am afraid that we are being presented with a proposal about mass produced and high technology housing which is not designed to meet the needs of people for whom such housing is most suitable. The context is that in a situation of rapid development we will see these mobile homes

Meat Industry

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 595

dropped into the Gladstones, the Latrobe Valleys and the Hunter Valleys and other areas of rapid development. That will mean that we will develop two standards of housing in those areas. One standard of housing will be for people whose requirement it is assumed will be extremely temporarythat is, who may be there for a few years-and another standard for people who are regarded as permanent residents. I think that that is a recipe for social disaster. I do not think it is the right way to go.
It seems to me quite wrong that we ought to think about reducing the standard of housing-I will come back to that again very briefly-in the context of some of the largest developments that this country has ever seen. Hundreds of millions of dollars are being spent on the smelter at Gladstone where not a cent is being spared to build one of the largest smelters in the world, of the highest standard and with the latest technology. But when it comes to housing the workers, we look at a situation where almost anything will do. We look for a different set of standards and I believe that that is quite wrong.
Of course it is important that we look at factory technology in relation to housing. I believe that it would be possible to introduce housing, based on factory production, into this country. But when we do it we ought to be very careful about how we do it. I am concerned that the proposal that we have before us is a proposal by a government which is seeking, rather than to innovate in the area of housing, to produce cheap housing for selected groups of people who perhaps do not have as much choice as they should in the market but for whom decent public housing ought to be constructed at the highest standards and certainly on the same basis as housing for the rest of the population. I believe this scheme has the danger in it that it will increase housing inequality rather than help produce greater equality in housing standards. One of the characteristics in Australia is that we have had a great deal of equality in housing standards. I believe that this move will go against that tradition.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
MEAT INDUSTRY
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIIar)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The Government's failure to respond to the meat industry's calls for assistance and to the plight of the over 10,000 meat workers stood down in the meat industry.

I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number afmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (3.02)-At the outset, may I say that if National Country Party members are wondering why I am raising this matter of public importance, I assure them that it is not just a sudden flash of inspiration. Quite frankly, I am amazed by the lack of action by Ministers and members of the Government parties, particularly the National Country Party, on this issue. The rural regional media, the rural specialist media, have responsibly detailed every abattoir closure over the past month, the plight of the unemployed meat workers, the economic impact on the owns affected and every statement by a responsible spokesmanJor producers; the unions and the industry. There may be some rom for disagreement about some of the statements but there is no room for disagreement about the severity of the problem or the fact that the Government and its Public Service resources have had ample time to prepare for what was readily foreseeable.
The Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation has recently prepared a paper on this issue and we know the statistics. AbattoIrs have been closing, not just stopping for seasonal reasons, for nearly a year. For example, Andersons Roma plant closed in September or October last year and now all of Andersonsplants are closed. The absolutely staggering fact is that almost no National Country Party member has taken up the matter in the Parliament or made other than soothing noises in their electorates. Of course they are guided by the National Country Party Minister for Primary Industry, Mr Nixon, who somehow thinks that statements about rationalisation that is taking place relate to a policy or a response. At the Australian Agricultural Council meeting recently, the Minister said:
At Commonwealth level this movement away from approaching every problem with Government intervention and handouts is being applied across all our industry programs.
I guess that the Budget was some eyidence of this and tpe Governm~ntis applying some vigour to the programs, but' I see that the Minister in thestatement which he made after the Budget defended the continuing support. I would hav-e thought the view of the National Country Party was that it does support industries. If the statement by the Minister to the Agricultural Council is to be the approach of the. Government and National Country Party to Australia's rural industry then the Country Pl!rty is no longer a responsible party as far as Australia's farmers and

596 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Meat Industry

graziers are concerned. If this is to be the approach of the Government and the National Country Party it is the final confession that they are a miners party-I do not mean miners at the face but miners such as Utahand therefore act contrary to the rural sector's interests. While I believe that proposition is largely true, I think the main reason why the Minister uses such arguments is simply because he is choosing to turn his back on the meat industry's problems. No matter what the issue is in this industry, whether it be dual meat inspection, sales of meat food or whatever, there seem to be inaction or duplicity.
It is rather disgusting-I do not entirely blame the Minister for it-when the meat industry is on its knees that the Commonwealth and States are still fighting about dual inspection. The Government has also chosen to take no initiative with respect to the livestock export issue, other than one limited study. Anyone who is familirar with the meat industry or the rural scene knows that that issue is a potential time bomb and that that has been accentuated by the abattoirs closing. There needs to be a full study into all aspects of abattoirs and the problems of the meat industry.
Governments have shown that they have been prepared to act when rural industries are in trouble. As far as this industry is concerned, I could point to the producers side of it where the beef incentive payment scheme was concocted by the Government. We know the facts about that. Legislation was rushed through this House because the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) felt another early election coming on; but $117m was spent. As a side effect one of the operations under which farmers were eligible for assistance was spaying which in turn tended to reduce the herd. The point I make is that there is no sense in taking recourse in words such as 'rationalisation', 'reconstruction' or 'adjustment' and not acting to facilitate the change, or not recognising the human distress involved or the economic effects.
As a side issue there will be a lot of talk in this Parliament 'about adjustment, levels of protection and the rural sector's interests in those matters. Perhaps it is a good time to point out to peoplepeople from some of the industrial seats-that primary industry has always had to adjust and that international forces have dictated the changes in those industries in Australia. I take as an example the dairy industry, which has undergone massive adjustments since the late 1960s. At that tiJ1le there were about 60,000 dairy farms; now there are about 17,000. That was a massive adjustment and no one seemed to recognise the

amount of adjustment that went on in that industry, but the Government has assisted in that process. It assis~ed in the light of clear evidence. I
have asked State Australian Labor' Party members and State candidates in New South Wales why Country Party Federal members are saying nothing about the meat industry's problem. I have been told that they are worried about what the Lives~ock and Grain Producers Association might say. I know not much love is lost between producer bodies and the Meat Council, but anyone who does not recognise that producers, processors, unions and the Government will have to sit down and discuss this question is being plain irresponsible. It is in the interests of producers for there to be a stable, efficient, competitive processing industry. If there is not, producers will pay more and in the long term will receive less for
their beef.
futting aside that explanation, or whatever other reason, for silence, one would have thought that National Country Party members might have had something to say about the people in the towns who have been stood down and the disastrous multiplier effects this has been having on the towns' economies. I refer honourable members to a list which shows that 27 meat works are now closed and three have forfeited export licences. Of
course many of the others are operating below capacity. According to figures supplied to me approximately 10,571 meat workers are unemployed in this industry. In any other industry where 10,500 people were put off, there would be a strong hullabaloo.
Let us look at where some of these abattoirs are located. In New South Wales, there is the one at Goulburn in the seat of the honourable member for Eden-Monaro (Mr Sainsbury). The ones at Guyra, Tenterfield, Wallangarra and Inverell are all in the seat of the right honourable member for New England (Mr Sinclair). The ones at Moree, Dubbo and Bourke are in the seat of the honourable member for Gwydir (Mr Hunt). The Condobolin abattoir is in the seat of Calare. They are also at Newcastle, Cowra, Homebush and Wingham. Wingham is in the seat of Lyne. Thousands of people are unemployed. The Wallangarra closure, for example, has resulted in 455 people being unemployed. Since this list was drawn up, Field's abattoir at Orange has closed. Approximately 300 people lost their job there. Let us look at the situation in the other States. At Roma and Moreton in Queensland approximately 735 people were put off. In Victoria, people were put off in Brooklyn, Shepparton, Geelong, Portland, Doveton and Kyneton. I guess the pick of the box is Portland, which is in the seat of the

Meat Industry

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 597

Prime Minister, where 1,000 people were put off. In Tasmania people were put off in Launceston. In Peterborough, South Australia, and, recently, Murray Bridge, people were put off. In Western Australia there is Coogee, Derby, Albany, Midland Junction and Linley Valley. In total approximately 10,500 people were put off.
There have been approaches by industry organisations, by the Australian Meat Council and unions to the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown) and the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney), but nothing constructive is being done. These meat workers are just being put on the dole. If one works out the figures and if the figure of 10,500 is correct, it looks like it is at a cost of $55m to the Department of Social Security. If those figures add up, it is clear that the Government would rather pay the dole than do anything about the industry. What is the impact of these closures? It depends on the centres concerned. I guess the worst effects are being felt in northern New South Wales in the electorate of the right honourable member for New England. The towns of Tenterfield. Wallangarra and Inverell depend more on the abattoirs as an economic base than some of the other towns I have already listed. Guyra is also in that electorate. Some members of the local Press there are accusing the right honourable member for New England of turning his back on the problems in his own electorate. In other centres the impact depends upon the regional economy, but in many parts, of course, the drought already is causing a lot of impact on thi: other rural industries that underpin those towns. In regard to the drought, I do not think the Government has behaved anywhere near as responsibly as it used to. More and more the States are picking up the tab. In many of these towns there is little chance of alternative employment. The retailers and the public utilities are affected and, more importantly from a primary industry point of view, skills will be lost as those people who are lucky enough to get jobs elsewhere move away.
The reasons are clear enough and are well known by the Minister and members of the House. By and large, I think the beef industry is assuming the structure it had before 1974. In the late 1960s, as honourable members realise, the wheat quotas were put on, there was the dairy reconstruction I have already referred to and there was a collapse in wool prices. A lot of people turned to the beef industry. I do not think we will see a big expansion of the beef herd other than by normal reproductive means, but any people who have free resources in agriculture will move to

grains rather than to beef. This has caused a sharp decline in the number of cattle being slaughtered and a fall in the utilisation of the beef chains. Sheep and lamb slaughter levels have not changed much since the mid-1970s, but they are at only about 75 per cent of the early 1970s level. The levels are expected to fall for the next four or five years; the decline is not a temporary one. The decline is not uniform across Australia. Queensland and the Northern Territory are not quite as badly affected as New South Wales and Victoria.
What can be done? First of all, let us look at the position of the workers involved in the industry. Quite a few measures were put up to assist farmers with the dairying reconstruction and adjustment. I shall name some of them. There was the rehabilitation grant for farmers, which technically was a loan of about $2,000. Household support measures were provided during the period of adjustinent. There was access to retraining schemes and relocation assistance. For farmers this was largely supportive assistance. But this could be extended to financial assistance to abattoir workers. The arguments which applied to the farmers then and which the Government articulated in this House, could also apply to the workers. I have been saying for a long time that it is only the Government's ideological opposition to any job creation schemes that prevents its providing seasonal unemployment schemes through local government. Putting aside the crisis problems of the meat industry at present, there are always seasonal downturns in a lot of the industries throughout this country. I think there need to be seasonal unemployment schemes to hold workers in those towns because they will be needed when the weather changes. If we look at the problems for the industry we will see that only the Labor Government in New South Wales, where Mr Hallam is the responsible Minister, has been prepared to supply money. The Victorian Government has been prepared to look at the rationalisation of abattoirs and to have an inquiry. But only the Labor Government in New South Wales has been prepared to put in a lot of money, and it is prepared to put in $19.5m over the next five years. I do not have time to go through the details of that scheme, but there is money there for interest free repayable Treasury advances, there is money to cover snowballing costs and there is money to keep some abattoirs operating. I think it is good that the New South Wales Government is supporting these public abattoirs but I do not want to see a division develop in the industry between public and private abattoirs.
A lot can be done but above all else there need to be far-reaching discussions and inquiry into the

598 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Meat Industry

problems. If we are to have rationalisation it has to be on a planned basis, otherwise it just will not be a question of the big abattoir groups eating up the small abattoir groups. Many people will be hurt, and in the long run it probably will be the farmers themselves. The industry has been coming to the Government for some time and saying: 'Can we look at these charges again?' The industry pays approximately $40m a year in levies to the Government. I refer to the $1.80 meat inspection charge, the slaughter levy, and the tuberculosis and brucellosis levies. The Government could extend interest rate subsidies via the State governments to help them. It is my understanding that the right honourable member for New England, when Minister for Primary Industry, said that he would re-examine the $1.80 meat inspection charge if the industry's circumstances changed. Everyone knows the circumstances have changed but the Government seems to be unable to look at the matter.
Theother day I asked the Minister a question and he gave a heartening response to some degree but it is getting a bit late. It has been going on for nearly a year now and I really hope that there will be some action soon because we are looking at a $2 billion industry. Why not refer the problem of the rationalisation of abattoirs to the Industries Assistance Commission? Why not refer it, as the industry has been calling for, to the Bureau of Industry Economics, the Bureau of Agricultural Economics and the Bureau of Labour Market Research? Why not do that? No one is saying that no shake-out will occur, no one is saying that it is only a temporary phenomenon, that the herds and flocks will get to high levels again, and no one is saying that the problem is not related to the problems of the beef industry in the mid-1970s. We really understand what processes are at work in this industry, what changes have been going on in the agricultural sector, but so far the silence from the Government on this issue has been deafening. I do not think it is in the long term interest of any of the people involved in this industry-the towns, the workers, the producers or the abattoirs themselves.
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (3.13)-1 think the best explanation for the bringing forward of this' matter of public importance today was the statement just made by the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) when he said that the problems of this industry have been going on for a year and complained that nothing has been done by the Government. Let me make this point: It is quite clear that the reason why this discussion is on today is that there is to be a State election in New

South Wales shortly. The honourable member for Werriwa has had a whole year to bring the matter before the Parliament and he has done nothing about it. The purpose of his speech was simply to attack my colleagues in the New South Wales Country Party. Let me tell him for a start that it will do him no good at all because the people in New South Wales country areas know full well that the Wran Government is centred simply on the cities of Sydney, Newcastle and Wollongong and does not give one hoot for those who live in the country. That is a simple fact. The honourable member for Werriwa does himself no good at all in the political way in which he has raised this matter and the political attacks he has made on my colleagues in his address.
I waited with bated breath for something new to be said by the honourable member for Werriwa-some fresh approach or some idea that he might have or some thoughts of members of the Australian Labour Party on this problem. But what did we get? We got a very tired political attack on what is a very serious matter affecting thousands of people throughout the country communities, particularly in New South Wales. I find it very disappointing that the honourable member for Werriwa cannot produce one idea of any substance that might be considered by anybody as a means of resolving the difficulties of the industry. The honourable member referred to the support given by the New South Wales Government by way of $19.5m for meat works in that State. He made a plea for there not to be a separation between State-owned works, public-owned works and private works. But what did the New South Wales Government do? It made that money available only to service works, public-owned works, works owned by the Government and deliberately did not help the privately-owned enterprises in New South Wales. That is the value of the New South Wales Government's intervention. It has driven a wedge into the industry in New South Wales in a deliberately cold, political way. It deliberately has ignored the hardship and difficulties being faced by the privately owned works. It has deliberately ignored a proper rationalisation that might have been brought about in New South Wales had an overall approach been taken by the Government in that State. Indeed, the New South Wales Government set up the Regan committee to look at the abattoir situation in New South Wales. What happened to that report? The fact is that the report has been kept secret. It has never been published. I suspect that one of the reasons it was never published is that the report recommended the closedown of the abattoir at Homebush. Because the State election is due

Meat Industry

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 599

shortly in New South Wales the Government was not prepared to make the report public, purely for political reasons, not for industry reasons. All that the abattoir at Homebush is doing is taking cattle away from abattoirs in country areas and causing greater difficulties for country abattoirs in relation to their remaining open. So the New South Wales Government has been singularly unhelpful in finding a long-term resolution to the difficulties which are faced by the meat industry.
The fundamental problem facing the industry is that the cattle slaughter capacity is way beyond both the present needs and the foreseeable needs for the next few years. The cattle herd has declined from a peak of over 33 million in 1976 to an estimated 24.8 million as at March 1981. As a result, the slaughter numbers have also fallen considerably from 12.9 million in 1977-78 to 8.4 million in 1980-81. The expectations are that cattle slaughterings will be even lower during 1981-82. The rundown in slaughterings has been caused largely by depressed markets in the United States and Japan, compounded by the effects of a very serious drought that extended through a number of States and particularly important cattle areas. Also in the 1970s we saw a dramatic reduction in the national sheep flock. This stood at 180 million in 1970. It was reduced by about 40 million by 1972 and has now stabilised at around 132 million. Furthermore, there has been a big swing to grain growing. This year a record 12 million hectares are being planted.
Some sections of the industry try to blame the live sheep export trade for the downturn in the abattoir industry. However, the figures do not support such claims. Sheep and lamb slaughterings have remained relatively stable over the past five years. A recent study by the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation shows that while about 66 per cent of available sheep slaughter capacity is currently being used this will grow to an estimated 80 per cent of capacity by 1985. On the other hand, the same report shows that only 51 per cent of available cattle slaughter capacity is currently being used and that by 1985 this will increase to only 56 per cent. Again it points to the inescapable fact that there is much more capacity than is needed for several years to come particularly for cattle and therefore it is inevitable that some rationalisation of the abattoir sector of the industry will have to occur.
Furthermore, on the live sheep question it is interesting to note that while the live export trade is growing so too is the carcass trade. Some people involved in this debate tend to ignore this. Sheep and lamb carcass exports to the Middle East in 1975 totalled 2.6 million. In 1979-80 the total

number of sheep and lamb carcasses to the Middle East was 4.6 million-that is a pretty impressive growth-which represents 40 per cent of our total sheep and lamb carcass exports of 12 million. Live sheep exports to the Middle East in 1980 reached 5.6 million or one million more than the carcass exports. Those people who are claiming that the downturn in the abattoir section of the industry is the result of the live sheep exports ought to do a bit more homework and have a look at the facts. I come back to the prime reason for the current difficulties facing the abattoir industry and that is simply over-capacity. The fact is that I have been warning about this for months. I repeat what I said at the National Outlook Conference in January:
There is generally excess capacity in that industry. which has been marked in past years by periods or extremely high slaughterings. It seems inevitable that there will have to be a rationalisation and readjustment in the meat slaughtering industry.
In a nutshell, that is the crux of the matter. I note that the President of the Meat Council of Australia agrees with that view. It is strange that the honourable member for Werriwa should complain about my use of the word 'rationalisation' when everybody in the industry realises that rationalisation is inevitable. I find myself in good company in my use of that word because on 13 August Mr Bargwanna said:
The Meat Council has never suggested that there will not have to be a shake out or rationalisation at abattoir level.
The only person with his head in the sand on this issue is the honourable member for Werriwa. He turns his back on the realities of life to make a crude political attack on the Government and the members of my party in New South Wales, and fails to tackle the problems as they exist. Mr Bargwanna also agreed with a statement. I made at the Australian Agricultural Council meeting in Darwin when I said that no amount of assistance would produce cattle for slaughter or avoid the need for substantial downward adjustment in thecapacity of the works. So it seems that I am at one with the President of the Meat Council of Australia. The only one who is not with us is the honourable member for Werriwa who does not seem to understand the problems of the industry at all.
Before I turn specifically to the Meat Council's proposals it is worth just looking at the working record of the meat products industry. The honourable member for Werriwa made a great plea on behalf of the workers in the industry. Of course they have problems but let us look at their own record. In recent years strikes have been a

600 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Meat Industry

major problem in the industry. The latest Australian Bureau of Statistics information, which covers only disputes of lOman days duration or more, points to an above average level of disputation in the industry. There were 126 such disputes in 1977; 138 in 1978; 81 in 1979 and 49 in 1980.
Mr Campbell-Getting better.
Mr NIXON-Is not that a typical approach? One would assume that there has been a lessening of industrial turmoil but the facts do not support that. Although the number of disputes was fewer in 1980 compared with the number in 1979 the average number of working days lost per worker in the industry was actually greater. In 1979, 5.5 working days were lost per worker compared with 7.6 workings days in 1980, all of which means the duration of the strikes was longer. Furthermore, the aggregate working days lost in 1979 totalled 169,000 compared with 312,000 in 1980. So the number of working days lost has increased from 169,000 in 1979 to 312,000 in 1980. One cannot claim that the unionists involved in the meat industry have been very concerned about their industry. In fact, it is true to say that they have been holding the industry to ransom and this is one of the causes of the trouble that the abattoir industry is in today. Let other unions around Australia recognise what the meat industry unions have done to the meat industry. Let that be a lesson to them.
Let me deal with the Australian Meat Council's proposals. It has requested the suspension of all Commonwealth levies for 12 months; accelerated depreciation allowances on abattoir equipment; the Commonwealth to urge the States to suspend payroll tax and meat inspection charges for 12 months; the Commonwealth to institute a study into the optimum scale and structure of the livestock industry, the capacity and location of slaughter facilities, social security and retraining needs of displaced meat workers; and legislation to apportion slaughter levies between processors and producers.
Again, the honourable member for Werriwa chided me and the Government for taking no action on the Meat Council's submissions to us. I heard from the Meat Council, I think, for the first time, in April. It had three proposals then. The first proposal was simply a State proposal to lift payroll tax. That is something that Mr Wran could have done in New South Wales but which he totally ignored.
Mr Lloyd-He helped all abattoirs in New South Wales!

Mr NIXON-Yes, he helped only the service abattoirs. He could have helped all the abattoirs but he chose to ignore them. This last submission with all of its better thought through proposals, to describe them politely, arrived on my desk only last week. As far as the study that the Meat Council has requested is concerned, it is a fact, of course, that the Bureau of Agricultural Economics, the ALMC and my Department undertake studies on market outlooks and other factors all the time.
The honourable member for Werriwa said that the Government should have implemented an up to-date study on live sheep exports and their effect on abattoirs. I can tell him that within a couple of days I expect to get a report from the BAE and other departmental officers who have been studying this issue for some time and who have almost completed a very comprehensive study. He might be pleased to know that. The fact is that the requests from the Meat Council of Australia which arrived on my desk last week will be put to study and a proper and responsible approach will be taken to them. There are limits, of course, as to how far we can go on these matters. It is never possible to predict with certainty what supply and demand forces will opetate several years in advance. This aspect of the Meat Council's request will receive the closest consideration. But it is inevitable that individual firms must exercise commercial judgment as to whether they engage in the meat business and if so where they locate their commercial operations. Fundamentally it has to remain a commercial issue.
The honourable member for Werriwa raised a question of whether or not the former Minister for Primary Industry, the present Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair), gave an undertaking to the Australian Meat Exporters Federal Council that the Government would re-examine the question of the meat industry paying for meat inspection charges if circumstances changed. The Minister for Communications has said to me that he did discuss the possibility of a review of the way levies were being raised in 1979 when meat inspection charges were reintroduced. This is a matter which the Government will consider when it looks at other issues that have been raised. The point is whether the suspension of the meat inspection charge or any of the other levies will help to alleviate the problems that abattoirs are facing. Such levies and charges are a small part only of abattoir costs which must reflect in the prices which abattoirs pay for livestock. Given the strong competition between abattoirs to obtain livestock supplies, it may be that little of the benefit of levy suspension would be retained in the

Meat Industry

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 601

abattoir sector. The suspension may simply reft.ect increased cattle prices. However, as I said, the Government will be giving serious consideration to these propositions. We are sympathetic to the problems of the abattoir industry. We want to find a long term solution for it and not simply rest on a stop gap solution as has been proposed by the honourable member for Werriwa.
Mr MILDREN (Ballarat) (3.30)-1 support this matter of public importance which has been raised by my colleague the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin). I indicate that the Opposition wishes firstly to register its concern for all those involved in the ailing meat industry. Secondly, the Opposition wishes to indicate to the Government that it has failed to respond to the problems of the industry. This failure has further exacerbated the already parlous state in which the industry now finds itself. The Government ought to be aware of the fact that in the eastern States the number of closures and retrenchments in the meat works has caused 10,000 jobs to be lost. In New South Wales 20 abattoirs have ceased operation and 4,000 jobs have been lost. Since June, the date when that figure was taken, other abattoirs have also closed and that has been detailed by my colleague the honourable member for Werriwa.
Without some concern being shown by the Federal Government, the workers and their families will be left to rot. This is why my colleague the honourable member for Werriwa pointed out the initiative that has been taken by the New South Wales Wran Government to assist those abattoirs to the extent of $19.5m over a period of five years. We have been accustomed to hearing throughout most of this year a tirade of attacks against the Wran Government. This is not surprising because it is the most successful government in this country today. It is most upsetting for the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) to have to admit that a Labor Government has taken the initiative to assist the meat industry while a National Country Party Minister, functioning in a typically conservative fashion, has been waiting, waiting and waiting and taking little action. The assistance of the Wran Government and other initiatives that have been taken by it will go a long way to helping not only these meat works to survive but also to maintaining the living standards and the way of life of people living in those areas. The concern of the New South Wales Labor Government contrasts sharply with the neglect of the industry by the Federal Liberal Government with its coalition hangers-on.

While other States have been seriously affected by the factors responsible for the downturn of fortunes of the industry, the situation in my State of Victoria, which is also, as has been indicated by the honourable member for Werriwa, the home State of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), if his memory serves him, is even worse. For instance, the level of operation in Vict9rian abattoirs-that is, those that will survive-will only be 38 per cent in 1982 and no better than 41 per cent in 1985-that is, in terms of a level of maximum operation. Clearly this points to a crisis situation. Yet the Federal Government continues to treat the problem either in purely economic adjustment terms or to ignore it. Perhaps it will come as news to the Prime Minister to learn that in his own electorate of Wan non the major meat works conducted by Thos Borthwick and Sons (Australasia) Ltd has closed causing serious hardship in the town. My own electorate of Ballarat also has not been able to escape the impact of the malaise affecting the meat industry. In Kyneton, which is a town with limited employment opportunities and already existing high unemployment, the major employer, J. C. Huttons Pty Ltd meat works, was recently closed with the catastrophic loss of 130 jobs. I believe that the closure of that meat works was a premeditated act of the controlling firm as a means of rationalising its own enterprises. The workers at Kyneton could hardly be expected to appreciate the effects of the decision because the firm used the issue of industrial disputation to justify its high-handed decision. The workers have been left in a disastrous situation.
I ask the House to bear in mind that the impact of such a loss of jobs in a town which has a population of less than 4,000 people must be felt by small businesses and other agencies in town. The Federal Government has known about these matters for years. Closures and retrenchments in the industry are not a phenomenon first appearing in 1981. We are aware of the problems surrounding the meat industry. These problems of supply result both from the drought and the depletion of the number of livestock nationally. That has been pointed out by the honourable member for Werriwa and also pointed out by the Minister. These factors, together with the reluctance of the Government to establish a reasonable ratio of carcass to live sheep exporting, places considerable cost burdens on the processing plants. Quite obviously, the strain has been too great for many.
It is unreasonable at this stage for the Government to try to explain away the problems in terms of the reasons alone that I have just mentioned. Seasonal factors have also been significant. Just as

602 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Meat Industry

with good methods of farm husbandry, the bad seasons should be taken into account when determining strategies for the industry. By and large, industry tends to take these factors into account. The present situation, however, is not to be seen in terms of normal seasonal fluctuations. In the main, meatworkers are skilled workers. They develop their expertise under strict conditions and the pressure of the industry upon workers is considerable. But the specialised nature of the work is such that the transferability of skills developed is strictly limited.
Workers find themselves in a classic no win situation. Having developed these skills and having settled in these country towns and cities, they have planned ahead with the reasonable expectation that they will be able to provide their families with a secure lifestyle. The majority have saved for a home and are paying it off. What is the situation for these workers? Many of them are without work and find that they cannot move to another location because they cannot sell their homes. Any savings they might have been able to put together are rapidly depleted as they attempt to meet current commitments. The housing situation rapidly deteriorates as many unsalable houses are added to the market already depressed by existing high unemployment in these towns. Since the meatworkers are now unemployed, many find that keeping up with their house repayments is beyond them. Surely it is not necessary to portray the cumulative effects of this situation. We are not only talking about economic statistics but also talking about persons, human beings. Surely it is not unjustifiable to ask whether the Government is really co,:!cerned.
As well as the Kyneton closure, I mention also the firm of Pridham (Ballarat) Pty Ltd in Ballarat which is a subsidiary of Protean (Holdings) Ltd and which recently has undertaken a serious retrenchment program. In a meat works capable of employing 450 workers, no more than 94 are employed in processing at the moment. The loss of 120 jobs at Pridhams in recent weeks has added once again to the problems of job seekers and has reduced seriously the opportunities for job creation in service industries in that city. I would like to know what the Government has in mind as long term plans for the industry. It is no good talking about there being no possibility of long term planning. Such planning is up to the Government.
Mr GilesBreed more cattle.
Mr MILDREN-No one is suggesting that some rationalisation is not required but forward planning is required to the stage where we hope the market will be more stable and livestock

numbers will have recovered. I suppose that the honourable member for Wakefield (Mr Giles) might well be able to help them. To begin with, the Government should examine the costs to the industry of some of its own measures. We would like the Government to give serious consideration to reducing and redistributing the inspection and export levies. I believe it should be possible for the Government to drop altogether its inspection charge of $1.80. Likewise, it makes good sense to see the disease eradication levy directed mainly towards the detection of brucellosis and tuberculosis in carcasses as a charge which should be absorbed by government. The issue is one of national interest; therefore why not see it as such? The absorption of this charge by government would certainly assist the industry at this time. The same might also be said for those charges levied on research and administration. For a number of works, the difference in cost might mean survival. Finally, I suggest that it is high time we had an indepth inquiry into the meat industry. I hope that a government will act to ensure that these suggestions are acted upon.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond) -Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr COWAN (Lyne) (3.39)-It appears that the pattern is very clear because the only thing that both of the spokesmen for the Opposition were concerned about in this debate was employment. The only person who has mentioned anything from a practical point of view about the producer is the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon). As both Opposition members have stated their concern for the meat industry within Australia, we expected that at least they would have risen in their places and put forward certain proposals concerning the survival of the meat industry. What have they put forward this afternoon? All that we have heard from the members concerned is the fact that they are worried about employment. We on this side of the House are worried about employment. We have illustrated that by what is in the Budget Speech made last Tuesday evening. We expected that if Opposition members had been conferring with representatives of the meat industry-and I assume that they have been-they would have come up today with a proposal which said: 'Righto, from the Commonwealth point of view these are the things that we believe should be considered and brought into being'. They must recognise also that meat works are basically a State responsibility. Why do they not throw back this matter to their own Ministers of decentralisation and employment within the States and ask them what they are going to do

Meat Industry

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 603

about their payroll tax and what they are going to do from a practical point of view to see that these people are not displaced from the meat works they have been talking about?
No State, I believe, has been affected more than New South Wales. We had a cattle population of 9.1 million in 1976. It is now down to an estimated 6.1 million-that is, one-third less cattle within the State. The Minister for Primary Industry this afternoon mentioned the Regan report in New South Wales. Nobody recognised the problems of rationalisation of the meat industry in New South Wales so far as meat works were concerned more than the Wran Labor Government did. It set up the Regan committee in 1979 to report upon the industry in New South Wales, and principally-if honourable members did not know already I will tell them-to report upon the rationalisation of meat works within the State. That report was in the hands of the Premier of New South Wales in August 1980. Why is it that the Premier has not released it? The member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) might know because he said that he has been conferring with the Labor members of the New South Wales Parliament. The Leader of the Country Party in New South Wales, Mr Punch, and the Deputy Leader, Mr Murray, know what might be in the report because they can guess that it will be a practical report on the industry by men who have expertise in that area.
Why is it that the New South Wales Labor Government has withheld that report from the public and the Parliament? I suggest that one of the reasons concerns Bomebush, as mentioned by the Minister for Primary Industry. I wonder what that report said about Homebush? Maybe the honourable member for Werriwa can tell us.
I wonder what it said about the rationalisation of meat works within the State. I also wonder why it is that the Premier of New South Wales and the Minister for Agriculture should adopt agreement 493A when the six local government service abattoirs within the State were selected for financial assistance. They will be given $19.5m over a five year period to prop them up. If they were so interested from a regional meat works point of view, why did they not look at some of the other meat works-for example, the Wingham meat works within my own electorate? There would not be another meat works within 150 kilometres of the Wingham meat works but Homebush has the private works at Riverstone which is only 30 kilometres away. So, that will cater for the metropolitan area.
If there is to be proper planning there must be a rationalisation. None of us will turn around and

say that there should not be such rationalisation because the industry itself accepts the fact that there must be, in particular, a rationalisation of meat works in the eastern parts of Australia. There is no diligent planning whatsoever by the New South Wales Government. Yet, as I pointed out, it has a report which would clearly state what plans there should be over the years to come to see that nobody is hurt, to see that the employees whom the Opposition is so concerned about are not hurt. We accept that they must be looked after and that there must be certain planning so far as the meat producing areas of the State are concerned. People from the north coast or the central coast must not have to take their cattle to Sydney for slaughter; likewise people from the north-west and south-west of New South Wales should also not have to do so. I suggest that the selection of the local government works throughout the State as the only ones to receive assistance, must eventually come back upon the ratepayers of the municipalities and the shires concerned.
The Prices Justification Tribunal report of 1978 indicates that costs within government-owned meat works are greater than those in the cooperatives or the private works within the States. If Opposition members are so concerned about this matter, why do they not look at the real crux of the problem? The Opposition is run today by the unions of this country. Opposition members do not deny it. The Australian Labor Party is going downhill because the unions are running it and telling it what to do. I suggest that some meat works are closing because of the pressures of the unions in New South Wales. I further suggest that the Regan report was never adopted because of the pressures of the militant unions of New South Wales, particularly those involved with the men within the meat works. Nobody has more sympathy for the employees within the works than we have. Let us consider what has been imposed on the meat works over the years by the unions. Certainly, the employees work an eight-hour day but they work under a quota system. If they can produce the quota in five hours they finish work or they are paid overtime. Who is paying for this? The very producers about which the Opposition is supposed to be concerned are paying.
The cost of raising a beast to three years of age today is not as great as the cost of transporting that beast to market and killing and processing it for the consumer. In other words, the cost within the processing works is greater than the cost to the farmer to produce the animal. That is a ridiculous situation. The Opposition has talked about what the National Country Party has done. The beef breeders of this nation have never forgotten what

604 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Apple and Pear Legis/ation

the Labor Party did to them from 1972 to 1975, when the many concessions on the costs of fertilisers and other things were taken away from them. In the Budget brought down this week, none of those concessions has been taken away from the man on the land who is producing the food. The Labor Party turned away from the development of Australia's natural resources, water conservation, development of roads and other things that assist the primary producer on the land. The Opposition has walked out on the meat industry of Australia. We agree-nobody would agree more, as the Minister said this afternoonthat there are problems within the meat industry. We accept that there are problems in marketing and seasons. We accept that there is a need for a form of rationalisation within the industry. The Commonwealth is prepared to look at some of these problems and confer with the industry. But we recognise, as does the Australi"an Agricultural Council, that the basic responsibility lies with the States. They are obliged to confer with the industry, particularly on the future of their meat works, to ensure that those involved in the meat industry remain there and prosper in the years ahead.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond)- The discussion is concluded.
EXPORT GRANTS ACTS AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Anthony, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources) (3.49)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Honourable members will be aware that the Export Development Grants Board, established under the Export Market Development Grants Act 1974, is responsible for the administration of that Act and the Export Expansion Grants Act 1978. The export incentive schemes established under the Acts are designed to encourage exporters to seek out and expand Australia's export trade. Currently, the Board consists of a full time Chairman and four other members who are part time and are drawn from a cross-section of the Australian business community. The Bill provides for the restructuring of the Board so that the positions of Chairman and Deputy Chairman will be filled by the part time members. The full time executive member will continue to be responsible for the carrying out of the Board's decisions and the day to day operations of the secretariat. This restructuring of the Board is consistent with the Government's policy on the administration of

statutory bodies. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Kerin) adjourned.
AUSTRALIAN APPLE AND PEAR CORPORATION AMENDMENT BILL
(No.2) 1981
Bill presented by Mr Nixon, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (3.51 )-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of the Bill is to increase the number of grower members on the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation from four to six.
This change has been requested by the Australian Apple and Pear Growers Association, which represents apple and pear growers on a national basis and which nominates candidates for appointment to the Corporation as grower representatives.
The Association believes that an increase in the number of grower representatives will enable the Corporation to reflect more fully the interests of differen~ apple and pear growing regions.
The Government has accepted this view.
In effect, the current grower membership is sufficient only to represent major exporting areas. The growing importance of the domestic market means that we must provide the scope for fuller representation on the Corporation of those growers supplying that market.
The difficult export situation being faced by the industry highlights the importance of the Corporation's domestic market promotion function and the need for a membership which will enable this function to be performed as well as possible. This Bill and the changes proposed in the associated levy Bill and export charge Bill are designed to increase the Corporation's capacity to carry out this task.
An opportunity has also been taken in the Bill to bring those sections of the Act relating to dismissal of members and disclosure of interest into line with standard provision in other similar legislation. Also the number of members who constitute a quorum has been increased from seven to eight because of the increase in total membership of the Corporation. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Kerin) adjourned.

Apple and Pear Legislation

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 60S

APPLE AND PEAR LEVY AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Nixon, and read a first

1commend the Bill to honourable members. Debate (on motion by Mr Kerin) adjourned.

time.

Second Reading

EPIDEMIOLOGICAL STUDIES (CONFIDENTIALITY) BILL 1981

Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (3.53)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.

Bill presented by Mr MacKellar, and read a first time.

This Bill increases the maximum rates of levy to

Second Reading

enable the industry, should it so wish, to support Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for greater activity by the Corporation in domestic, Health) (3.55)-1 move: promotion and other programs. It does not change

the operative rates of levy which are set by reguThat the Bill be now read a second time.

lation. Actual charges at present are: Juicing fruit-SOc per tonne; processing fruit-$l per tonne; in any other case-5c per box.
The present levy Act provides that fruit which is not packed in boxes but to which the box rate of levy is applicable is to be converted to a box equivalent on the basis that a box equals 18 kilograms of apples or 20 kilograms of pears. The Bill also amends this basis so that, consistent with the weight equivalents used for similar purposes in other apple and pear legislation, a box equals 18 kilograms of either kind of fruit. The amendments have the support of the Australian Apple and Pear Growers Association. I commend the Bill to honourable members.

By this Bill the Government seeks to provide for the confidentiality of personal information collected during the conduct of the epidemiological study of Vietnam veterans and when necessary
other government-sponsored epidemiological studies. Honourable members will recall that last year the then Minister for Veterans' Affairs announced the Government's intention to conduct a scientific study of the possible effects of exposure
to herbicides on Vietnam veterans and their children. A pilot study is well under way. Its purpose is not to yield findings relating to possible effects of herbicides but to test 'a number of possible ways of carrying out a major survey. It is being carried out on a small sample of veterans living in Sydney

Debate (on motion by Mr Kerin) adjourned. and their families.

APPLE AND PEAR EXPORT CHARGE AMENDMENT BILL 1981

Bill presented by Mr Nixon, and read a first time.

Second Reading

Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (3.54)-1 move:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

This Bill increases the maximum rate of export

charge per box of fruit to bring it into line with the

maximum rates provided in the associated Apple

and Pear Levy Amendment Bill 1981.

-

The Bill does not change the operative rate of charge, which is set by regulation and presently stands at 5c per box. Two other amendments have been made. The weight factor used to convert fruit not packed in boxes to a box equivalent has been modified on the same lines as for the levy Act. The Bill also amends the section dealing with the regulation-making power of the Governor General to bring its expression into line with other legislation.

The amendments have the support of the Australian Apple and Pear Growers Association.

Some of the questions being tested in the pilot study and which might also be asked in a later major survey are on personal subjects such as drug abuse and interpersonal relations. Some of the answers given by the veterans or members of their families might bear on any claims a veteran might have for compensation or for repatriation benefits. Still other answers if disclosed might affect their opportunity for employment in particular occupations, or could be used to their detriment in courts. A number of veterans have expressed reservations about participation in any study where absolute confiden~iality of information cannot be guarantee,d.
The Government accepts the fact that for epidemiological studies to have scientific validity, response rates must be high. The concerns over the confidentiality of the pilot study indicate that unless confidentiality is guaranteed, the Vietnam veterans study will meet with a significant degree of non-response. The Bill therefore would provide for the confidentiality of all information collected in the course of a study that is identifiable with particular persons. Clause 4 of the Bill would create an offence with a maximum penalty of $1,000

606 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981 Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Bill

or imprisonment for six months for the unauthorised disclosure of personal information. This restriction on the divulgence of personal information would extend to the disclosure of the existence or non-existence of a document concerning the affairs of a person and to the disclosure of the whereabouts of such a document.
In addition, clause 8 of the Bill provides that a
person who has assisted or is assisting in a study shall not be required to produce in a court documents concerning the affairs of another person acquired during the study. Similarly, there can be no compulsion to divulge to a court personal information acquired during the study. This prohibition would not however extend to the production of documents to the Ombudsman. I think that it is proper to allow access by the Ombudsman for the purposes of an irivestiga tion which he might make following a complaint.
I would draw honourable members' attention to clause 7 of the Bill. That clause would provide that in a few limited circumstances it would not be an offence to divulge information. Under that provision information might be divulged to the person who provided the information in the first place, or to the person to whom the information relates provided that where the informatiQn deals with more than one person, the permission of all the persons involved has been obtained. Clause 7 would not give a right to the information. It will simply provide that it will not be an offence to provide the information in those circumstances. A person's rights to information would be provided under the proposed Freedom of Information Act. That Act would of course protect the information if it would be a breach of confidence to make it available. Although all personal information is protected from disclosure in a court, clause II would permit the publication or disclosure to a court of conclusions, statistics or procedures used in a study.
Clause 12 would provide that in the case of the Vietnam veterans study, the new Act would extend to information acquired, and documents prepared or obtained, before the commencement of the Act. Although expressed to apply to the Vietnam veterans study the confidentiality
ensured by this legislation will be a valuable tool in the conduct of other government-sponsored epidemiological studies. The legislation has therefore been drafted to allow other studies conducted by or on behalf of the Commonwealth to be declared by regulation as studies to which the con-
fidentiality provisions apply. The provisions would also apply to information acquired and documents prepared or obtained before the commencement of the relevant regulation. This Bill is

an important measure and essential to the success of the Vietnam veterans study and similar epidemiological studies. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Kerin) adjourned.
NORFOLK ISLAND AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Wilson, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment) (4.1 )-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to amend the Norfolk Island Act 1979 to provide for the appointment of a Chief Judge of the Supreme Court of Norfolk Island. Sub-section 52 (2) of the Act provides that the Supreme Court of Norfolk Island shall consist of a judge or judges appointed in accordance with the Act. Present appointments to the court are Mr Justice Dunphy and Mr Justice Evatt.
It is consistent with the state of constitutional development of Norfolk Island to bring the constitution of the court into line with the Supreme Courts of the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory by providing for a Chief Judge. The opportunity is also being taken to provide that future appointees as judges of the Norfolk Island Supreme Court shall retire from that court at age 70 whether or not they are at present obliged to retire at that age from another court. This is consistent with Government policy on this matter.
It is also desirable to make it clear in the legislation, as was the original intention of section 53 of the Act, that a judge of the Supreme Court of Norfolk Island ceases to be a judge of the court if he ceases to be a judge of another court created by the Parliament. This provision, like the retirement at age 70 provision, will not apply to judges currently appointed to the Norfolk Island Supreme Court. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Kerin) adjourned.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
Mr SINCLAIR(New England-Leader of the House) (4.3)-1 move:
That, unless otherwise ordered, the following sessional orders to provide for the operation of estimates committees be adopted: Commillal and consideration in estimates commillee:
(I) After the speech of the Leader of the Opposition, or a Member deputed by him, on the motion for the second reading of the main Appropriation Bill for a year, the

Estimates Committees

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 607

proposed expenditures for the Departments and services contained in the Schedule to that Bill may be referred to an estimates committee. Such referral shall be on motion, moved by a Minister, of which notice has been given. A committee may be ordered to report by a specified date.
(2) There shall be 6 Estimates Committees to be known as Estimates Committees, A, B, C, D, E and F, which shall not vote on, but shall examine and report upon, proposed expenditures for the Parliament, Advance to the Minister for Finance. and each Department of State; such report may contain a resolution or expression of opinion of the committee but shall not vary the amount of a proposed expenditure.
Members: (3) Each estimates committee, to consider each proposed expenditure, shall consist of the Minister responsible in the House of Representatives for the proposed expenditure under consideration, together with 10 Members, excluding the Chairman.
(4) Members of an estimales committee shall be nominated by either the Prime Minister, the Leader of the House, the Government Whip or the deputy Whip and either the Leader of the Opposition, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, the Opposition Whip or the deputy Whip and every nomination of a member of the committee shall be forthwith notified in writing to the Speaker.
(5) In nominating Members to an estimates committee to consider each proposed expenditure regard shall be had to .the qualifications and interests of those Members nominated and to the composition of the House. Either the Prime Minister, the Leader of the House, the Government Whip or the deputy Whip and either the Leader of the Opposition, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, the Opposition Whip or the deputy Whip, shall have power to discharge from time to time any of those Members nominated by them and to nominate others in substitution for those discharged. The responsible Minister may nominate another Minister to act for him as required.
(6) The nomination of Members to consider the proposed expenditure of each department or service shall be announced to the House as soon as practicable after the proposed expenditures have been referred to a committee.
Chairman: (7) The Chairman of an estimates committee shall be- (a) the Chairman of Committees; or
(b) a Deputy Chairman of Committees to be appointed by the Chairman of Committees.
(8) The Chairman of Committees, Deputy Chairman of Committees or any member of the committee shall take the Chair temporarily whenever requested so to do by the Chairman of the Committee during a sitting of that committee.
Q1Iort/m: (9) The quorum of an estimates committee shall be 5, excluding the Chairman, and, if at any time a quorum be not present, the Chairman shall suspend the proceedings of the committee until a quorum be present, or adjourn the committee.
Participation b)' other members: (10) Members of the House, not being members of the committee, may participate, at the discretion of the Chairman, in the proceedings of the committee, but shall not vote, move any motion or be counted for the purpose of a quorum.

Min1ltes ofProceedings: (II) All proceedings of a committee shall be recorded by
the Clerk to the Committee, and such records shall constitute the Minutes of Proceedings of the com-
mittee, and shall be signed by the Clerk to. the Committee.

Proceedings in estimates commillee: (12) Consideration of proposed expenditures in an estimates committee shall follow, as far as possible, the procedures observed in a committee of the whole with the following exceptions:
(a) Speech time limits and the restriction on the number of times a Member may speak to each question (S.0.91) shall not apply.
(b) Voting shall be taken by a show of hands: tellers shallllot be appointed.

Time /imits on Report: (13) During consideration in the House of the reports from estimates committees, the maximum period for which a Member may speak shall be-

Each question before the Chair Ministers Any other Member

Periods not speci fled 10 minutes

Reportfrom estimates commillee andf1lrther consideration: (14) A report of an estimates committee shall be presented by the Chairman of that committee or a member of the committee deputed by him and shall contain any resolutions or expressions of opinion of the commillee.
(15) On a report from a committee being .presented, a future day shall be appointed for taking the report into consideration.
(16) On the calling on of the order of the day for the consideration of a report from an estimates committee, the following question shall be proposed in respect of each proposed expenditure:
'That the proposed expenditure be agreed to (and that the resolution(s) or expression(s) of opinion agreed to by the committee in relation thereto, be noted),.
(17) Upon the completion of consideration of the reports of estimates commillees: the question shall be proposed forthwith- 'That the remainder of the Bill be agreed to '.
(18) When an Appropriation Bill which has been referred to an estimates commillee is finally agreed to by the House, a futureday shall be fixed, on motion, for the third reading.

I have moved the motion not because the GoVernment is necessarily totally convinced that the procedure and practices of the Estimates committees have overcome all the disabilities that have been seen in the former practice of considering the Budget in the Committee of the Whole. However, it is certainly one of those innovatory concepts that the Government has pursued with the idea of trying to give individual honourable members some greater opportunity to consider the details of the Budget and to examine matters within the Budget in a way that was normally not practical, given both the time constraints and what I guess one would call the size constraints of this chamber.

The purpose of the committees, of course, is not
to duplicate the role of the chamber, but to provide individual honourable members with some

608 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Estimates Committees

opportunity to gather information both from Ministers and from their officials about the details of the expenditure programs on which they will be called on to vote ultimately in the House. Honourable members will note that the sessional orders which are in the motion before us incorporate some significant alterations to previous arrangements. There are to be six committees rather than the previous number, with up to three committees meeting concurrently, and there is to be more stable membership. The greater stability should allow each Committee to perhaps develop its own approach and facilitate the early distribution of papers.
There is, of course, a problem with each committee. It does not lie just with the committee members but also with those who are to chair the committees and who have a very considerable responsibility to ensure that the system works. I have moved the motion as an amendment to the Sessional Orders rather than to the Standing Orders because I think that all honourable members would want the form to be established in the preferred system rather than one that still has some room for doubt. It is expected that the proposed expenditures will be formally referred to the committees next week, as soon as the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) has addressed himself to the Budget Speech. The committees will commence operations in the week commencing 8 September. Details of the composition of committees and the departments and services which each committee will examine will also be announced to the House next week. I commend the motion to the House.
Mr LES JOHNSON (Hughes) (4.6)-The Opposition has noted the comments of the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) about the Estimates committees. I am glad to acknowledge the qualification with which he put the proposition to the House. I think it has to be said that the whole issue of Estimates committeesa new innovation which I think was contrived for the first time last year-has to be regarded as being on trial. It is certainly a long way from being the perfect answer to parliamentary procedure. I think any Opposition which acquiesces to this proposal and co-operates with the Government as we have done is giving the procedure more than a fair go. Sacrifices are made by an Opposition which supports a system which takes the proceedings of parliament outside this chamber into some clandestine situation.
I remember over many years the most vigorous discussions taking place when controversial legislation has been subjected to extended debate in the Committee of the Whole in this chamber and

when relevant Ministers have been on trial, not just before the Parliament but, indeed, before the nation, because it has often been the case that Committee proceedings have been broadcast. As I understand the situation, since the new proposals were put into operation last year the Estimates committee proceedings have not been broadcast. I also understand that it is not intended to broadcast them this year. If that is the case, not only is the Parliament losing some of its glamour and drama but also the people are being denied the opportunity of becoming involved and being exposed to the nitty gritty of formulating legislation. It is all right for us to make generalised speeches in this House at the second reading stage of debates, but it is tremendously important for the House of Representatives as well as the Senate to become involved in the more detailed probing and to be in a position to challenge Ministers.
Members of the Opposition concede that something has to be done about the processes that can be regarded as traditional. It is not good enough for an honourable member occupying one of the 124 places in this House to make a lousy speech and a poor contribution to an important national issue in the chamber and to expect other honourable members to sit and listen. It is a challenge to us to find a way of utilising the enormous human resources and, indeed, the expertise, that are available through members of Parliament. Honourable members are not experts on everything but they have access to experts in departments and libraries, among research people and in pressure and interest groups in the community. It is very important to ensure that as much opportunity as possible is given to members of Parliament to speak. I think that the traditional process that we observe in this chamber day after day is old-fashioned. We ought to have a committee system that enables people to participate more frequently than some of us are able to do.
Nevertheless, I do not think the answer is to set up some committees-under this proposal, six committees-and send people off to a quiet little room. Although access is provided for the media and interested members of the community, the committees do not have the benefit of broadcasting facilities. I believe that we should be looking very critically at this process when it comes into operation this session. I think a weakness also lies in the fact that Estimates committees can operate concurrently with one another or, indeed, concurrently with the Parliament itself. There ought to be some rationalisation of this procedure. I think we ought to be giving some thought to the general propositon that an effective committee system should be contrived to facilitate and maximise the

Estimates Committees

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 609

participation of as many members of Parliament as possible. I think that to achieve that, a specified period should be set aside for Estimates c?mmittees to operate. Perhaps a week or a fortmght of the parliamentary session should be given over exclusively to Estimates committees so that they are not operating concurrently with the sitting of the House. Then we could really apply ourselves to them in an assiduous and effective way. When it is all said and done, it is on those occasions, when the Minister is giving an account of his stewardship, that parliamentarians have the opportunity to come into a close relationship with members of the bureaucracy and to interrogate them with the advantage of being in a relatively informal atmosphere.
I am not knocking the committee system. I put to the Minister what I hope are constructive suggestions. I suggest that we should not put the committees into such a subjective environment but should give them a more distinguished atmosphere in which to operate so that they can operate concurrently and so that members of Parliament can move among them. One of the difficulties that we have now is that each of the six Estimates committees are allocated several subjects, if not several ministerial portfolios, to consider. It is extremely difficult, in the hurried way that we go about conducting the committees, for honourable members to deploy themselves from one committee to another. The fundamental requirements are to set aside a prescribed period in which the committees can operate and to publicise the proceedings so that members of the public can have the benefit of knowing what kind of interrogation and probing is taking place.
I cannot quarantee on behalf of the Opposition that we will go along with the present scheme forever. Although we do not intend to be in opposition for very long, we are in opposition at present. We do not like the-fact that a great deal of the proceedings of Parliament have been taken off the air. We want to have the committee process given more prominence in the future than it has been given in the past. In the meantime, 1 think 1 can say that the Opposition will extend its co-operation during the forthcoming sittings of the Estimates committees, certainly avail itself of every opportunity to probe legislation and do what it can, as a member of another place has said, 'to keep the bastards honest'-in other words to serve the best interests of the community.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (4.13)-1 shall speak very briefly. 1 simply thank the Government for agreeing to the continuation of the committee system which is being discussed

today. 1 believe that it is a system which is beneficial to the Parliament and to the people. It
gives honourable members an opportunity, through questioning, to obtain information which would otherwise not be available or which it sometimes would take us months to receive. I congratulate the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair)
for his open mind. 1 am quite sure that the Estimates committees will work in a spirit of co-
operation which is beneficial in the manner 1 have described.

Mr UREN (Reid) (4.14)-1 hope that Esti-
mates committees will do something towards
bringing about a little more freedom, tolerance and understanding in this country. This afternoon
here in Canberra 150 young unemployed people
occupied the Liberal Party of Australia headquarters. The Australian Federal Police took a
brutal position in extracting them. 1 am asking
Ministers, particularly the Minister for the Capi-
tal Territory (Mr Hodgman), to have a look at the brutality of police action against young
people. Unemployed people in this country may
want to do some things which may not be orthodox in the realm of what the Minister thinks, but
they have to do unorthodox things to attempt to
relieve the plight of unemployment and the plight of housing in this community. The way in which
the authorities have dealt with those people is an
utter disgrace. 1respect the fact that the Leader of
the House is a senior Minister and understands
the procedures of the law and what people are entitled to do. People who are battlers and who are
underprivileged should not be treated in the
brutal way that these young people were treated. 1 bring this matter to the House--

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jone~)-Order! The matter for discussion at the moment is the adoption of a motion by the Leader
of the House which deals with the Estimates com-
mittees. 1 suggest that the honourable member relate his remarks to the motion before the Chair at the moment.

Mr UREN-1 am trying to do so. 1 feel that in

Parliament one should be able to talk about the

truth. 1 knew two of the people involved. 1 was

appalled to hear stories of the role of the police. 1

thought, in the Estimates committees, we might

be able to get at some root of the sickness that is

growing in relation to the treatment of young

people by the Australian Federal Police. 1am ask-

ing this Parliament to make sure, through the

Minister for the Capital Territory and senior Min-

isters, that the police carry out the law in a much

more tolerant and patient way in regard to people

who want to protest.

'

610 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Days and Hours ofMeeting

Question resolved in the affirmative.
DAYS AND HOURS OF MEETING
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House) (4.17) - I rise with no particular enthusiasm to suggest that we alter our afternoon and evening sitting by half an hour. The proposal is one that came out of a compromise of various suggested changes during the last session. I move:
That, unless otherwise ordered, the following amendments to the Standing Orders be adopted for the remainder of this Session-
(I) Days and Hours of Meeting Standing Order 40 be amended to read-
40. Unless otherwise ordered, the House shall meet for the dispatch of business on each Tuesday and Wednesday at 1045 p.m.; and on each Thursday at 10.00 a.m.
(2) Adjournment and next Meeting Standing Order 48A be amended to r~ad-
48A. At 10.00 p.m. on each sitting day the Speaker shall propose the question-That the House do now adjournwhich question shall be open to debate; if the House be in committee at the time stated, the Chairman shall report progress and upon such report being made the Speaker shall forthwith propose'the question-That the House do now adjourn-which question shall be open to debate. No amendment can be moved to this question:
Provided that-
(a) if a division be in progress at the time fix~d for interruption such division shall be completed and the result announced;
(b) if, on the question-That the House do now adjourn-being proposed, a Minister requires the question to be put forthwith without debate, the Speaker shall forthwith put the question;
(c) a motion for the adjournment of the House may be moved by a Minister at an earlier hour;
(d) any business under discussion and not disposed of at the time of the adjournment shall be set down on the Notice Paper for the next sitting; and
(e) if the question-That the House do now adjourn-is negatived, the House or committee shall resume the proceedings at the point at which they had been
, interrupted:
Provided fufther that, if at 10.30 p.m. the question before the House is-That the House do now adjourn-the Speaker shall interrupt the debate, at which time-
(f) a Minister may require that the debate be extended until 10040 p.m. to enable Ministers to speak in reply to matters raised in the preceding adjournment debate; at lOAD p.m., or upon the earlier cessation of the debate, the Speaker shall forthwith adjourn the House until the time of its next meeting, or
(g) if no action is taken by a Minister under paragraph (f), the Speaker shall forthwith adjourn the House until the time of its next meeting.
(3) Precedence to general business Standing Order 104 be amended to read-
104. Unless otherwise ordered, government business shall, on each day of sitting, have precedence of all other business, except that on the sitting Thursday alternate to the sitting Thursday to which standing order 106 applies, general business shall have precedence of government business until 12.15 p.m ..
(4) 'Grievance' Debate Standing Order 106 be amended to read-

106. Notwithstanding the preceding standing order, the first

order of the day, government business, on each alternate sit-

ting Thursday commencing with the first sitting Thursday

after the Address in Reply to the Governor-General's Speech

has been adopted shall be a question to be proposed by the

Speaker 'That grievances be noted' to which question any

Member may address the House or move any amendment. If

consideration of this question has not been concluded at 12.15

p.m., the debate thereon shall be interrupted and the Speaker

shall put the question.

.

I point out to honourable members that the House will be meeting at 1.45 p.m. on Tuesdays and Wednesdays. The sitting will be suspended at 6 p.m. and the adjournment question will be put at 10 p.m. The adjournment debate will run for half an hour until the House rises at 10.30 p.m. I believe, as with other areas, these sessional orders give the House some opportunity to consider the various alternatives that there might be to sitting hours. I suspect that because this is a compromise proposal a good many members will find it does not necessarily meet their preferred hours of
sitting.

Other propositions are. still to be finally resolved, including the pattern of sitting days. My
colleague the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney), amongst others, is looking at ways by which there might be a re-staging of the sitting pattern during the 1982 autumn sittings. Instead of having basically a three-week-on oneweek-off rotational system we might have a twoweek-on two-week-off system with a Tuesday to Friday, Monday to Thursday period on those two sitting \Veeks. With respect to the hour of adjournment, it is relevant that last night, for example, the House did not itself wish to rise at 10.30 p.m. In order that it could do so it was necessary for a
gag to be moved.

I have no strong feelings about the preferred
hours, but I know that most honourable members
would like not to meet until quarter past two. On
Thursdays this provides a break of an hour and a
quarter for lunch. On the Tuesday and Wednesday members have committee, party and Caucus
meetings to attend before the House meets. I
suspect that it is likely that although the House
might well accept this motion today there might be honourable members who wish the hours to be
reviewed within the next few weeks. I suggest,
however, that we should give the revised hours a trial period. I suggest that the earliest possible
time by which they should be reconsidered would
be the end of the next sitting break. After another few weeks of sitting we will have a break and then
another sitting period. I suggest that the earliest
possible time at which the hours should be reviewed would be at that second break when we
might' well see whether the views of honourable

Days and Hours ofMeeting

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 611

members are that the 1.45 p.m. commencement is, in fact, meeting their requirements.
I recognise that most honourable members want the House to rise early. I hope that out of the various deliberations we can find a suitable time which will enable the consideration of private members business and give an opportunity for every honourable member to canvass issues which he believes need to be raised in Parliament whether because of his philosophical views or because of his attitude to his own electorate. I hope, finally, that Government business can be processed and dealt with in a proper way. It is on that basis, therefore, that I have moved the motion and suggest to the House that we put the revised hours on trial and, if they do not fit the bill, we modify them in due course.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (4.27)-As the spokesman for the Opposition on this matter I confirm to the Leader of the House (MrSinclair) that the proposition does not fit the bill, as he says. I noticed that he felt, with some reluctance, that it ought to be given a trial. I can make my comments with some confidence. The Opposition has had a party meeting on the matter and was somewhat astounded to find that the Government had resolved that the best way to overcome the difficulties which obviously exist in this Parliament is virtually to reduce the lunch hour period by half an hour on Tuesday and Wednesday. No comment has been made aboutThursday, except the sitting will commence earlier at \0 a.m. and the adjournment question will be put at 10p.m.
The Opposition does not feel that because the Government is bringing in something it has to oppose it. There has been a long discussion in the party room as to whether there ought to be a better and more intelligent arrangement of sitting hours. The Minister knows that the Opposition is prepared to co-operate in an intelligent fashion in respect of matters that concern the Government and also concern the Opposition. There are limited opportunities for people to speak. It must be acknowledged that everybody cannot speak on every matter. Arrangements of business can be made whereby a facility is given for honourable members to express their point of view.
The Opposition is mindful of the fact that there had been a number of discussions, not the least of which was with Mr Speaker. On 4 June a ballot was taken amongst all honourable members to determine whether they wished to change the sitting hours. It was agreed, by a four to one majority, that they wished to do so. I would be very surprised if they thought that by voting for a change

in the sitting hours all they would be able to achieve would be a reduction in the period of the lunch hour from what is normally a one and a quarter hour period to something less than one hour. That is what this matter is about. Tn itself that should not be given over-emphasis.
Let us look at the matter from the point of view of a democratic institution. A number of people want to discuss matters in Canberra with members of this Parliament. The only convenient time is usually between the hours of I p.m. and 2 p.m. In other words, the honourable member is, in fact, working through his lunch hour. Very often a delegation, deputation or an organisation wants to put a point of view or invite the honourable member to address it in some area of Canberra. I think Ministers will be very inconvenienced, to say the least, to find that they have to leave wherever they are by 1.30 in order to get back to the Parliament at 1.45 p.m. I cannot see it helping Ministers or people in the Opposition who may have to meet, say, a trade union delegation or a group of pensioners who want to discuss a matter in that period. It happens from time to time that our party meetings, for example, on Wednesday, could go well past 1 o'clock. They might go to 1.15 p.m. Honourable members can see the sorts of problems that will be created in terms of trying to organise work in the House.
Perhaps it can be argued that I am emphasising the less attractive aspects of this matter. But we have had a series of ballots which resulted in a four to one vote in favour of a change in the sitting hours. What was the other option which I understood to be the most popular? It was that there should be some rearrangement of sitting hours whereby there would not be this process of legislation by exhaustion. Members are at work for 15 or 16 hours each Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday. Effectively that is 48 hours in three days. Members do not start work when the House commences to sit. They are very busy right from the early. hours of the morning dealing with the problems concerned with their constituents, the nation, legislation or whatever. It is a very exhausting process. Honourable members will have noticed that a number of parliamentarians have had to be taken to hospital as a result of the tension that is created by this exhaustion. I do not think to be left in the position of not working 48 hours in three days but 46 hours in three days, is a remarkable improvement.
On the other four days of the week, members work possibly another 10 or 12 hours a day. I am not trying to make a plea for a salary increase on
that basis, but the fact is that a fair amount of work must be done in a certain period. In that

612 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Days and Hours ofMeeting

sense, members intelligently voted that there should be a change in sitting hours. I think that the reason behind one of those changes was in what was called 'Option I' which proposed that on one evening there could be an opportunity for members to get some rest or return to their electorates. Perhaps I am speaking from a personal viewpoint if I talk of what happens on a Thursday. Effectively we must spend a whole evening and another day in Canberra as a result of sitting two hours on a Thursday evening-that is, between 8 o'clock and 10 o'clock. For the sake of sitting two hours, we must spend so much additional time in Canberra. Some members are due back in Perth, Darwin or the north of New South Wales and must make all sorts of extraordinary travel
arrangements early Friday morning to get back to their electorates to continue their work. Probably it would be far more intelligent for the business of the House to be completed by 7 p.m. on Thursday. In fact from a personal angle that might be the way to go. Maybe we could extend the sitting hours each day to 7 p.m. and, so, some concession could be given to members so that they could get a reasonable rest on Thursday evening before undertaking their arduous duties on Friday. Is it any wonder that honourable members are exhausted when we are here perhaps to midnight on a Thursday sitting day and have to fly out again at 7 a.m. Friday which means that we have four or five hours' rest before undertaking that flight and continuing our duties?
I notice that part of that option attracted the majority of the votes cast. In other words, when members agreed that there ought to be a change
of sitting hours, they said that the best thing to do would be to go this way which, to some extent, would have enabled that process. The other option, which was not accepted but which was of the same ilk, was Option 3. I am mystified to find that Option 2, which is the one that the Government has now decided to adopt, polled a very paltry 14 per cent of the votes. In any system of counting-we are all professionals in this area-we usually do not give much weight to anything that polls 14 per cent. In fact I think the Minister would agree with me. He is not really rapt about the fact that we will adopt Option 2 which ran last in the ballot that we conducted. I seriously suggest to the Minister, who is a pretty wide-awake gentleman and understands the rules of the game, that we can do better than this. If it means the Government and Opposition setting' up a committee', perhaps we can do it.
To put it on the basis that the best compromise is to adopt option two is not on from the Opposition's point of view. We basically think that

there could have been a better result. My party is of the opinion that Option 1 has a lot of merit. Arguments can be put from the point of view of the Cabinet and the Government. If honourable members look at the matter in the context of what we are about, reasonable hours for sitting to enable members to get some rest-that is all it is-I think that we can come to some compromise which could certainly be arranged. I know that State parliaments can get through their business in a reasonable time that allows their members to get back to their electorates at the conclusion of the week's business. I think we ought to be thinking along the same lines. We are not here to reduce the effective work of the Parliament; we are here to increase it. But we are certainly not helping if we do it on the basis that members must sit for such long hours.
I repeat that the problems of party meetings and members in Canberra having to meet people, deputations, delegations and representations have to be considered. Most of these meetings can take place in the hours the availability of which will now be shortened by the earlier starting time, particularly on Tuesdays and Wednesdays. I think the change in sitting hours will affect the capacity of members to have an opportunity to carry out their other business outside the House to meet people who are making representations or just to have a reasonable break before commencing the afternoon sitting of the Parliament. We do not agree with the motion. We would like the Minister to take the matter away, have another go at it and not rely on 'Option 2' because it certainly does not contain any merit. Whoever voted for it would not even comprise the numbers of members in Cabinet. So we cannot blame them. The question is: Can we get a better solution? I think we can. It would mean representatives of the Government and the Opposition getting together to analyse the situation. We will again discuss the matter in our party room. I offer that advice in a spirit of compromise which would enable us to get something that will meet the wishes of all honourable members who voted that there ought to be a change in sitting hours. Accordingly, we do not agree with the motion and will oppose the proposition.
Mr ADERMANN (Fisher) (4.33)-1 will take just a moment. I am very disappointed indeed that this is the suggested option. I recognise the reluctance of the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) and the way this situation has come about. It was no wonder that there was such a vote for a change in sitting hours, if other honourable members were in the same circumstance as I was the day when the vote was taken. I went to

Days and Hours ofMeeting

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 613

my room at 1 a.m. not knowing how much longer we would be sitting and there was a ballot paper asking: 'Do you want a change in sitting hours?' In circumstances such as those an honourable member would have to be a nut if at that time he or she did not want some change from that situation. Unfortunately, this proposal is not a change. It will not meet the situation that honourable members were looking at and wanted corrected. I have no opposition to going home half and hour earlier. I would not oppose this motion particularly on that basis. I join with others and I think I may be expressing the sentiments of the Minister in saying that we must look further at this matter. We must see whether we cannot get a more rational, a more sensible, system than the one we have.
As a matter of fact. the suggested change may make it even more difficult for Queensland members. We do not have daylight saving. We do not want it. We are on God's time. But, when daylight saving comes into being, if there is an occasion when we take a Monday night appointment and come down to Canberra on Tuesday morning, the earlier sitting hours might make it just that much more difficult. But that is not the point that I want to put regarding this matter. It is a personal reflection. I suppose it is not that important. In my view it is not a change. I am disappointed that this is as far as we have gone but that disappointment will be alleviated and allayed if we can turn our minds to finding a better solution than this one. The particular proposal I favoured was the back to back situation, where we sat two weeks with an extra sitting day in each week and then had two weeks up. That too is a matter of personal opinion and I do not say that that is necessarily the best proposition. But this proposition is not the best and I hope that our research can goon.
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House) (4.35)-in reply-As there have been some suggestions about the ballot, perhaps I should explain to honourable members that another ballot was conducted amongst the Government members. As a result of that the Government is proposing this motion. Four propositions were submitted to them for consideration. One proposition was for the maintenance of the existing sitting hours; that is, rising at 10.30 p.m. with provision for an adjournment debate for half an hour and the hours being as they have been in the last sitting period. Option one was that the House should sit from 12.30 p.m. to 7 p.m. on a Tuesday, from 12.30 p.m. to 7 p.m. on a Wednesday and from 10.30 a.m. to 7 p.m. on a Thursday. Option two was that the House should sit from

1.45 p.m. to 6 p.m. and from 8 p.m. to 10 p.m. on a Tuesday, from 1.45 p.m. to 6 p.m. and from 8 p.m. to 10 p.m. on a Wednesday, and from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., from 2 p.m. to 6 p.m. and from 8 p.m. to 10 p.m. on a Thursday. Option three was that the House should sit from 1.30 p.m. to 6.15 p.m. and from 8 p.m. to 10.30 p.m. on a Tuesday, from 1.30 p.m. to 6.15 p.m. and from 8 p.m. to 10.30 p.m. on a Wednesday and from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. on a Thursday.
Those four options were put to the Government members in a preferential ballot. As a result of the distribution of preferences, 53 votes were recorded for the motion which I am now submitting to the House. I therefore put it to the House on the basis of its being a compromise within the Government parties on those alternative hours that were available to us. I understand, as I explained before, that there will be difficulties at lunch time on Tuesdays and Wednesdays. I do not believe that the commencement half an hour earlier of a Thursday will disadvantage honourable members, although, as the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) has suggested, there are many things which honourable members need to do prior to the sitting of the Parliament and that commencement half an hour earlier will make it all that more difficult for them to be concluded by the time that the House in fact sits.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOUSE-CONSTRUCTION AND
FITTING OUT
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House) (4.37)-1 move:
(I) That, in accordance with the provisions of section 8 of the Parliament House Construction Authority Act 1979, the House of Representatives declares the construction and fitting-out of the building that is to constitute Parliament House, together with-
(a) the construction, on the site of Parliament House, of access roads, parking areas and other facilities to be provided on that site in connection with Parliament House; and
(b) the landscaping of that site,
to be a declared stage in the construction of Parliament House for thepurposes of that section, and
(2) That a message be sent to the Senate acquainting it of the resolution agreed to by the House of Representatives.
The reason for the moving of this motion is known to honourable members, and that is that under the Bill introduced to enable the construction of the new parliament house there is a requirement for the Parliament to approve of certain stages of the construction before the Parliament House Construction Authority is allowed to let tenders or to accept contracts and proceed at that stage. The

614 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

New Parliament House-Construction

motion is the first of a two-stage process that will require parliamentary approval for the construction and fitting out of the new parliament house. The motion seeks to define the construction as a declared stage in accordance with the provisions of section 8 of the Parliament House Construction Authority Act 1979. A subsequent motion will seek parliamentary approval for the Construction Authority to proceed with work as defined by the declared stage.
It is anticipated that the second motion will be brought forward next week for debate. In the meantime, honourable members are encouraged to examine the report of the Parliament House Construction Authority, which was tabled by Mr Speaker at the beginning of this week, and also the report of the Joint Standing Committee on the New Parliament House, which also was tabled early this week, and to inspect the display which I understand is mounted in one of the rooms of this building. It will give them an opportunity to see the concept as it is now developing and to offer their own views if they feel it needs modification or adjustment at the time the debate is resumed in this House. I therefore commend this motion to the House.
Mr LES JOHNSON (Hughes) (4.43)-The Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) is engaged in the process of causing the House to discharge its obligations under the provisions of the Parliament House Construction Authority Act 1979. Under that Act the Parliament is given the right to declare stages in the design or construction of the new parliament house, the commencement of each stage having to be authorised by Parliament. That is covered by section 8 of the Act. I take this opportunity to mark the occasion, as I think we should take the opportunity to mark each successive stage, because clearly the provisions were incorporated in the Act to ensure that the Parliament would take an intelligent interest in respect of the construction progress of the new parliament house and it should not pass as an insignificant occasion-not that anybody, in my view, is in a position to criticise what has happened to the present.
We have had the benefit this week, as the Leader of the House indicated, of having tabled in the House the schematic design report provided by the Parliament House Construction Authority. I think it is a well prepared report. Whoever is responsible for it is deserving of congratulations. I am not altogether impressed with the fact that in respect of this great bit of Australiana we have bypassed our own Government Printer. It seems that the Government Printer might not have been

given the opportunity of producing this report; instead it went to a private printer in Canberra, who made a good job of it. But there is no printer in Australia superior to the Government Printer. No one has better facilities. I think that it is unfortunate that this symbolism is involved in the construction of Australia's parliament house. I hope that this will be the end of the nonsense about utilising to the maximum possible extent the pub-
lic resources that exist in all matters relating to the construction of the parliament house.
I am surprised also that more information is not available about the progress that has been made. The Leader of the House certainly has not mentioned anything that counts. Is everything proceeding satisfactorily? I noticed a cursory mention in the report that there have been very significant changes. For example, the whole building complex has been raised by an average of two metres to reduce the amount of excavation required. One can probably make a lot of changes to contain costs. If one is to make enormous changes I think that is a quite significant factor. The report states that the overall profile of the building has been maintained by lowering the upper floor levels by a total of two metres. I think the Parliament is entitled to a continued flow of information about the cost factors. When this session of the Parliament began there was speculation that construction of the parliament house was to become a casualtyof the Government's economic and financial dilemmas. 'We certainly do not want to see that kind of expediency creeping into the matter. I hope that we are business bent and are involved in a long term specific objective. The Parliament does not want to be taken for a ride now or in the future. Honourable members do not want to arrive here one day, maybe before an election, to find that they are cashing in on some Press speculation byabandoning or setting back the project for the purpose of winning votes or something of that kind.
In my view, and it is the view that I have expressed consistently, we have a great obligation to keep an eagle eye on this whole scene because prices will escalate beyond comprehension. In fact, they have already escalated to a very serious
degree. I am not sure whether it is generally understood that when the successful designer submitted the tender it was said that the cost of the completed project would not exceed $151 m. The new design as at June 1980 went past the estimate of $151m to $156.4m. In August 1980 when the whole thing was revised the estimate went up from the initial $151m to $220m-a jump of something like 46 per cent. We are now told that at May 1981 prices the cost of the building stands

New Parliament House-Construction

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 615

at $296m, an increase of 35 per cent. So the estimated cost has gone from an initial $151 m to $296m. The estimated cost of the building has almost doubled.
I said in the Parliament quite some time ago, in fact in August 1980, that in my view the new parliament house would finally be constructed at a cost in the vicinity of $500m, not $15Im. Once again I make that prediction. The cost will go from $151m to $500m. As I have said, the latest estimate is already close to double the original estimate. Let me remind the House of the dangerous situation that prevails in respect of this kind of project. The Opera House is the best example I can give. Originally it was to be a $9m project. The final cost was up by a factor of 14 to 1 or 1,400 per cent. The cost finally rose from $9m to $124m. Having regard to that example and having regard to the trend that is in evidence in respect of the new Parliament House, that is almost a doub, ling of the price up to now. I think I am being reasonable in simply saying that as each successive stage requires the approval of the Parliament, the members of parliament as well as the people of Australia are entitled to receive a lot of information. I would like to know, for example, the extent to which Australian resources will be put to use in the construction of the building, the use of Australian architects, Australian tradesmen and how the work force will move up and down during the construction stages so that assistance can be given to Canberra in the provision of housing, transport, education facilities and the rest of it. In other words, the matter is being treatea far too cursorily. I am glad that we have available the Parliament House Construction Authority Act of 1979 which acknowledges this building to be a significant development. I hope the next time we are required to report to the Parliament for approval in respect of another phase of the project, we will be given more information than hitherto we have had the 'benefit of receiving.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (4.49)-We have just heard a speech from the honourable member for Hughes (Mr Les Johnson) who I think we can refer to as a certain sceptic on the subject of this new Parliament House. I just briefly want to say that on 18 August Mr Speaker wrote to each honourable member inviting him to attend an exhibition in one of the rooms in this building for
an outline of the progress that has been made in relation to the construction of the new Parliament House. We were invited to attend on two occasions, from 7.15 to 7.45 last night, Wednesday 19 August, and between similar times next Tuesday, 25 August. I, along with the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) who is

present in the House was one of the few members who attended last night and I think you, Mr Deputy Speaker, were there as well. There were very few of us there. I want to assure the House that all the questions very properly raised by the honourable member for Hughes were, I believe, answered adequately by Mr Richard Thorp, the Australian architect who is in charge of construction. I think each of us has to make up his mind whether a country like Australia is to have any great buildings of note. I believe a rich country like ours should have some great buildings of which we can be proud. We should, as the honourable member for Hughes has said, properly monitor the construction of such projects, but we have to go a little further and take advantage of those occasions on which we can get a report on a construction such as this one. I do hope that those great many honourable members who did not attend last night will take the opportunity to attend next Tuesday night to receive a report from Mr Richard Thorp and others about the construction of the building.
The fact is that prices will increase along with inflation, but strong assurances were given to those who were present last night that there has not been any increase other than the normal inflationary increase and an increase resulting from specific requests which had been made by members and other users of the new building. Such requests had been properly authorised by the committee that we set up to oversee this project and they required additional appropriation. I repeat, I have risen merely to draw attention to the opportunity that each honourable member has to find out the answers to the sorts of questions that were raised by the honourable member for Hughes. However, I can agree with him when he says that it would be best if the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair), who is sitting at the table, in outlining these matters before the House drew attention to the occasions when honourable members can keep themselves informed on the project.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
RETIREMENT OF MRS NANCY SHAW
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House)~Mr Deputy Speaker, with your indulgence I inform the House that Nancy Shaw is retiring today after II years service on the Parliament House switchboard. There are many girls in the bowels of this place who look after each of us a's members and I would like to wish Nancy Shaw well in her future, thank her for the services she has rendered to the Parliament and trust that in whatever new employment or retirement she now

616 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

enters she can enjoy a long life and much happiness.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford Smith)-In the spirit of goodwill I welcome the chance to agree with my colleague the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair). On behalf of theLabor Party, we wish Nancy Shaw well. We obviously hear her voice often but seldom see her which is one of the difficulties in this place. The switchboard is a very essential part of communications in this place. If we did not have the switchboard we would probably lose our seats on occasions. On behalf of the Opposition, we very much appreciate the services that are rendered by staff such as Nancy. We hope she has enjoyed her experiences here, perhaps more so than many of us I would think, and on that basis we hope her retirement is a very long, healthy and happy one.
OVERSEAS AID PROGRAM 1981-82
Ministerial Statement
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs)-by leave-The Treasurer (Mr Howard) indicated in his Budget Speech that I would be making a statement to the House on the 1981-82 overseas aid program. It is important that the Government's decisions on aid be placed in the wider context of the Government's policies towards the Third World. Our policies towards the Third World take account of the three levels at which we must consider these relations-the global, regional and national levels. At present, the most pressing global issue is the problem of reconciling the interests and established practices of the industrialised countries of the north and the demands for a greater political and economic role by the developing countries of the South. Australia does not fit either description very easily although we tend to be identified with the industrialised countries. However, this does not make the issue any less important to us. There is a particular need to consider the relevance of the issues which are involved in the North-South dialogue at a time when Australia is about to host the meeting which will bring together significant members of both groupings.
The Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting will be attended by some 40 heads of government of a range of countries at all stages of development. It will be the most important meeting yet held in Australia and one which has a wider international importance extending beyond the Commonwealth itself. This is because of the time of the meeting, its agenda and the atmosphere in which it will be conducted. At Melbourne, developed and developing nations can

consider the issues without being bound by the institutional groupings which so often characterise and impede progress in other forums. The Melbourne meeting will have as a central theme and an essential part of its agenda the present state of the North-South dialogue and the question of how to move ahead. Its timing is, as I mentioned, particularly significant. It follows the Ottawa summit of the industrialised countries and the recent meetings of Foreign Ministers in Mexico to prepare for the North-South summit to be held there in October shortly after the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. The meetings held so far in Ottawa and Mexico have established important common ground between developed and developing countries and each has represented a step forward towards a revival of the North-South dialogue. It is the Government's hope that the Melbourne meeting will make further positive progress.
Australia's interest in relations between developed and developing countries is of long standing and reflects our geographic situation and out political, strategic and economic interests. Nor should there be any doubt about the importance attached to the North-South dialogue by both the developed and developing country members of the Commonwealth. Honourable members will be aware that emissaries have been sent to all Commonwealth countries to find out from heads of government what they believe ought to be discussed at the Melbourne meeting. The emissaries have since reported back to the Government and these reports reveal there is a clear consensus on the urgency of North-South issues and the need for progress. We believe that CHOGM should give a positive signal to the Mexico summit. We expect it will and that the seven Commonwealth heads of government who will go to Mexico will take with them a clear message and perception of how progress can be made.
Although there are doubts about how to proceed, it is apparent that there is a need for a new process of global discussions between developed and developing countries. The foundation for these discussions, the so-called global negotiations, has been laid in the United Nations. A further effort to create a favourable climate will be made at CHOGM. The issues for the world community to consider have been refined into four headings: Food and agriculture, trade flows, energy, and international financial questions, in particular the debt problems of developing countries. We expect CHOGM to focus attention on these issues and to identify practical measures and arrangements to improve the situation in each of them.

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 617

Food and Agriculture
The problems of world food security are immensely complex. Too often these problems are
seen only in terms of famines and crises. However, the harsh reality is the need to deal with the permanent problem through the creation of adequate global food security arrangements and elimination of persistent food shortages. The increasing gap between food demand and supply in many developing countries, especially in Africa, has been aggravated by population pressure and the progressive destruction of agricultural land by cutting down trees, overcropping and overgrazing in the search for food and fire-wood. The statistics may seem abstract, but the impact on human lives and the development process is dramatic and continuing. Some 500 million of the world's population suffer from chronic malnutrition and hundreds of millions more suffer periodic and debilitating food deficiencies brought about often by the fact that they simply do not have enough money to buy food.
Despite encouraging harvest predictions for the next 12 months the overall global situation gives no cause for optimism. World food production declined on a per capita basis over the two previous years and world carry-over stocks of cereals are at their lowest level since 1975-76, although there is some prospect of an improvement this year. Food aid is still running well behind targets set by the Food and Agriculture Organisation.
Against this sombre background and fully
aware of the vital part which agricultural and rural development must play in providing a base for economic development, Australia will increase its own efforts, and encourage those of others, including the work of the Commonwealth Secretariat and the Commonwealth Fund for Technical Co-operation. We will do this in two ways-first, through addressing the short term problem of food shortages in developing countries by the provision of food aid. Second, we will help tackle the long term problem-that of helping developing countries to meet more of their own food needs in the future. Developing countries need to encourage increased food production by their own farmers. We shall assist countries to develop and implement effective food strategies, by strengthening agricultural research, technology and training facilities; and by playing a full part in international efforts to improve global food security. In addition we shall add our support to combating protectionism in the agricultural sector. That protectionism has severely damaged the economies of many developing countries, as well as our own, by reducing their foreign exchange
earnings and employment opportunities and

inhibiting efficient agricultural production. There will be increased emphasis on food security measures in this year's aid program with some $106m being provided for these activities.
Further gains in agricultural production in developing countries depend to a significant degree on advances in basic agricultural research. Australia has a proved ability to contribute in this area. We are already supporting such research both bilaterally and internationally, through our contributions to the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research for bodies such as the International Rice Research Institute in the Philippines. However, we have resources within Australia-in the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation, the universities and State bodies which can and must be tapped to a greater extent than is now the case.
The Government has therefore decided to establish an agricultural research centre in Australia concerned with the .needs of developing countries. The new centre, which will be known as the Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research-ACIAR-will be established as a small statutory body responsible to me as Minister for Foreign Affairs. The centre will not engage in research itself. It will be charged with contracting research work to existing Australian institutions in the field of agriculture and related disciplines for the benefit of developing countries and its principal 'aim will be to contribute to the solution of agricultural problems in these countries. Research work will be carried out in developing countries as appropriate. Opportunities will be sought to involve research and extension workers from developing countries. To ensure the effectiveness of the new centre, a high level advisory council representative of the Australian, developing country and international scientific communities will be established to set the research priorities of the new centre and review the progress of research programs undertaken. In addition, the centre will be served by a small secretariat of high professional quality.
The Government has decided that a trust fund should be set up for the centre and that the initial commitment should be $25m over four years. Expenditure during its first year is expected to be $1 m. An amount of $2.1 m has also been set aside for food security measures intended to assist the development of secure production, marketing and distribution facilities in the food economies of some of our principal aid recipients. This assistance will be in addition to our existing country programs and will be provided by a mix of commodity aid and technical assistance, as well as

618 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

support for relevant programs developed by international bodies.
Food aid also can play an important role in improving food security in low income food-deficit countries. A significant increase-from $87m in 1980-81 to $100m in 1981-82-has been included for the food aid program, which has an immediate impact on the poor and hungry in developing countries. There are a number of innovations in this food aid program, including: The payment of freight on an increased portion of food aid in recognition of increasing freight costs; provision of 80,000 tonnes of freight-paid grain to Africa to be provided on a bilateral basis but channelled through the World Food Program; and a contribution of at least 45,000 tonnes to the International Emergency Food Reserve which will be used to help overcome unexpected and sudden food shortages.
Energy
The world economy generally, and non-oil producing developing countries in particular, have experienced considerable difficulty in adjusting to the second oil price shock of 1979-80. Overall, the oil bill as a proportion of gross national product for non-oil producing developing countries nearly doubled. For some individual countries in this group, a substantial portion of their export earnings is needed simply to meet the cost of imported oil. This obviously restricts the economic development of these countries and, in turn, their opportunity to expand economic relations with developed countries.
The debt burden has created a critical situation for most oil importing developing countries. Even those which can borrow money in the commercial markets face serious uncertainties in planning their future.
The primary responsibility for developing energy must always rest with national governments. However, the Government recognises that international efforts need to be made to tackle the global energy problem and the particular problems of non-oil producing developing countries.
Australia, for its part, has been active in promoting regional initiatives designed to assist developing countries in their attempts to r\!duce dependence on imported oil. We fund the Commonwealth Regional Renewable Energy Resources Information Service-CRRERIS-and other activities established under the Commonwealth Heads of Government Regional Meeting Energy Group. We have been active in promoting and have recently organised discussion on increased coal utilisation for Association of South

East Asian countries. Australia funded an energy planning workshop in Papua New Guinea in July for some 20 developing countries in the region and was a major contributor to the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific Secretariat's study into the particular energy problems of the ESCAP region. There is, in addition, an increasing 'energy focus' in Australia's bilateral development assistance.
Urgent measures are required to assist developing countries reduce dependence on imported oil through increased oil exploration, conservation, substitution and development of alternative energy sources. The principal issues relate to oil supply and price, conservation arid the nature of financial assets exchanged for oil. These are primarily matters between members of the Organisation of Petroleum Exporting Countries and the major Western industrial and financial countries. However, CHOGM will provide an opportunity to consider measures to alleviate the special problems of developing countries. We support establishment of the proposed World Bank Energy Affiliate as a fund to develop new sources of oil and to promote the use of alternative energy sources. Australia believes however that increased energy lending by the World Bank to assist developing countries reduce dependence on imported oil shOlild not have to await establishment of the proposed Affiliate. Australia welcomes therefore the recent announcement by the World Bank that it will increase and diversify its energy lending in 1981.
The Commonwealth can take effective steps to assist developing countries in other ways. Initiatives which Australia is prepared to propose include extension throughout the Commonwealth of the types of services provided by the Commonwealth Regional Renewable Energy Resources Information Service, which collects and disseminates information throughout the region and which will also provide an advisory service for member countries. Australia would be willing to collaborate in providing advice on establishing similar services in other regions of the Commonwealth and in assisting with training personnel in energy planning.
We shall, also work in international bodies to strengthen the flow of investment in oil and t<nergy exploration and development by encouraging the participation of private enterprise, particularly in developing countries where there has been a significant falling off in such activity. Private investment can be an extremely important source of development finance. At the same time, it may not satisfy all requirements and a significant role

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 619

is likely to remain for development finance from official sources.
We are also participating actively in the United Nations Conference which is presently taking place in Nairobi on New and Renewable Sources of Energy. The Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) who led the Australian delegation, pointed to Australia's own extensive experience in seeking to develop alternative energy sources and announced that Australia would allocate an additional $lm for energy assistance following the Conference.
Trade
In the area of trade and commodities, the environment for world trade is deteriorating. The developed countries continue to face high levels of inflation and unemployment. Protectionist pressures have been mounting in major trading countries and protectionist measures are now applied to sectors which account for nearly 30 per cent of world trade.
Increased opportunities for trade, however, offer the most promising avenues for many developing countries for greater prosperity. The greatest degree of economic growth among developing countries has been achieved by those which have focused on export strategies.
Australia, for its part, has taken substantial steps to improve access for an increasing range of imports from developing countries. On a per capita basis, Australia is a major importer of manufactured goods from developing countries. For example, Australia imports more textile and clothing products from developing couritries that any other developed country on a per capita basis. The concessional arrangements which we offer developing countries through such arrangements as PATCRA and SPARTECA are helpful and as I found at the recent South Pacific Forum valued highly. These agreements are complemented by actively promoting the products of developing countries in the Australian market.
The Government's recent announcement that it would call for a report within six months from the Industries Assistance Commission on the general question of tariff protection is a practical demonstration of its willingness to have Australia's own protection arrangements carefully examined. I should note that this timetable is well ahead of the original schedule for the inquiry.
There is an additional national interest in seeking to make best use of our domestic resources. Some structural adjustment of our own industries may be involved. To avoid unacceptable social and economic costs, this process must be gradual.

A number of steps could be taken by the Commonwealth to improve global trading conditions and assist developing countries with their particular problems. It could call on the meeting of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade Trade Ministers in 1982 to consider issues which have an impact of the trade of developing countries. We would hope that the Melbourne meeting would urge a wider signature and ratification of the Common Fund and call for more pledges to its Second Account.
International Financial Questions
The debt of developing countries has grown considerably during the 1970s, even when allowance is made for inflation. To a significant degree, this increase in indebtedness has been caused by oil price rises in 1973-74 and 1979-80 and added to recently by steep rises in international interest rates. The trends indicate that developing countries will face more serious debt management problems in the future-particularly those developing economies which are experiencing dynamic growth and therefore need capital as well as some low income countries having difficulty in paying for the rising costs of imports, especially oil.
The international financial institutions have expanded and adapted to changed economic circumstances and responded to some of the needs of developing countries. The International Monetary Fund has played an expanded role in recycling oil surpluses to developing countries and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development has stepped up its activities in lending to developing countries. There is also an urgent need for those countries themselves to adjust their national policies so as to improve their economic performance and their balance of payments situation.
On specific measures, Australia would support increased International Monetary Fund capacity to assist in financing and the adjustment of large external deficits. It is important that nations act quickly to provide their contributions to the World Bank's resources. Australia supports consideration being given to a higher ratio of lending by the World Bank in relation to its capital resources. A number of these issues will be considered at the forthcoming meeting of the Commonwealth Finance Ministers where Australia will seek to play an active and positive part.
Aid
I have spoken of the issues facing the world community under the four headings of Food and

620 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

Agriculture, Trade Flows, Energy and International Financial Questions. Many of the practical actions which Australia has taken in these areas involve us in significant expenditures under our overseas aid program.
Overseas aid is itself an important element of the North-South dialogue. The actions of developed countries on this issue of the transfer of resources to developing countries are seen by the Third World as a measure of our commitment to the achievement of real progress in the NorthSouth dialogue. The world community will benefit if all its members can share the resources and conditions necessary for a decent standard of living. Hundreds of millions of people in developing countries are deprived of such basic necessities as adequate shelter, nutrition, health and education.
Of course, there is a substantial element of self interest for Australia in promoting higher startdards ofEving and political stability in developing countries, particularly in neighbouring ones. The world community will benefit if all its member can share the resources and conditions necessary for a decent standard of living. Hundreds of millions of people in developing countries are deprived of such basic necessities as adequate shelter, nutrition, health and education.
Of course, there is a substantial element of self interest for Australia in promoting higher standards of living and political stability in developing countries, particularly in neighbouring ones. As a democratic Western society in the Southern Hemisphere, Australia more than most aid donors has a real and direct interest in supporting the development efforts of Third World countries.
As there is greater economic advancement in developing countries, so trading opportunities for Australia will expand. Many Australian companies already benefit from commercial opportunities flowing directly from the aid program. Often Australian expertise is a necessary requirement for the efficient use of Australian aid funds, particularly for agricultural development projects.
Aid can also serve long term foreign policy interests. The Soviet Union has shown by its past actions that it will willingly exploit situations of poverty and hunger, but the amount of genuine development aid provided by the Soviet Union to recipient countries is small-both absolutely and in comparison with the military equipment it provides.
It is in this context that aid which offers practical assistance to development can help achieve foreign policy objectives. I am not talking of using

aid as some sort of lever or bribe in an attempt to buy short term political advantage. Nevertheless, aid must provide a basis for mutual understanding which can grow only if donors show an appreciation of the legitimate developmental goals and aspirations of the recipient.
This year's Budget makes provision for expenditure of $662.3m on official development assistance in 1981-82. This represents an increase of $104m over actual expenditure in the last financial year. Of the total amount, $637.7m will be used for direct expenditure on aid activities by the Australian Development Assistance Bureau within the Department of Foreign Affairs, $15.4m by the Treasury while the balance is accounted for by development-related activities undertaken by other government departments and instrumentalities.
The increase of over $lOOm over our 1980-81 aid expenditure level is evidence of our acceptance of aid as a key element in the North-South debate. It will mean that the proportion of Australia's gross national product actually spent as official development assistance will rise from 0.43 per cent in 1980-81 to 0.45 per cent in 1981-82. On the basis of comparing aid with gross nation product, Australia is ranked in middle of the 16 major Western aid donors, although the quality and terms of our aid are better than those of most other donors.
In addition, the aid program involves significant expenditures and hence benefits at home. I am thinking here of the supply of Australian grain and other foodstuffs as food aid and the purchase of a range of Australian goods and services. We intend to maintain these features of the program and, indeed, to look for further ways in which to develop mutually beneficial aid flows.
Paralleling the Government's decision to provide an increase in the level of the aid program, efforts to ensure that the increased funding is used in the most effective way possible will be continued. Of course, existing obligations to our near neighbours and to international organisations and development bodies account for a large portion of this amount. In fact, almost 90 per cent of the total amount will be directed to maintaining ongoing programs. There has nevertheless been considerable scope to introduce further initiatives within the program and to expand existing programs. I have already mentioned some of the most important of these in the context of food and agriculture and energy.
I would now like to mention some of the aid program's major components and to elaborate on

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 621

some of the initiatives included within it. Further details are set out in Budget Paper No.8.
Assistance to Papua New Guinea
As in previous years, Papua New Guinea will be the major single recipient, with $254m being allocated for that country in 1981-82. This amount includes the first budget-support grant from within the new five-year PNG-Australia aid agreement announced in September 1980. The purpose of this agreement, which is of great importance to PNG, is to provide that country with a long term framework within which to plan its future development.
The Bilateral Projects Program
About $145m has been allocated for project and technical assistance activities in a large number of countries, principally in South East Asia and the Pacific. In both these regions we have major long term commitments to provide assistance. Whilst there is a good deal of emphasis within the ASEAN program upon large scale projects, the program to the South Pacific region includes a large number of small projects and different forms of aid designed to meet the needs of these small island states. In total, there will be about a $5m increase in the level of bilateral aid to the South Pacific this year. In addition, there will be a substantial increase in our support for regional activities in the South Pacific. I will refer to these later in this statement. To keep pace with the changing requirements of the South Pacific new forms of aid have been introduced. over recent years. One particular form of assistance which will be given increasing prominence in 1981-82 is the funding of joint ventures in the region. One million dollars has been set aside to provide grants for the purchase of island equity in joint ventures with Australian companies. It is anticipated that the economies of the South Pacific countries will benefit from this through income and employment creation.
Training
Some 3,300 overseas students and trainees will be sponsored by the Australian Government in 1981-82. This is a significant increase on 1980-81 numbers and reflects the increased emphasis that recipient countries are placing on their human resources and the high level of goodwill generated by the program. Within the training program, for which $24m has been povided, it is proposed to increase English language training opportunities and to give further emphasis to training senior administrators. Additional support will also be provided for training within developing countries.

Support for Non-Government Organisations
I would like once again to express my appreciation of the important work being undertaken by Australian non-government bodies. They have a special role to play in serving some of the areas of most serious need in developing countries and operating in a way, and often on a scale, more effectively than the official government program. An expression of the Government's support is reflected in the decision to make donations tax deductible to the major bodies involved. Assistance for these organisations will rise from $2.9m in 1980-81 to $5.2m in 1981-82. Within this amount a new scheme known as the Australian Executive Service Overseas Program will be funded. This Scheme, which makes use of the skills of the Australian business community, is being introduced on a trial basis in 1981-82 with the support of the Confederation Australian Industry. A specific allocation of $400,000 is earmarked for nongovernment organisation projects in the South Pacific region.
Multilateral Aid
Total multilateral assistance will amount to $142m in 1981-82, an increase of $41 m on expenditure in 1980-81. Expenditure of $11.6m for capital increases in the resources of the World Bank and its private sector arm, the Internatioanal Finance Corporation, is included in the program. A $3.6m contribution is also provided to the Commonwealth Fund for Technical Cooperation to meet priority technical assistance needs of developing Commonwealth countries. This represents a substantial increase over the previous levels and reflects the confidence of the Government in the CFTC as a means of assisting the development efforts of developing Commonwealth members. Increases will be made in our pledges to the United Nations Development Program, United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund, United Nations Relief and Works Agency, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and United Nations Fund for Populating Activities. The increases, which amount to approximately $4.3m, reflect the Government's support for the special role which these bodies can play in providing development assistance at the global level. Contributions to the United Nations Industrial Development Fund and the United Nations Research Institute for Social Development will also be made for the first time in 1981-82.
Regional Co-operation
Australia is particularly keen to support regional co-operation efforts. Perhaps the leading

622 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

success story in this area has been the degree of co-operation developed in the ASEAN region. Part of Australia's response has been the development of the ASEAN-Australia economic cooperation program. The program which is jointly funded by Australia and ASEAN was established in 1974. It supports projects and activities designed and implemented by ASEAN. A major benefit of the program has been the degree of cooperation and collaboration among research and technical personnel in the ASEAN countries. This has stimulated research and development activities, technology transfer and mutual assistance. An amount of $7.5m has been made available for the program by Australia in 1981-82. Similarly, within the South Pacific we are increasing our support for regional co-operation through contributions to a number of activities, including the Pacific Forum Line, seabed research and the University of the South Pacific.
Refugees and Emergency Relief
Over the last 12 months, there have been further tragic increases in the number of refugees throughout the world, including in East Africa, Kampuchea and Afghanistan. To alleviate the extreme hardships which these people face, Australia will continue to support international appeals and provide emergency aid, mainly in the form of food. One example of this is the Government's recent decision to provide significant amounts of wheat, high protein milk biscuits and sugar for Afghan refugees in Pakistan. An amount of $8.5m has been set aside to meet our obligations to special international appeals. Two million dollars of this amount is already committed to fulfil a commitment announced in April this year at the International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa.
Aid and the Private Sector
The Government is actively promoting the involvement of the Australian private sector in the aid program. Thus some 64 projects worth $60m are now being handled by private consultants. Attempts are being made to tap the skills of Australian companies in other ways. One example, in the South Pacific, is our support of joint ventures between Australian firms and island partners. Another response has been the introduction of a scheme specifically for ASEAN countries known as the development import finance facility. The idea of the scheme is to reduce the cost to ASEAN governments of importing capital goods and services from Australia for development purposes to match the export finance terms of other developed countries. By offering a grant to support such transactions the

Australian Government aims to enable recipient countries to purchase needed capital goods and services on better terms than are available under existing concessional finance.
Conclusion
I am sure that it is no exaggeration to state that the relationship between the developed and developing countries is now at a crucial stage. A great deal more is at stake than economic and commercial advantage. Important political and strategic considerations are involved. It is essential that the Western democratic nations show they can respond to this situation, to the opportunities as well as problems which are posed. The USSR has demonstrated both its unwillingness and its inability to provide the assistance which the Third World needs if the great mass of humanity is to achieve the prosperity it seeks. The USSR cannot provide the markets, capital, technology, the flexibility of adjustment which has made the West the dynamic force in international development. The USSR may offer arms, ideology and disruption but they bring chaos not prosperity. The USSR has always stood aside from the North-South debate seeking to hide its inability to make a positive contribution behind out-dated, empty arguments about the responsibility of former colonial powers.
We in the West, the developed democracies, can show our ability to respond to a new challenge, to bring about a new period of growth and prosperity. We cannot do this by seeking to exclude the developing countries or isolate ourselves from them. Nor can we ignore them and their problems. We still have time and the opportunity to find a solution within the existing international framework. It would be misleading to suggest that any solution will be arrived at easily-without a long process of negotiation and reconciliation. The effort must be made because the alternative of economic Darwinism-of the extinction of the weakest or the survival of only the most powerful-is not acceptable nor is it in Australia's interest. Australia, as host, has a unique opportunity at .the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne to give the NorthSouth dialogue a new impetus. We must make the most of that opportunity. I expect that members on both sides of the House will support this objective and that we will achieve bipartisan agreement about what has to be done. I present the following paper:
Overseas Aid Program 1981-82-Ministerial Statement, 20 August 1981.
Motion (by Mr Moore) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 623

Motion (by Mr Moore )-by leave-agreed to:
That leave be given to the Deputy Leader of the Opposition to speak for 42 minutes.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (5.30)-The Qpposition notes with interest the statement just put down by the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street). Whilst I want to make a detailed reply to it, let me say at the outset that we applaud the concept of establishing, for example, an agricultural research centre. I think that is essential. I would like to see encompassed in it also an obligation to get land reform in the areas in which research gets the benefit. One of the difficulties in the past has been that whilst we might be helping countries to develop some of their techniques, there is no land reform so that the poor become even poorer and those who have land become so much richer. I think it is essential to talk about energy in the present world and to talk about alternative energy resources, particularly ethanol. That also applies to the effective and efficient use of land resources. I note and applaud the fact that there is to be a program for the training of students. That we welcome, because it all helps the people in the areas we are talking about.
Let me advert to another matter which the Minister was anxious to emphasise, namely, what is wrong with the Soviet Union. There is plenty wrong with the Soviet Union. But page 17 of the statement tabled talks in terms of the Soviet Union giving aid more on the basis of military equipment than otherwise. I would say in fairness that other countries are just as guilty of that. When we talk about refugees, which the Minister has done, and the problems facing those refugees, it would be worthwhile to include those coming from Latin America, the Lebanon and Vietnam. There are in those areas circumstances which clearly indicate that there is likely to be an increase in refugees, and we would not want to limit any discussion to one ideology overcoming another. The issue should be faced up to squarely-there is much that Australia can do in a number of areas.
On that note of what we can do, this Budget contains an 18 per cent increase in our overseas development assistance. I congratulate the Foreign Minister for that. I know that he has had to work hard to get it. But let us look at the reason that it happened at this late stage. Could it not be said that it is due to the fact that there is about to be a Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Australia and our Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) wants to go there on the basis that he is an international statesman who has been interested in aid for a very long time? If I may use

some words used in Question Time earlier today, the Prime Minister will certainly have some temporary clothes as an emperor when he appears at CHOGM, but until now he has been bereft of any equipment to c'onvince the developing countries that we have been sincere about our overseas aid and their development.
We do not want to see aid given on the basis of 'now you see our aid and now you do not', which appears to have been the routine. Let us look at the facts in strict terms: The present increase in aid will only partly make up for the cuts in real terms which the Government has made since it came t6 office. In spite of the promises made over the past four years about moving towards a target of 0.7 per cent, there has been no commitment by this Government to further increases as expressed in percentage terms. In other words, this could be a carefully staged oncer, and we would object to that. On June 14 1977 the Prime Minister stated that Australia agreed with a target of 0.7 per cent and gave an assurance that the Australian Government would maintain its commitment. I emphasise that that was in 1977. That was reaffirmed at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in London in 1977 and has been reaffirmed since.
But the facts are otherwise. The previous Labor Party Government consistently increased Australia's aid and by 1975 we were well on the way to achieving the target. In fact, Australia's overseas aid contribution reached 0.65 per cent of its gross national product. By 1979, however, Australia's aid had declined to 0.52 per cent of its gross national product. In 1976, the first year of the present Government, it dropped dramatically to a miserly 0.41 per cent. In 1977 it was increased to 0.42 per cent and in 1978 it was increased to 0.55 per cent. Those figures were taken from the annual review of the Australian Development Assistance Bureau. In real terms our overseas aid dropped by 20 per cent in four years. Just to keep pace with inflation, let alone any movement towards the target, the Prime Minister would have had to provide $600m in aid in 1980-81. In that year his Government provided only $550m.
The contributions of the present Government have not even marked time. Up to this Budget it spent four years moving away from the target it so earnestly professed to be moving towards. We have heard all the usual excuses that economic conditions have not been appropriate and that inflation must be conquered, but times have also been difficult in other countries, not the least of which would be Denmark, Norway, Sweden and the Netherlands. These countries have exceeded the target of 0.7 per cent with ease. In fact, some

624 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

of them are now approaching a level of one per cent. in the meantime,- the contribution of this Government which is now styling itself as the advocate of the North-South dialogue has moved only from 0.43 per cent to 0.45 per cent of our gross national product. This does not compensate in real terms or percentage terms for the Government's backsliding in the last four years. It will be interesting to see, when the fanfare of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting is over and the 1982 Budget rolls around, whether the Government will be able to respond to the continued increases in needs. We will look to that with interest.
We note the large increase in the share of overseas aid to be allotted to non-government organisations for distribution and application. The Labor Party recommended that course and applauds it. We are glad to see the Government adopting our suggestion in those terms. Such agencies and organisations believe that they could efficiently handle up to $20m of government aid funds, with the increase in their share phased in over several years. I hope that this Budget's increase to the non-government aid agencies will be the first phase and that the Government in its two remaining years in office will continue to give these agencies more funds to distribute in their own specialised and efficient way.
I wish to comment also on changes in the area of food aid. The funds allotted to overseas food aid have been increased by some $13m but the way in which that increase has been directed cannot pass without some questioning. Most of the increase has gone to bilateral food aid-that is, to the country-to-country section. The increase to the multilateral section of the world food program is relatively small. The Opposition would prefer to see more emphasis placed on and more money provided for the world food program. That is because the multilateral food aid programs are much less likely to be affected by political choices. The hungry, no matter what the politics of their governments, are more likely to get food from the world food program than they are from bilateral channels which can be affected by political events.
In this House in April the Opposition called for a review of all our overseas aid to ensure that it was not being allocated to regions where there was a conflict between the government and the local people. I was particularly concerned at that time about the Padap Road and rural construction scheme which we were funding in the southern Philippines. I believe it is essential that

the Australian people should not be asked forand the Australian Government should not commit funds to-any form of military or quasimilitary assistance in the guise of civilian aid. There was a suggestion at the time that I did not understand what was really being done in the Philippines. I recently visited the Philippines and I was again assured that the aid was being intelligently used and sought after. As a result of further questioning I again asked whether there had been any land reform, whether more people had been given the benefit of increased production, whether the produce got to the market so much more efficiently on the roads and what happened before the roads were constructed-I was assured that the produce had been transported by sea and that no land reform program was available to the existing residents.
We should bear in mind that expenditure on this road program runs into some $80m. I decided to pursue the matter further. I was assured by our own officials-no doubt they were well meaning-that the aid was well received and well spent, but my worry was that because there is a rebel group in the same area known as the Moro National Liberation Front which is hostile to the Marcos regime, there may have been some determination to effect our aid program and divert the aid towards implementing what the Marcos Government thought was a law and order matter. Accordingly, when I had the chance to talk to the responsible Minister, the Minister for Highways, he greeted me by thanking me for the aid program and the assistance we were able to provide by way of roads 'because it helps us keep law and order in the area'. I was not going to contest that matter with him, but I am somewhat concerned that I can be misled and that the Minister can be misled. It is not appropriate to think that we can be conned in this fashion. In Budget Paper No.8 we find the following statement:
The basis of our program to ASEA N countries is an openended commitment of $250 million. This commitment was first established in 1977 and has been periodically reviewed.
I would have thought that in any review of the program the Government would give consideration to matters that I have been able to illicit in a matter of a few days by visiting the countries and looking at the situation. I am suggesting that quite simply we need to review constantly not only the size of our programs but also their nature and quality.
I remind the Minister of the following statement in Budget Paper No.8:
Of foremost importance is our acceptance of the right of all human beings to share the resources and conditions necessary for a decent standard of living.

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

20 August 1981 REPRESENTA'rIVES 625

Our geographic location as a wealthy country in a region of developing countries places special responsibilities on us to assist the countries of the South-East Asian and South Pacific regions. This responsibility not only contains a moral element but also a very practical one; it is obviously in our interest that countries in our region see Australia as being willing to assist in their development and that Australia encourages governments with similar outlooks to our own.
I agree completely with the thrust of that statement, but I believe that it is inherently contradictory to suggest that we should help only governments with similar outlooks to our own. Our overseas developmerit assistance should flow from humane considerations, not political ones. I believe that this Government, is irresponsible in refusing, for example, any assistance to the people of Vietnam because it does not like the present political attitudes of the government of that country. We have a particular responsibility to the Vietnamese people. Furthermore, in our own longer term interests, it is extraordinarily short sighted to believe that we could influence the Vietnamese Government's political decisions by contributing to some misguided policy of starving its people or bringing the Government to its knees. We should bear in mind the problems we would face if there were a massive outflow of refugees.
The Prime Minister and this Government purport to be particularly concerned with the progress of the North-South dialogue and its .importance for the short to medium term future of the poorer countries and the long term future of the international community. But there is a glaring contradiction in both practical and philosophical terms between the Government's attitude and its support for a resumed arms race. The hard fact of the matter is that the financial resources, even of the wealthier {;ountries, are finite; and the more money that is spent on neutron bombs, B52 aircraft, MX missiles and the entire appalling array of sophisticated and vastly expensive engines of death and destruction, the less money is left for development assistance programs. More importantly, massive sales of arms substantially increase the risk of regional conflicts which destroy the limited progress already made by some of these poor countries.
The Government's stance in this regard is not progressive. It is retrogressive, and it is not just the Opposition which says so. I had discussions recently with a number of foreign Ministers in countries such as Yugoslavia and Austria. They were unanimous in their view that a way must be found to divert resources away from nuclear and conventional arms proliferation and towards real transfers to increase substantially assistance to the Third World. We find in this Budget that there is

to be an increase of $6m in the level of assistance to Commonwealth African countries and Indian
Ocean states. We also find an acknowledgement
that the Indian Ocean is bordered by many of the poorest countries which are faced with particu-
larly severe problems. We applaud the $6m, but we would be making a much greater contribution
to the welfare of the world and this region if we
could work towards 'an Indian Ocean zone of peace and a diversion to development assistance of some of the massive funds now allo'cated to
military hardware.

One of the most crucial areas for, many

developing countries is the successful conclusion

to the Law of the Sea treaty negotiations. For

many of these countries, particularly our Pacific

Island neighbours, their greatest resources are the

mineral and animate resources of the 200-mile ex-

clusive economic zone 'which that treaty could

give them. Our Pacific neighbours, and other

developing countries, do not want to have con-

tinually to rely on handouts; they want to be self-

supporting. The Law of the Sea treaty, more than'

any other single item on the current international

agenda, would help them towards that goal. What

has happened? Just as the many years of nego-

tiation were about to be concluded the Reagan

Administration refused to accept the arduously

negotiated compromise on a number of key issues

and is threatening to wreck the prospects for an

international treaty because several major United

States ,corporations ,are interested in seabed

mining of their own. Within the last few weeks I

have had discussions with the Prime Minister and

Foreign Minister of Fiji, the Foreign Minister of

Mexico and the Foreign Minister of Canada.

Their hostility towards the complete irres-

ponsibility of the United States in this matter is

very great indeed.

'

I have given notice in this House of a motion on this issue which I believe the Government could agree to. I urge the Government to adopt this motion without further delay; not only because
Australia has fundamental economic and strategic interests in conclusion of this treaty, but also because our poorer neighbours, whom the Prime Minister says he is anxious to help, also have vital interests in its conclusion. The point I am making
is underlined at the very beginning of Budget Paper No.8 which states:

The basic tenet of Australian aid policy is that our development assistance should contribute to the social and economic advancement of people of developing countries, The aim is to
contribute to their self-sustaining development.

It is essential that we give more emphasis to this aspect of development assistance.

626 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

We support the allocation of funds for refugees and emergency relief. But once again the Government's approach is no more than a band-aid therapy. The real aim should be to have policies which avoid the problems which cause massive outflows of refugees. I recently drew the Minister's attention to a statement by the United States that it would have no serious objection to a further military strike by China against Vietnam. What incredible stupidity is that?
If we really care about preventing the creation of future generations of refugees, as well as about those currently searching for a home, we should urge our ally not to encourage military strikes which will create only massive refugee problems.
This Government has a fundamental misconception about North-South issues, and about the way in which economic' forces operate to the detriment of the poorest countries. The Minister said in March last that Australia was seeking to play its part in bringing about in as orderly a manner as possible the move of the poorer countries into the technological age. I will show in a moment that the arrival of the 'technological age' in the poorer countries is nota magic wand. It does not guarantee economic self-reliance. Anyone who believes that is either naive or ill-informed.
Let us look at some of the realities. Most of the developing countries see that existing economic order is geared primarily towards the interests of the developed countries. The economic relationship between these countries is one between u~equal partners.
The key issue, therefore, is: For whose benefit does the existing economic order operate? These issues directly involve transnational corporations, because half of world trade in non-agricultural goods is in transfers of goods and services between the various branches within transnational corporations. This trade is growing 16 per cent per year faster than the traditional 'arm's length' trade. Thus the traditional world market is being replaced by planning within the structures of transnational corporations.
The price of traded goods and services and international specialisation and location of industries is determined less and less by supply and demand and more and more by the transnational corporations themselves.
The growing domination of the international ,market by planning within those corporations has . prompted the United States Senate Finance Committee to note that within these terms 'planning and subsequent monitoring of plan fulfilment have reached a scope and level of detail that ironically resembles more than superficially the

national planning procedures or' communist countries'.

The impact of these developments on developing nations should be recognised. By 1977 the income of the 10 .largest transnational corporations was in excess of the gross domestic product of 80 of the world's nations..

Control of technology is also at issue. Five countries, namely the United States of America, the United Kingdom, West Germany, France and Japan, are responsible for almost 90 per cent of the total research and development in the Organ-
Isation for Economic Co-operation and Developmen't area. The United States receives 90 per cent of the receipts from the sale of technology to developing countries and 50 per cent of the total receipts in the OECD area. Yet ,of these 'sales' of
technology almost 80 per cent ar.e made from the United States head office of the corporation to branches of the same transnational corporation in other countries. Again, these internal transfers of
technology are growing 16 per cerit a year faster than the 'arm's length' sales. Apart from the issue of whether the imported technology is appropriate to the development requirements this exchange is unequal since the United States revenue from technology is 10 times its expenditure on research and development.

Over 25 per cent of new foreign investment is flowing to the developing countries, the bulk of it through transnational corporations. Yet certain corporations tend to promote excessive consumer expenditure by upper income groups or to introduce objectives and a scale of social values incompatible with a development strategy catering to the basic needs of the general population.

My reference for that is the economic editor of

the Far Eastern Eco,nomic Review. He talks

about that particvlar problem and about the

chain of fragmented specialised production which

multinational corporations have built up in the

free trade zones of the world. He says that this

will lengthen as more developing countries are

brought into the arms 'of export industrialisation.

He then makes this point:

'

Moving from labour~intensiye, assembly,type operations

into heavier industry, with its more complex infrastructure,

has entailed heavy external debts arid a great dependence on

energy, most of which is imported oiL " ,

-

The same editor, in another fashiqn, states:

'. . . the small' population and primarily resource-based

nature of the Australian economy has made this country vul-

nerable to the same problems of developing countries, such as

MNC exploitation of natural reSourc~, the costs of foreign in-

vestment, or the deteriorating terms 'Of trade for p'rimary

exports.

~

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 627

Applying this question of how we might help, he said:
Finally, I would like to touch on the impact of export industralisation on the poorer, predominantly agrarian Asian economies. There is substantial evidence that export-led economic strategies have only aggravated unemployment, income inequality, and wasteful resource fiows in developing countries where structural distortions in the economies are historical legacies.
He makes the point:
. . . the export enclaves tend to be foreign dominated, and divorced from whatever local industry that exists.
Export-oriented agro-industry, which is relatively capitalintensive compared with traditional farming, has combined with population pressures to spawn a growing army of the landless unemployed in South Asia, Indonesia, Thailand and the Philippines.
Southeast Asia has become Japan's backyard garden and fishpond. High quality seafood, fruits, vegetables and poultry are processed, canned or frozen, and exported to Japanese and Western markets, with very little intended for intraASEAN trade. In the pursuit of foreign currencies, however, export oriented agro-industries have aggravated income disparities, rural unemployment and malnutrition.
The Government's decision to increase its aid is laudable but, in that context, it should realise that this is only part of the real issue of economic relations between the rich and the poor countries. There is an increasing realisation of the complexity of the development process. Since the process is a basic economic and social transformation a simple infusion of capital may be of limited value. It must be accompanied by other measures. The United Nations Economic and Social Council states:
There is an increasing awareness of the infiuence of foreign companies on the st~ucture of national development. This is especially the case where these corporations are seen as powerful transmitters of models of development of industrial society which are not geared to meeting the basic socioeconomic needs of host developing countries.
For example, the transnational corporations have largely determined the location of mineral processing capacity according to their own needs and not necessarily according to those of the producer nations.
Transnational corporations may decide to locate particular activities elsewhere simply because such a "division of labour" serves the corporate system of vertical integration.
Conspicuously absent in the Governments of the developed countries are explicit policies on international industrial location or division of labour. Such policies could possibly answer the question of what types of transnational corporation activities should be encouraged or discouraged abroad.
The Council further states:
The absence of any international institutions for transnational corporations as well as international investment, comparable to GATT for trade, the IMF for money, and the World Bank for development finance is still a glaring shortcoming.
What has the Government had to say in this area about matters which are of great concern to

developing countries? It calls for tariff reductions by developing countries, including Australia. But that is only one facet and a very small one indeed. Yet this Government confines its self-styled concern to this trade issue alone. The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade estimates that the share of world trade affected by import restrictions, newly introduced or seriously threatened by industrial countries since 1974, amount to only 3 per cent to 5 per cent. We note the call from the Association of South East Asian Nations and other developed countries for tariff reductions. But we also note that foreign control of industry in eight key countries of the ASEAN region has risen from one-third to two-thirds in eight years.
Even in 1971, our Department of the Treasury noted that over one-third of Australia's trade was internal transactions between branches of transnational corporations here and their branches overseas. This Government and the Industries Assistance Commission appear to ignore this reality. To parade the general reference to the lAC for tariff reductions as real assistance to developing countries ignores the vital mediating role of global corporations which could have more to gain from these measures than either Australia or the developing countries.
We note also that Australia is beginning to experience the same erosion of control in its national policy whether it be fiscal, monetary, the exchange rate or trade and industry, and that has already occurred in many developing countries. For example, according to the United Nations and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Australia has more penetration by foreign capital than any country in the OECD group, other than Canada. Thus, we are beginning to have some affinity with the developing nations. Under these circumstances the Opposition believes that Australia must bargain for a better position. We will not simply dismantle protection and expose our industries and wage earners to the economic linkages with other countries whose characters are determined by third parties, that is, transnational corporations. We agree with the United Nations Secretariat which has stated:
Regional co-operation is thus imperative in order to strengthen bargaining power with transnational corporations.
Further, the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions has come out with this extraordinary statement that our membership of the International Bauxite Association is conditional upon the private sector paying our membership' fees. Does the Government assume that the aluc minium companies, which are exporting from Australia, are interested in ia fair export price? There is plenty of evidence to show that that price

628 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

has been manipulated. Our component manufacturers in Australia cannot buy aluminium at the same price at which the product is sold overseas. That is the way the discrimination applies. It is high time that the Government addressed itself to these issues and dealt with them on a general region co-operation basis.
We welcome bilateral and multinational agreements especially with developing countries which promote genuine competition and complimentation. They would benefit all concerned. I find the Minister's conclusions in his statement somewhat extraordinary. We have the statement that the Government's assistance would be for humane reasons. But if we look at the peroration by the Minister we can conclude that it obviously emphasised political and strategic considerations. I emphasise that we reject the use of aid as a pplitical tool to sway other governments to our way of thinking. Such an approach is morally bankrupt and politically extremely short sighted.
Debate interrupted.
RESERVE BANK OF AUSTRALIA
Mr SPEAKER-I present the Report and financial statements of the Reserve Bank for the year 1980-81, together with the Auditor General's report thereon. This action is required of me pursuant to the Reserve Bank Act. Copies are being released to the media by the Bank.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
OVERSEAS AID PROGRAM 1981-82
Ministerial Statement
Debate resumed.
MrFALCONER (Casey) (8.0)-TheHouseis debating a ministerial statement made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) concerning Australia's overseas aid contribution in this year's Budget. The Budget provides for an allocation of $662.3m for this financial year, which is an increase of $1 04m over last year's contribution. The Minister, in his statement, said that Australia is ranked in the middle of the 16 major Western aid donors in terms of the size of contribution as a proportion of gross national product, although the quality and terms of our aid are better than those of most other donors. I wish to emphasise that point very briefly. Late in the last session of Parliament I spoke on this subject and made the point that Australian aid is relatively without strings and that recipient countries are able to choose to a very large degree the way in which they want that money spent. We discuss with them in the most flexible way the types of contributions which we can best make to assist them in

their development. From the discussions I have had with a number of officials, members of parlia-
ment and government leaders from some overseas countries, I can say that that fact is well appreciated and understood by them.
I wish to deal with the subject which the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) dealt with at the end of his remarks when he referred to the Minister's statement that there
were important political and strategic considerations involved in the granting of aid. The Deputy Leader of the Opposition took the minister to task on this point and said that aid ought to be given purely on a humanitarian basis rather than looking at it in terms of trying to get political favours for the aid giver. Ideally, I would like all aid to be given on strict humanitariari grounds. I think the Deputy Leader of the Opposition is hiding his
head in the sand a little if he does not think that there is a great deal of resistance in some parts of our community to overs.eas aid, particularly to increases in ov~rseas aid. I put to the House that in fact the political and strategic considerations are a valid part of the consideratLons that the Govern-
ment musthave-in mind when it determines the nature of our aid and the way in which it is to be justified to the Australian electorate. If the Government, on some humanitarian basis, suggested that most of our aid ought to go to Africa and Latin America where there may be very great needs to be met, the Australian public is not likely to support an aid program which is so directed. I believe that the Australian public believes that we have responsibilities in South East Asia and the South Pacific in particular, and that it wants to see, as part of our total involvement in this region, a realistic and meaningful aid program for countries in that region. Considerations in the mind of the Australian public must be considered
by any Australian government when it looks at the composition and direction of our aid policy.
I wish to underline the comment that the Minister made about the quality of our aid. Our aid goes to projects and to requirements that are specified to us by the refipient countries. In relation to bilateral aid, we discuss with other countries what services and what products, if necessary, Australia is best at providing and we see to what extent these match the needs of the recipient countries. When one looks at some of the countries with which our aid performance is sometimes compared one will see some rather odd things included in the statistics that come out of those countries. For example, I understand that the contributions by France to the Alliance Francais throughout the world count as a part of its aid performance. That is for the maintenance of the

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 629

French language and the French culture throughouUhe world. It may .not necessarily be what the recipient countries want, but it is included in its aid figures. I think that those sorts of qualifications ought to be kept in mind when we compare the better performance in terms of the statistics of some other countries with which Australia is compared.
The Minister also made reference to the coming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting
and the .significance that that would have in the North-South debate; that is; the debate about the redistribution of resources and wealth throughout the world in a way that will be of benefit to the developing countries. I wish to comment on the role that I believe Australia ought to play in the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. This will probably be the most significant international conference involving heads of government that has been held in the South Pacific region. For that reason it ought to provide an opportunity to concentrate the world's attention on some of the problems of the smaller island states in the South Pacific. Many of the problems that those small island states face are also problems faced by other small island states in other parts of the world. However, it is a feature of the South Pacific area that so many of the countries in that region are made up of relatively small island states.
I had the opportunity, as one of the Prime Minister's emissaries for the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting, of visiting some of th'ose countries. I wish to comment on some of the problems that have come to the fore in those countries and on which they want some assistance from countries such as Australia-not super-powers but countries with some sort of influence in world
forums that can assist them in the resolution of their problems. For example, they are experiencing potential problems with respect to energy supplies. It would be fair to say that most island states feel vulnerable in this area because they are on the end of the distribution chain for petroleum products in particular. Crude oil comes from countries in the Middle East especially, goes to the developed countries for refining and is then distributed elsewhere throughout the world. A small island state of, say 100,000 people or 500,000 people tends to be on the end of the distribution chain. They feel vulnerable because of this. They want to see some way in which their energy supplies can be guaranteed and some assistance in replacing oil products with other sources of energy which they can perhaps generate from within their own countries. That is an area of great concern to them. Also, they are concerned about

transport and communications and their ability to take part in world trading patterns. The quantity of a product that many of the smaller island coun-
tries can put on the world market makes it very difficult to sustain a regular shipping service in a way that enables them to get their product to mar-
ket on any reliable basis. That is an area in which they are looking for some assistance.
With those sorts of problems, I think it is fair to say that countries that come into the category of smaller island states are looking forward to the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne as an opportunity to see their problems dealt with. They are looking to Australia as the significant Commonwealth country in the region to give a lead in articulating their problems and making the rest of the Commonwealthindeed, the rest of the world-aware of those problems. I believe Australia has a very real responsibility in this area of the world. That is one reason why our aid performance in this part of the world-the South Pacific and South East Asiaought to be significant. That aid performance inevitably is connected with general political and strategic considerations. I do not necessarily mean ideological considerations but general political and strategic considerations because, after all, we are in this area of the world and are maintaining day by day relationships with those countries.
Even other types of aid which we give to countries in this region and which do not come under the general heading of overseas aid I think can legitimately be linked to our overseas aid performance. For example, much of the assistance which we give under the Defence Co-operation Program is in fact related to the industrial and economic development of those countries. For example, I invite honourable members to look at the type of defence assistance, so called, that we are extending to Tonga. It is in the form of assistance with trade skills. Tradesmen from the Australian armed forces are in Tonga assisting the people there with defence building programs. That aid is defence related but it is also raising the general level of skills of people in that country and in the long term it will be of assistance in what might be regarded as perhaps the more mundane domestic development.
So our Defence Co-operation, Program is not a program which is primarily concerned with handing over defence equipment. It is a program designed to raise the level of skills in maintenance capability and in trade skills in' those countries and, to that extent, it is of very direct long term assistance in their developmental programs. In Vanuatu, for example, the assistance we are extending under the Defence Co-operation

630 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

Program seeks to upgrade elements of their police force which they will use instead of a regular defence force of their own. Obviously that is of some significance in a country which has had some internal problems on the way to independence.
The Minister also made reference to the development of student exchange schemes-and the training of people from South Pacific countries. This is an important development because historically Australia has had other associations with these countries in particular through missionaries and church people being involved. The churches in those countries are now autonomous, national churches and there is perhaps not quite the same flow of people at that level as there used to be. It was very common, for example, for people from Vanuatu, or the New Hebrides as it was, to come to Australian schools under Presbyterian Church scholarships. Now of course that does not happen as much, as I understand it, because of the new character' of the church in Vanuatu. Other programs must be developed to ensure that we have a regular flow of people and regular contact
at a person to person level with countries of this nature.
Mr Barry Jones-Don't leave out the Methodists in Tonga.
Mr FALCONER-Indeed, that is a very good point. Dr A. H. Wood in particular has had a long association with Tonga. I thank the honourable member for that comment. One thing I do want to comment on is the extent to which Australians are well regarded because of the various aid projects in which they participate in this part of the world. I suppose any Australian talking to officials from those countries is likely to be the subject of fairly generous comments.-After all, it is a feature of the people from South Pacific countries in particular they are not rude to people to whom they are talking. They are fairly generous in their comments and that is a problem that one has to try to talk one's way through to some extent. But I think it is fair comment to say that the participation of Australians-be they agricultural extension experts, civil engineering experts or trade people who are trying to upgrade the skills-is very well appreciated and in great demand by the recipient countries.- There is a degree of suspicion about
people from the former colonial powers, that is the major powers which were once the colonial masters of those countries, because it is felt that they may in some way involve themselves in the internal political affairs of the recipient countries. I think it is greatly to the credit of the Australians one meets who have participated in the various training schemes and aid programs, that they have developed a reputation of getting on with the job

very efficiently. Often in their own rough sort of way there is a great deal of sensitivity to local people and they do not involve themselvc::s in internal political developments. I have found several instances in which requests have been made for Australians to fill particular positions rather than people from former colonial powers.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MORRISON (St George) (8.15)-lt is regrettable that the Government has tarnished its contribution to international aid .by juxtaposing the statement made somewhat apologetically this afternoon by the Minister for Foreign.Affairs (Mr Street) with its strenuous efforts at making the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne a public relations success for the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). We all know that nothing concentrates the mind of the Prime Minister quite so much as the opportunity of personally posturing on the international stage, and that is precisely what the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne will be all about. It will be a farce ofmonumental proportions. The Prime Minister is frantically searching for something concrete to put in the final communique. In the absence of anything more to his liking he has finally decided that the contribution will be in aid. This is a remarkable reversal of form. Aid, as we all know-honourable members on the Government side as well as on the Opposition side will realise this-under the Fraser Government has been a cinderella in the expenditure of the Fraser Government. Now it has been pulled out of the Prime Minister's bottom drawer and it has been brushed and polished for CHOGM in Melbourne. This new-found interest in foreign aid has got nothing to do with the disadvantaged of this world. What it has to do with is an exercise in the personal vanity of the Prime Minister.
I ask honourable members to look at the context of CHOGM and the performance of this Government on Commonwealth schemes. The aid papers in the Budget detail a number of these programs. There is the Commonwealth Fund for Technical Co-operation. In 1980-81 the Australian contribution was $1.8m but surprise, surprise in 1981-82, under this Budget-the year of CHOGM-the contribution has doubled to $3.6m. The contribution to the Commonwealth Trade Union Council-I can well understand the Prime Minister not being terribly sympathetic to any contribution to trade union councils-in 1980-81 was a massive sum of $40,000 but again surprise, surprise this year it has jumped to

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 631

$100,000. As to the Commonwealth's cooperation in education schemes-we know the Prime Minister's views about education for Australia-in 1980-81 our contribution was $1.28m and this year it has jumped to $1.6m. We also find in the Budget Papers an allocation of $lm which is included principally to finance initiatives developed under the auspices of CHOGM. That is in the context of the Budget Papers. So it can be seen that what the Prime Minister is about is a public relations exercise.
But let me put the aid program that is associated with Commonwealth schemes into another perspective. I have just listed the programs under Commonwealth aid for 1980-81. The contributions amounted to a sum of $2m. But if one looks at the administrative arrangements for CHOGM which is to deal with aid matters at the prompting of the Prime Minister, one will see that the conference is to cost $12m-1 repeat, $12m-over half of which is for security measures, that is, Commonwealth police, State police and other security forces. So in one year we will provide $2min aid to disadvantaged people of Commonwealth countries and in this year the Federal Government, using Australian taxpayers' funds, will spend at least $12m to run just one conference which is nothing more than a public relations exercise for the Prime Minister. That means that six times the amount of money provided for aid to Commonwealth countries in 1980-81 is being provided for this conference. So much for the new-found concern of the Prime Minister for the world's disadvantaged.
I want to look at the record of both political parties On aid. The Labor Government, of which I had the honour to be a Minister, had a policy to reach the target set in the Pearson Commission's recommendations of 0.7 per cent of gross national product for annual expenditure on aid by 1980. We were well on the way. If one refers to the Government's own documentation 'Australia's Overseas Development Assistance Program 1981-82' which is Budget Paper No.8, one will see these figures are borne out. They are provided by the Development Assistance Committee of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development in Europe. In 1975 Australia's contribution .had reached 0.65 per cent of GNP. We were heading to 0.7 per cent by 1980. But when we come to the 1980 figures, after five years of the Fraser Government, what is the record? Again I am reading from a Budget document put out by this Government. In 1980 the figure had dropped from 0.65 per cent to 0.48 per cent. That is the record of the Fraser Government.

The Labor Government's contribution to aid was not made in the context of an up-coming conference. That contribution was a sincere commitment by the Whitlam Government. The Labor Government established-I had something to do with its establishment-the Australian Development Assistance Bureau. We believed in having an organisation devoted to aid and the provision of aid which was not directly related to either the Department of Foreign Affairs or to the Department of Defence in terms of the strategic interests about which the previous speaker in the debate
spoke. We believe this was the most effective contribution we could make to providing Australian aid to the Third World. But when the Fraser Government came to power that aid bureau was reconstituted and downgraded. But that is not all. The Fraser Government made a series of statements that economic circumstances precluded that Government from setting a firm date for the achievement of the target of 0.7 per cent. I ask honourable members to remember that we had got to the level of 0.65 per cent. The Fraser Government, on coming to power, refused to set any detailed target for the achievement of 0.7 per cent.
As I have mentioned, the performance of the Fraser Government has been deplorable. After five years it had achieved 0.48 per cent of a target that was agreed by all participating governments should be 0.7 per cent. In fact, in no single developed country in the world has the proportion of the fall in aid expenditure during the past decade been as great as it has been in Australia. I trust that those participants at CHOGM will recognise that fact.
The Prime Minister has the effrontery to cast himself in the role of champion of the Nor"th-
South dialogue. It is an act of transparent hypocrisy. This morning, during Question Time, the Prime Minister asserted, as is his wont, that Australian aid to the Pacific Islands had increased. It may have increased in inflated monetary terms but certainly not in real terms. Again, referring to the Government's own evidence, the aid to,the islands of the Pacific as a proportion of our total aid program has dropped. It dropped to 54.1 per cent from the level that was provided in the aid program of the Labor Government. The 54.1 per cent is the current level.of our total aid vote given to the islands of the Pacific including Papua New Guinea. Under the last Budget of the Labor Party in 1975-76 the figure was 63.7 per cent. So it has droped from 63.7 per cent to 54.1 per cent. These statistics can be taken through every form of aid program. The aid programs of the Fraser Government are demonstrably much lower than the aid

632 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

programs of the Whitlam Government. But we Pacific and significantly to Papua New Guinea.

did not seek, as the Prime Minister is currently However, the extent of our involvement in the

seeking, to make great fellows of ourselves. We South Pacific underlines the depth of our evolving

did not have to because the records were on the special responsibilities in respect of the indepen-

books. It is because the Fraser Government hasdent states of the South Pacific. There is an

not got the runs on the board that it has to seek increasing acceptance on the part of the island

these kinds of public relations exercises.

states that a genuine effort is being .made by

The Prime Minister reminded us three or four times today of the speech which he Illflde at the

Australia to be a partner in the region and to promote their stability and econo-mic progress.

University of South Carolina. That is about the The present Government's policies towards the

closest he has ever got to participating in the diaSouth Pacific have been reflected in actions and

logue of the North-South.

statements on Australian aid to the region. Aus-

Mr Duffy-It was Mr Stone's speech.
Mr MORRISON-It was not even Mr Stone's speech. After having come under some criticism the Prime Minister observed that he had not written the speech but, in fact, he was trying to pass off the responsibility for it, first of all to the foreign affairs and defence committee of his party. So he was spreading responsibility around. Then he said that it had gone through the Treasury and then he said it had gone through the Department of Foreign Affairs. I think it was one of these cases of a committee sitting down to draw a horse and it finishing up as a camel. That speech no doubt was one of the camels.

tralian aid to the region, excluding Papua New Guinea, has risen to pver $120m, for the next triennium, as against only$15m for the three years beginning in 1972.. Australia is now the largest single aid donor to the region and 1981 saw the implementation of the South Pacific Regional Trade and Economic Co-operation Agreement under which Australia and New Zealand have agreed to give the former island countries trade preferences and, I emphasise, mostly duty free access. Australia actively participates both politically and financially in a wide range of regional organisations, meetings and ventures such as the South Pacific Forum and the South Pacific Commission. As the Minister's statement indicates,

Mr Milton-He got the degree.

promoting security in the world's food supply and

Mr MORRISON-He got the degree. But one its distribution isa task of great complexity. There often wonders about the proper responsibilities of is an increasing gap between food demand and

those who give degrees at the University of South Carolina. In any event the Government has a dismal record in the main issues of the North-South dialogue. That North-South dialogue is a very simple proposition but a very meaningful one. It is a proposition which seeks a redistribution of the world's wealth and economic opportunities between the developed countries and the less developed countries of this world. This Government's

supply and this particularly applies to the African continent. These problems have been aggravated by population pressure and, of course, importantly the destruction of fertile land. Australia, as a major food exporter, . of course has significant commercial interests at stake as well as a responsibility which it shares with all donor countries to contribute to the food security of food deficient developing countries. Of course, Austr~lia has

record of assistance to the disadvantaged is as debeen active in North-South discussions in food re-

plorable internationally as it is domestically. I do lated issues and we must continue to argue that not believe that the hypocritical performance of increased agricultural production in developing

this Government will go unnoticed by the people countries is the key to world food securities. We

of Australia or by the people of the Third World. must also argue that external aid can playa comp-

Mr FISHER (Mallee) (8.27)-1 welcome this major statement which has been made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) in this House today on the Government's 1981-82 overseas aid program. The Budget statements indicate . that $653.1 m will be provided for expenditure this

lementary role in helping to increase production. However, the main impetus has to come from developing countries themselves through such measures as adequate price incentives to farmers and marketing and distribution arrangements et
cetera.

year. This is an increase of $100.6m or 18.2 per There is also, of course, a continued re-

cent. I believe that this reflects the importance quirement for assistance to meet the current

that .this Government attaches to improving needs of food deficient countries, especially

Australia's creditable aid performance over the through food aid including such programs as the

years and its practical forms of assistance to International Emergency Food Reserve and the

developing countries. Naturally our aid program strengthening of the world food program. It is also

is indicative of Australia's role in the South obviousthat the most appropriate forum for

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 633

negotiations of reserve stock holding in the context of world food security is the International Wheat Council and Australia must continue to explore solutions in that forum. We must also work towards the liberalisation of international food trade. This will make significant contributions to world food security. Given Australia's capabilities in agricultural production, research and development and its experience in the development of semi-arid lands, Australia is well placed to provide technical assistance to developing countries to assist them to improve their food production capacity. This year Australia will provide some 365,000 tonnes of food grain. However, in the critical world food situation we still have no cause for optimism. It is therefore very pleasing to see that in the Minister's statement we are now developing a major initiative, in that we will establish an agricultural research centre in Australia concerned with the needs of developing countries.
This new centre, as the statement points out, will be known as the-Australiilll Centre for International Agricultural Research and will be established as a small statutory body responsible to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. It is not intended that the Centre itself will engage in'tesearch. It will however be charged with contracting research work to existing Australian institutions in the field of agriculture and related disciplines for the benefit of developing countries. Its principal aim will be to contribute to the solution of agricultural problems in these countries. Research work is to be carried out in developing countries as appropriate. Opportunities will therefore be sought to involve research and extension workers from developing countries. To ensure the effectiveness of this new Centre, a high level advisory council representative of the Australian, developing country and international scientific communities is to be established to set the research priorities of the new Centre and review the progress of research programs undertaken. The Government has decided that a trust fund will also be set up for the Centre and that the initial commitment will be $25m over four years.
In regard to the establishment of the Centre I have one questi0I?- to put to the Minister for Foreign Affairs and it concerns how this new agricultural research centre will co-operate with the 13 existing international agricultural research centres throughout the world. It is important, I believe, that Australia's generous assistance to these existing stations be continued. I mention three of these centres, in particular the, International Agricultural Research Centre in .the

Philippines that has contributed so much to raising the productivity of rice production in Asian and other Third World countries. I also mention the valuable input that has been made by a similar institute in Mexico which is primarily involved in grain production. Of course, as well I mention the highly successful Asian Vegetable Research and Development Centre in Taiwan that has done so much to increase the yield potential and nutritional quality of vegetable crops for developing countries. These centres must continue to have our support.
I am often amazed at the change in stance taken by the Opposition in this place. Many of the remarks that have been made today in this debate by Opposition speakers, particularly regarding protection, should be treated with contempt. Developing countries at present are major beneficiaries of Australia's trade liberalisation. For example, imports of manufactured goods from developing countries increased by more thim 520 per cent between 1972 and 1980, and increased at a faster rate than imports of these products from all sources. The developing countries' share of total Australian imports rose from 14.5 per cent in 1972 to 26.3 per cent in 1980. On a per capita basis Australia is second only to the Urtited States of America among developing countries on the basis of the amount of manufactured products which it imports from those countries. For example, approximately 67 per cent of all Australia's imports enter free of duty and only about 12 per cent attract rates of duty of 30 per cent or more. Reductions in Australia's tariff levels have been reflected in increased import penetration into the Australian market. For instance, imports of manufactured goods accounted for 18 per cent of domestic sales in 1968 but in 1978, the last year for which figures are available, they accounted for approximately 23 per cent or an increase of 28 per cent. Textile imports have increased their market share in Australia from 32.8 per cent in 1968 to 40.3 per cent in 1978. The same situation applies in relation to clothing and footwear imports which have increased their market share from 7.3 per cent to 22.8 per cent over the same period. In this area the Australian Government is committed to continuing this liberalisation of Australian protection. Access for imports will be further improved over the next seven years and all market growth, I believe, will go to these imports. Australia's already broadly based system of preferences for developing countries has been further extended this year and now gives a margin of preference on textile, clothing and footwear items:

634 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

I remind the honourable member for St George (Mr Morrison) who was critical of the Australian Government's decision to host the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting that this conference is not just about aid. It is about issues of global importance and I believe he did very little in his address tonight but belittle the efforts of not only the Australian Government but also the Australian people. The staging of CHOGM in Melbourne is being held at a very critical time. The Commonwealth with its 44 member countries represents one-quarter of the world's population and its discussions will have a major impact on international forums. Coming just two weeks before the Mexican Summit gives it particular importance in the context of the North-South debate. Any positive approach taken by CHOGM will be of special importance particularly in view of the present stalemate in those discussions. I believe we can demonstrate at CHOGM, by reconciling the widely divergent points of view among Commonwealth countries, that the Australian objective can generate a momentum and give a lead to that Mexican Summit.
The Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) appropriately raised the importance of the law of the sea issue as a factor in the North-South debate. As we are all aware, a draft convention has been prepared. It contains articles dealing with the limits of national jurisdiction over the territorial sea, the exclusive econ-
omic zone and the continental shelf. There are also articles providing for the freedom of passage through straits used for international navigation and, of course, there are articles on the protection and preservation of the marine environment. This concept is important in the North-South debate and I believe we should pursue that view so that our interests in Australia are best protected by an early adoption of a comprehensive and widely supported convention on the law of the sea. We must take all available opportunities to make our position quite clear at Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting.
The statement by the Minister today indicates that Australia has set the stage for a successful Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. We have the ability to respond to major challenges in international affairs. We also have the capacity to assist developing countries to achieve a greater period of growth and prosperity. This statement by our Minister and the associated increases in aid announced in the Budget will assist as these new measures are not of a patronising nature but indicate a genuine interest by Australia, which regards itself as a vital link in our world and in the international family.

Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (8.42)-The honourable member for Mallee (Mr Fisher) was a little unkind to the record of the Australian Labor Party when he discussed the question of trade liberalisation. Whether one agrees or disagrees with the lowering of tariff barriers-that is very much a matter of dispute on both sides of the House and within the parties on both sides of the House-it is undeniable that the first major steps taken since the war in the liberalisation of Australian trading arrangements overseas took place under the Whitlam Government. The honourable member for Mallee failed to give us credit for that. He was also not always careful to draw a distinction between trade liberalisation when it benefits the access of a developing country to the Australian market and when it benefits the access of developed countries to the Australian market. In par-
ticular, when he dealt with the manufacturing sector he did not make clear the extent to which trade liberalisation permits penetration from developed economies and not underdeveloped economies. I think those distinctions are very necess-
ary to draw.
The Budget proposal to increase Australia's foreign assistance by 18 per cent in the forthcoming year is welcome. However, it would be inappropriate to let it pass without commenting on the
performance of this Government's official development assistance program since it came to power. This Government has sought, not without success, to identify itself with Third World aspirations, and the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has gained kudos thereby. It has done so with maximum rhetoric and minimum commitment. It has managed to scuttle out from under the embarrassment caused by its own very conservative positions by the appropriate last minute gesture, by reference to a position not immediately under discussion, by promises of better things to come and by contrasting its positions with that of other unreasonable developing countries. The Budget allocation and the statement of the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) are a case in point of this aspect of Government policy.
The Minister makes clear that this reversal in the trend of Australia's aid statistics is directly associated with the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting. The Government acknowledges that the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting is a significant North-South forum and wishes to be appropriately regarded in that body. I take the view, along with my colleague the honourable member for St George (Mr Morrison), that there is a considerable amount of cynicism in this proposal, coming as it does at this time. However, those of us on this side of the

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 635

House who are interested in seeing something like the situation that prevailed under the Whitlam Government restored are grateful for any excuse the Government finds to move in a more generous direction. At the same time we ought to recognise the short term nature of the event which provoked this act of generosity.
The Government's perf~rmance tonight cannot conceal the dramatic slide that has occurred in our aid program as' a percentage of our gross national product since it came to office. As the honourable member for St George pointed out, it has slipped from 0.65 per cent of our GNP, only slightly below what the United Nations has long regarded as an acceptable level for a developed and privileged nation, to 0.43 per cent. This will

take it back to 0.45 per cent. We have moved from being the fourth most generous donor among member nations of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development to being in the middle of the pack, as the Foreign Minister indicated in his statement tonight. No OECD member has experienced so high a proportional fall in terms of the percentage of its gross national product committed to aid than Australia, with the exception of West Germany, whose contribution in absolute terms is much higher than ours. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard some OECD statistics that will demonstrate that point.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows~

TABLE 4 NET OFFICIAL DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE IN RELATioN TO GROSS NATIONAL PRODUCT (YEAR
ENDED 31 DECEMBER)-PERCENTAGES

Countries

1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978

Australia
Austria Belgium
Canada
Denmark Finland France Germany
Italy, Japan Netherlands .
New Zealand Norway
Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom
United States Average DAC Countries

0.59 0.53 0.59 0.44 0.55 0.60 0.42 0.45 0.45 0.07 0.07 0.09 0.15 0.18 0.17 0.12 0.24 0.27 0.46 . 0.50 0.55 0.51 0.51 0.59 0.51 0.46 0.52 0.42 0.42 0.47 0.43 0.48 0.54 0.46 0.50 0.52 0.38 0.43 0.45 0.48 0.55 0.58 0.56 0.60 0.75 0.07 0.12 0.15 0.16 0.17 0.18 0.18 0.17 0.18 0.66 0.66 0.67 0.57 0.59 0.62 0.62 0.60 0.57 0.32 0.34 0.31 0.32 0.37 0.40 0.31 0.27 0.31 0.16 0.18 0.09 0.14 0.14 0.11 0.13 0.10 0.10 0.23 0.23 0.21 0.25 0.25 0.23 0.20 0.21 0.23 0.61 0.58 0.67 0.54 0.63 0.75 0.82 0.85 0.82 0.23 0.23 0.25 0.27 0.31 0.52 0.41 0.39 0.34 0,32 0.33 0.43 0.43 0.57 0.66 0.70 0.83 0.90 0.38 0.44 0.48 0.56 0.72 0.82 0.82, 0.99 0.90 0.15 0.12 0.21 0.16 0.14 0.19 0.19 0.19 0.20 0.36 0.41 0.39 0.34 0.37 0.37 0.38 0.37 0.40 0.31 0.32 0.29 0.23 0.24 0.26 0.25 0.22 0.23 0.34 0.35 0.33 0.30 0.33 0.35 0.33 0.31 0.32

Source: OECD Documents Press/A (79) 33 Paris 19 June 1979

Australia . . . . . .

FINANCIAL YEAR ENDED 30 JUNE-PERCENTAGES
1969-70 1970-71 1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 0.57 0.56 0.55' 0.53 0.52 0.56 0.50 0.46 0.47 0.45

Mr BEAZLEY-I. thank the House. This Budget must therefore be welcomed as the rever-
sal of a disturbing trend, not .an amazing new initiative. On aid policy generally the Government has appeared not to let its left hand know what its
right hand is doing while making absolutely cer-
tain that its right hand is firmly in control. It has
been the task of successive Foreign Ministers, and
occasionaJly the Prime Minister, when before in-
ternational bodies where Third World states are well represented, .to display deep sympathy for Third, World aspirations for ,anew international
economic order. It has been the task' of the Treasurer (Mr Howard), when before inter-
national bodies dominated by developed nations and in Australian internal debate, to ensure that

his colleagues not only do not get out of hand but also scarcely manage to progress to the little finger.
The major Treasury paper on the new international economic order, Paper No.6 of 1979, suggested that new international economic order proposals to enhance transfers of technology, create a favourable Third World trading position, give the Third World preferential access to capital markets, and ensure untied and substantial transfers of aid were, in the view of the Treasury, inimical to Australia's interest. Australia's interest, it argued, were served by 'minimal restrictions on flows of trade and long term capital between nations. The new international economic order

636 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

proposals are thus seen to have had serious adverse implications for Australia's security and
economic welfare'. Australia, according to the Treasury, faces with the new international econ-
omic ,order' an international economic system 'which would require a considerable increase in government intervention, and in international
controls over large areas of economic activity'. The Treasury, taking his line from his Depart-
ment, returned from an International Monetary
Fund meeting in October last year reportedly worried at a drift in IMF and World Bank aidgiving policies toward the Third World position.
In his annual statement to the IMF the Treasurer insisted that countries which did not take tough measures, seen in conservative and monetarist
terms, should not be favourably regarded by the Fund. Again, the position adopted by the
Treasurer is very much against the new international economic order position for which the Prime Minister on many occasions and the
Foreign Minister today have expressed a consider-
able degree of sympathy.

It is quite evident,from the record and from the Foreign Minister's statement tonight that we have not moved substantially away from that position.
I am a little fearful that the sort of role we will
play at CHOGM will 'be the role of a dampener
on the vaious aspirations of the Third World nations represented at that gathering while, at the
same time, expressing extreme sympathy. The
foreign aid proposals announced today could well
be seen as measures which will effectively bolster
the hand of the Government in being able to keep under control positions adopted on those sorts of
issues. The exception to our record on this was the
common fund for commodities proposals which we helped to establish in 1979. It was not really surprising that we did so since we, as a major com-
modity producing nation, could have expected to be a direct beneficiary of that. But even in this
case, when the pressure came from the developed
countries to modify the proposition for a common commodities fund to make absolutely certain that
in its size and functions it did not contribute sub-
stantially to a solution of the global investment, diversification and price stabilisation problems
we, in the end, with much reluctance, much toing
and froing and much massaging of the Third World states represented, came around to sup-
porting that position.

The Budget proposals on overseas aid have

further not altered the depressingly high percent-

age devoted to our bilateral aid program. At the

moment commit

itfuisnadbsoutto80mpuelrticleantte.rOalurowrgilalinnigsnaetsios ntos

increased dramatically during the period of the

Whitlam Government, but since its removal from office progress in this direction has slowed. The Government, again in this statement and invarious other statements made by the Prime Minister at different points of time, has paid lip service to that objective without in fact performing. We all know and acknowledge-the Prime Minister, the Foreign Minister and his predecessor have
acknowledged-the value of multilateral aid programs. They ensure independent judgment on the suitability of the applicant. They are, therefore, in contrast to bilateral aid programs, less open to the suspicion that the particular country donating the aid seeks to manipulate it for political purposes. It is also less humiliating for the receiver. It also offers, by an administrative economy of scale, better prospects for monitoring the dispersal of the aid, once it is given out to the recipients, and for managing its effectivedistribution. It avoids a sense of dependency on the part of the particular countries involved and thereby assists and encourages self-sufficiency.
A commitment to the organisation of aid on a multinational basis through bodies on which recipient nations have a very large say is fundamental to the new international economic order, but there has been no substantial progress in that direction in the Foreign Minister's statement this afternoon. However, I do not want to argue, notwithstanding what I have just said, that all aid should be dispensed through multilateral agencies; nor does the Labor Party argue that position. Nor do I want to argue that aid should be entirely free of political considerations. Such a position would be unrealistic.
I associated myself with a minority report on Indo-China which was brought down by the Joint Foreign Affairs and Defence Committee and which sought an alteration of Australian aid policy to Vietnam. In that minority report, in which we were supported by one Liberal senator, we disagreed on humanitarian grounds and on the grounds that we believed that after involvement in that war we owed an obligation to that country for its reconstruction. We also argued along the lines of a strategic political objective. We wanted
to see Australian aid used in such a way as to encourage the Vietnamese to depend less on the Soviet Union and to produce a situation where the Soviet Union was less involved in Vietnamese affairs. I do not dissociate myself from that argument which, I must concede, on what was essentially a proposal for bilateral aid, was political. However, a bilateral aid policy should contain maximum flexibility and carefully consider the political implications whilst not being put off by them. I do not believe that our policy does this.

Overseas Aid Program 1981-82

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 637

We have been extraordinarily slow to respond to some crises in which we ought to have taken an interest; and when we do respond, we are often extremely ungenerous, as has been the case in Kampuchea, Vietnam and Uganda.
I believe that we have been exceptionally slow in regard to Poland. I raised this matter in the House earlier today. It is terribly disturbing, given the stress that the Foreign Minister placed today on the significance we accord the question of food aid, that the Polish Government has made known a need for food aid for almost 12 months and that the Australian Government has not moved one step towards meeting that need in any shape or form. What we have had from the Australian Government is a very niggardly little suggestion to the Poles that they might like to get $40m worth of credit by our guaranteeing their ability to buy $40m worth of our wool. Nothing has been said on the subject of food, although food is quite fundamental to the crisis of confidence that both the reformed Government and the reforming Solidarity movement in Poland are experiencing at the moment. That, I would suggest, demonstrates inflexibility in our aid program which ought not to
be permitted to continue but which I very much fear will continue as a result of the program announced today.
When we have an element of politics in our proposals, we need to be very careful, and I am
not sure we are being very careful in the attitude we are developing towards the needs of the South Pacific nations at the moment. There is, in a sense, in the proposals we are putting forward and in the sorts of attitudes we have adopted in international economic forums, an excessive conservatism which could well work to the detriment of the economic objectives of many governments in the region. We need to be absolutely certain when we make a bilateral aid grant to many of the South Pacific nations that we are not basing that grant on an assumption of the political line we want those countries to pursue.
A strategic political interest in aiding a country and a direct interference in that country's internal affairs are two different things. The line is finely drawn, but if we have regard to the effectiveness of the recipient country's delivery systems and the equity of its distribution, irrespective of its political system, we will be able to draw that line. I would like to see the Government include some of these things in the foreign aid positions it adopts in futtire. Our program needs to be much more carefully thought out, much more generous and much more like the program we had under the Whitlam Government. Insofar as this statement moves us slightly back in the direction of the program we

had under the Whitlam Government, the Minister's statement is to be welcomed; but we have to be realistic about it at the same time.
Debate (on motion by Mr Jull) adjourned.
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 19 August, on motion by MrViner:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr LES JOHNSON (Hughes) (8.57)-The Parliament was under the impression, when we arrived here this week, that the predominance of our time was going to be given over to the Freedom of Inforrriation Bill. I understand there have been some changes. Nevertheless I am glad to have the opportunity of resuming this debate. It is a most beleaguered subject that has been in process for a long time in 'another place, but this House has not spent very much time on this important legislation. I was very interested to see the Bills Digest Information Service account of this legislation. Under the heading ~Background' it states:
The concept of freedom of information became prominent as an issue in Australian government following the ALP's commitment to 'open government' during the 1972 election campaign. In 1973 the Whitlam Government authorised the then Attorney-General, Senator Murphy, to prepare legislation along the lines of the United States Freedom of Information Act subject to whatever modifications might be necessary to adopt the American system to the Australian constitutional and administrative structure.
Naturally, I am pleased that the party and, indeed, t he Government of which I was-a member catalysed that important m\itter which has become dear to the hearts of many Australians and of such great consternation to many bureaucrats and probably Ministers as well. Of course, this is an evolving issue. More comprehension of it develops as every day goes by. Somebody said this:
If the Australian electorate is to be able to make valid judgments on government policy, it should have the greatest access to information possible. How can any community progress without continuing and informed and intelligent debate? How can there be debate without information?
Who said that? It was none other than the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). In 1976 he publicly committed his Government, following in the wake of the Whitlam Government, to freedom of information legiSlation. Of course, five years after that commitment his promise has reached Parliament and come into this crucible for some kind of purification process. I suppose that we should be grateful for the fact that these things, even though they are belated, have occurred.
Many things have happened. Various committees, including Public Service committees,

638 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Freedom ofInformation Bill

have been applying themselves to this matter. The Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs-an all party committee chaired by Senator Missen-Iooked at the legislation proposed by the Fraser Government and proposed some 93 changes to the first Bill. To its credit, I suppose, the Government accommodated some of these changes-I think approximately 30 of them-by amending the legislation. But it is important to say that that was not quite good enough. After all, the members of the Senate Standing Committee did not approach this matter in any starry-eyed way. They were realistic. They had regard for the public interest. They wanted to avoid any threat to the public interest. They were certainly not inclined to put the security of the nation at risk in any way. They were not oriented to some trendy philosophy. They have been frustated in respect of a very large number of their proposals-proposals which emanated from democratically elected senators of this nation representing all parties. So much is left to be desired. I notice that in the Australian of 13 June there w"s mention of the Freedom of Information Bill under the heading: 'Senate rams through information bill'. The article stated in part:
The last 40 clauses of the controversial Fre~dom of Information Bill shot through the Senate like the proverbial Bondi
tram yesterday afternoon.

It took more than 20 minutes-and one half-hearted division-to see the end of the bill which caused the Government so much heartburn.

We have got to the ultimatium stage. The

Government was just about ready to throw out

the baby with the bath water. It was about to say:

'You are pestering us with all this pedantic detail.

We are not sufficiently interested in the thing to

spend any more time on it. If you do not give us

the you

Bill, are

even if it is still in not going'to have

a it

half-botched at all'. That

fiosrma~

amazing attitude for any Government to take. I

think the views that I am expressing, my account

of the situation, would be shared by honourable

members on the other side of the House and certainly by a number of hon~urable senators.

The Press made very serious and vitriolic criticisms and condemnations of the chain of events
that have taken place. In the Sydney Morning
Herald of 1 June 1981 it was stated:

, , . the Bill, in the amended form , ' . will go through the Senate this week, is probably better than nothing-but not much better. It cannot be greeted with any enthusiasm . . . '

The article stated further:

The resultant legislation falls a long way short of its original
intention: to establish a public right of access to documents held by Federal departments and agencies unless there are
special reasons for not making them available. In the event,

(
far too many exemptions and qualifications remain, clearly as a result of last-ditch resistance, perhaps from some ministers but certainly from bureaucrats, because secrecy reduces their accountability and makes their life easier.
There does not seem to be much satisfaction on the part of anybody regarding the Bill as it now stands. The Opposition believes that the legislation, in the form in which it is now before the House, although it is better than the legislation originally introduced in the Senate, does not amount to an effective freedom of information legislation. It does not confer an un~estricted right to information. Of course, established arguments have been put relating to the need to prevent public access to documents relating to such matters as national security, defence and Cabinet deliberations. The Opposition is by no means insensitive to many of these issues. However, it is in the area of the exceptions and limitations to the operation of the Bill that the Opposition is most critical. The Bill establishes a right to information and then proceeds, in the view of the Opposition, to place blanket exemptions to the legislation by means of circumventing the legislation.
The Opposition is very critical of the Government for not accepting a number of amendments. For example the opposition sought, by way of amendment, to give Australians the right of access to all the documents which personally relate to them and not just to those documents that are no more than five years old. That is to say, if a document is more than five years old a citizen cannot expect to get it. Such a document could be very important and it could be made available. It might concern a social security issue, a veterans' affairs issue or a Public Service issue. I think we should try to sort out' the sheep from the goats in these matters. Somebody at a primary level ought to be asking: Is this request frivolous? If some cost and effort are involved we should be able to make out a prima facie case that a person is disadvantaged and if it is a genuine bona fide case which has some important bearing ona citizen's well-being, regardless of the five year barrier the matter should be given effect to.
We sought to give Australians the right to call for documents not relating to them personally which came into existence up to five years before the commencement of the Act. This legislation does not apply in general to documents produced before the Bill came into operation. We are dealing with the whole issue of retrospectivity. I do not know whether the several issues that I am about to mention are in the five year zone or just beyond it. Let us consider the importance of the following issues. The Hilton Hotel bombing issue, for example, involved some political organisations

Freedom ofInformation Bill

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 639

which contended that they were being unfairly identified with the issue. The issue concerned one victim-I think an amputee. Why should the general blanket embargo of retrospectivity prevent someone from getting to the truth of that matter?
Mr Milton-No inquest has been carried out
on that.
Mr LES JOHNSON-No inquest at all has been carried out on it. Many people are still a little anxious about the letter bombings in the 1975 election campaign. We have a right to find out who is responsible and what has been done to prevent a recurrence of such an event. An issue does not have to affect a citizen in a direct and personal way for that citizen to have a legitimate right to obtain information about the inquiries that have been made. I recall the case of Catherine Dalton, the widow of the former director of the atomic reactor at Lucas Heights, who is the author of the book Without Hardware and who raised many issues concerning the alleged conspiracies. That whole issue has been swept under the carpet. Under this legislation there is no right to information about it. The Bogle-Chandler case could be similarly affected. There is the Facom-IBM tender case. What about the matters raised by the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock) in relation to the Prime Minister? The honourable member contended that the Prime Minister was denying information. It seems to me that regardless of any retrospectivity embargoes those matters should be investigated. One could go on, enunciating issue after issue. Another such issue concerns the whole question of Indonesia's involvement in West New Guinea.
Where is the truth in that matter? Where is the information that could enable the constituency and even the Parliament to make proper and bona fide decisions and come to proper conclusions about it? I remember that only a matter of months ago the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) virtually dragged from this Government basic information about Australia's possible involvement in the Sinai desert. We can think of so many issues which are affected by this retrospectivity matter.
The Opposition sought also to reduce the number of special exemptions. Schedule 2 to the Bill lists the agencies exempted from the operation of the Bill. They include such government agencies as the Health Insurance Commission and the Pipeline Authority. Those agencies have blanket exemption. We start to speculate as to why they should be exempted. The Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation, known as SMEC, is also exempted. Honourable members know what that is. It is a consultancy organisation that

assists with aid programs around the world. For some reason that is excluded and given blanket exemption. Under the Freedom of Information Bill the Australian Shipping Commission and the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation as well as the more predictable agencies such as the Australian Secret Intelligence Service and the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation are exempted. We can understand some concern about the latter. It seems to me that there might be some reasons why some matters concerning the Pipeline Authority could be private and where information should be restricted; but not everything to do with the Pipeline Authority should be restricted. The Opposition in the other place sought, by way of amendments, to change the arrangements provided under the Bill for blanket exemption. We concede the right to exempt certain factors and features.
If the Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation did not want to disclose the detailed activities of some engineering company with which it was associated, that would be fair enough. There is a good prima facie case to be made out about having discriminatory exemptions rather than blanket exemptions. In other words, there seems little justification for exempting all these agencies in to to. In short, the exemptions are far too wide. The Government has failed to accept amendments to prevent the almost unbridled use of section 36 to obtain an exemption for even the most innocuous document written within the Public Service. We wanted to remove the unfettered
power of the Minister to issue a certificate declaring that a document is contrary to public interest and exempted from the operations. of the Act. Equally important is the Government's failure to increase the power and role of the Ombudsman under the Act. We proposed the creation of a separate administrative unit within the Ombudsman's office and the creation of a deputy ombudsman to give specialised support and assistance to the citizenry who have interest in taking some action under the freedom of information legislation. We proposed the extensions of the functions of the Ombudsman to enable him to investigate ministerial decisions. I confess that I personally have some misgivings about that. I am never over inclined to make the Parliament over subjective in the way of bureaucracy. The power of the people is best expressed by the people's par-
liament. I hate to see it developing a secondary subsidiary kind of role under the Public Service.
A great deal can be done in strengthening the role of the Ombudsman in other ways. We could give the Ombudsman the role of advising applicants under the Act and assisting those who have

640 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Freedom ofInformation Bill

obligations under the Act on the operation of the parts of the world. In this area it is my view that

Act. We could give the Ombudsman power to Australia should not be playing second fiddle. I

monitor and the duty to report to Parliament on hope that in whatever time this Government has

the operation of the Act. Other failings under the left to do something about these things it will

Act include the failure to give precedence to the apply itself more assiduously in the future than it

Freedom of Information Act over other legishas done in the past.

lation which contains secrecy provisions and the failure, where it is considered important to retain

Debate (on motion by Mr Burr) adjourned.

existing secrecy provisions applying in another Act, to incorporate that exemption in the Freedom of information Act.

GENERAL BUSINESS Suspension of Standing Orders

The Government has also failed to rectify the situation under clause 23 (2) whereby an official

Motion (by Mr~ MacKellar)~by leaveagreed to:

can refuse to grant access to documents without having searched or identified any of them if the nature of the document as described in the request

That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent Notice No.4, General Business, being called on forthwith.

is such that it would be exempt under the criteria in the Bill. Thus an applicant who seeks infor-
mation is precluded from the very beginning by

USE OF LEISURE HOURS MrBURR (Wilmot) (9.l8)-lmove:

the judgment of an official who has the opinion (I) That a select committee be appointed to examine-

that what is asked for, however vaguely, would, if it existed, fall into the category of exempt

(a) the facilities, services and opportunities available to the community to spend leisure hours for the better-

material. The Opposition believes that the right to

ment of the individual and the community, and

information is supported by the community as a democratic ideal and it is the duty of the Parliament to support this right in principle and practice. This legislation does not adequately fulfil this duty. The Freedom of Information Council has voiced the reasons for effective freedom of infor-

(b) whether there is a role for the Commonwealth Government in co-ordinating the activities of State and local Government in the field of recreation and sport.
(2) That the committee recognise the responsibilities of the States in these matters and seek their co-operation in all relevant aspects.

mation legislation. I think it sums up the position quite admirably. It states that the legislation, in its present form, would:
Fail to alter our present situation of unaccountable bureaucratic stranglehold;
Fail to achieve smaller government and thus lower tax. rates;

There is a very real need at the moment in Australia to co-ordinate the activities in sport and
recreation between the various levels of government which have responsibilities. At this stage it would be true to say that the responsibilities to sport and recreation could only be termed as a

Fail to ease the problems Members and Senators have hotch-potch between the three levels of respon-

getting questions answered and factual data made available;
Fail to alter our present poor quality of media coverage due to lack of information;
Fail to change the prevalent p'ublic attitude that politicians and bureaucrats have it easy, are lazy and inept;

sible government. The Federal Government, for
its part, has taken on the responsibility of inter-
national sport and has made some very real advances in providing facilities, opportunities and

Fail to inspire confidence in government decisions; and

training for those participants who may aspire to

Fail to enable exposure of any more corruption than at the international level. The Commonwealth

present.

Government is to be congratulated for the very

We should be taking the view that we have just real efforts it has made in the international field of

lifted the curtain on the enormous potential that sport. It leaves a very wide field of many millions

is available in this area. We have the primary rudiof people throughout Australia who wish to par-

ments of legislation about a very important and ticipate in various sporting activities not knowing

far-reaching matter. I hope that this Parliament whether their local government, their. State

sees it from that point of view. This should not be Government and, in some cases, the Common-

laid to rest at this stage. This legislation needs a wealth Government should be involved in provid-

great deal of embellishment. Conservative Minising various forms of facilities that might be used at

ters have reacted in a most reactionary way to this. the local or community level. There is a very real

legislation and caused it to be a lot less in its idealurgency for this House to establish a select com-

ism, in its aspiration and in its pursuit of high prinmittee, such as I have suggested, so that these mat-

ciples than the Senate committee hoped it would ters can be sorted out. Then there will be a clear

be. Certainly it falls short of the principles that understanding as to who is responsible for what

are enunciated in legislation operating in other levels and also, importantly, who is responsible

Use ofLeisure Hours

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 641

for providing the necessary funds for these
facilities.
I will outline some of my reasons for putting forward this motion to the House. I think it is generally accepted that, since coming to office, the Government has quite correctly pursued a consistent economic policy with a view to correcting the anomalies and the imbalances in the economy. The result of that campaign by the Government is now becoming evident with inflation within manageable proportions. This policy is having the effect of encouraging business investment and an improvement in economic activity in Australia albeit that this improvement in the state of our economy needs to be balanced against the opportunity of selling products on the international market. While these improved signs are evident in the economy there are still serious social problems.
The attitudes of people in society and unemployment-particularly amongst those in the under 25 age group-are problems which could broadly be termed the social ills of Australia. It needs to be recognised that these social ills need to be attacked as purposefully and vigorously as the problems and imbalances in the economy. There is little point having a potimtially buoyant economy if the people in the community will not work hard or produce products of a quality that can be sold on a competitive international market. The mental outlook and social attitudes of the community need to be such that there is a widespread pursuit of excellence in all fields and a united purpose in working .towards a more prosperous Australian nation that can be passed on as a heritage to future generations. With that objective in mind, we need to look at those activities in the community that can be used as a medium to encourage the younger generation to become proud of Australia as a nation and to seek excellence in their chosen field of activ,ity.
Young people have in the past identified, and can in the future identify strongly, with various sporting activities and these activities can also be used as a mechanism for instilling the-attitudes that I have talked about provided there is a proper managerial approach by government. In all fields of activity the strive for excellence and a higher degree of performance is achieved where there is a strong element of competition. That principle applies in the economy, business activity or for that matter in a wide range of activities in the community. It is equally applicable in sport and sport can be used as a training medium in this respect for our younger population. If that is done, I am confident that the results will flow over to other activities in which younger people and the

general community may be involved. But the incentive must first be there. In this regard I feel that there should be a three-pronged program. Firstly, an elitist group of sporting participants should be developed. Again I compliment the Government for its initiatives in this area. But we need those elitist participants who can compete favourably at the international level. This group will then be looked upon as standard setters who will act as an incentive for a wide range of young people to participate and to achieve a higher degree of excellence in their own performance.
Mr Jull-People like Tracey Wickham.
Mr BURR-As my colleague the honourable member for Bowman said, people like Tracey Wickham do give encouragement to others to participate and to improve their performance. Secondly, I believe we need the promotion of sporting activities at the local level. It is fine to have our elitists, our international competitors but we also need to encourage a broad range of people to participate in sporting activities. Thirdly, I believe there needs to be a widespread media campaign, similar to the 'Life. Be in it' campaign, to encourage sporting participation, again using some of our more successful international competitors.
Mr Jull-Greg Chappell.
Mr BURR~My colleague the honourable member for Bowman mentions that renowned Queenslander Greg Chappell. Support is essential if Australia is to produce an elitist group of sportsmen who can compete successfully at the international level. In addition to the opportunity for international competition, it is important that sporting participants in Australia do have available top class facilities of world standard in order to train and improve their performance before seeking international experience. The Budget brought down earlier this week by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) allows for some of those facilities to be provided in Australia. The purpose in establishing an elitist group of top sporting competitors is for that action to act as an incentive to many other young people in the community. There is no doubt that much publicised performances, such as by those referred to by my colleague, the honourable member for Bowman, including John Newcombe, Dennis Lillee, Stephen Holland and Tracey Wickham-many of them. Queenslanders-and many others, act as enc,ouragement to many young people to participate in a sports involved. They also act as an incentive for others to strive to improve their own performance.

642 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Use ofLeisure Hours

In addition it needs to be recognised that our sporting competitors act as ambassadors in bringing Australia's name and reputation before the world. I feel that this ambassadorial role can be used to supplement the efforts in the economic and political fields on the world scene by Australians who visit other parts of the world. With regard to local sporting activities, I strongly urge the Federal Government to reintroduce the old Commonwealth Assistance for Leisure Facilities scheme. That scheme, as some of us remember, was introduced some years ago by a former Minister for Youth, Sport and Recreation, the late Frank Stewart. I believe that that was one of the few successful schemes that was introduced by the former Whitlam administration. J strongly urge that the Government reintroduce the CALF scheme, as it was known, because that allowed a great many facilities to be provided in the community with equal contributions being made available for the cost of those facilities by the Commonwealth, State and local governments.
We have, at the moment, many hard working groups in the community which try to raise money as best they can and they find that the capital cost of providing those facilities is simply beyond their resources. A scheme, such as the CALF scheme,
would, I believe, provide a great many enjoyable facilities through which young people in the community can participate,. and improve their performances at the local level. I strongly urge the Federal Government to reintroduce such a scheme.
I also suggest to the Federal Government that not only do we need to provide capital facilities such as swimming pools, squash courts, tennis courts and so on, but also we need to have trained officers available who can coach and encourage young people to participate and who can coordinate those activities. I am aware that the State governments and in some cases local governments are making such officers available. They are national fitness officers or sport and recreational officers. I believe that the Commonwealth Government could also make a contribution to assist State and local governments so that more officers could be made available for that purpose. I believe also that there needs to be a promotional campaign to assist in this area. I feel that a national promotional campaign along the lines of the 'Life. Be in it' campaign should be included as part of the overall approach to this scheme. A number of present and past national sporting identities, I have no doubt, would participate in such a media campaign if they thought it would have the effect of encouraging a wider participation in sport.

There has been a change in the character of the Australian population. The once proud image of the rugged, suntanned Australian male is now nothing more than a myth. I think if we look around at the portly status of some of the people in this House we are reminded of that fact. No doubt this male is now something of a myth and this is due in part to the changed structure of the population from a rural base to an urban base. While it is a fact that the vast majority of Australians live in urban centres and are not exposed to the more physical activities of rural living, there is no reason why they cannot be physically fit. If a program supplementing the 'Life. Be in it' campaign were embarked on to lift the level of general physical fitness in the community, I am confident it would have a significant impact on reducing the incidence of illness and accidents. This could contribute greatly to curbing the soaring medical costs to the country and also the high cost to industry ofillness and accidents.
The community also is growing increasingly concerned at the inactivity and mental attitudes of the young unemployed. These people are not learning the discipline of the work ethIC. Whilst there are many factors contributing to unemployment, both economic and social-no doubt these problems .will take some considerable time to correct-positive action needs to be taken by the Government to prevent the physical and mental stagnation of the young employed. If this is not done, a significant section of that generation always will be a liability on the community, with all the cost that that involves. Sport is not an alternative to work. However, in the present circumstances it could easily be used as a medium to maintain the physical, mental and social health of a significant group of young Australians. I believe there is a role for the Commonwealth Government at the community sport level. I believe the Commonwealth Government can playa very significant role in co-ordinating the activities at the State government and local government levels. For that reason, I very strongly urge the House to accept this motion.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Is the motion seconded?
Mr Jull-I second the motion and reserve my right to speak at a later hour.
Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) (9.32)-Whilst I support the motion in essence, I wish to move an amendment. I support the motion, but it does not go far enough, and my amendment helps to expand the proposed select committee's terms of reference. Let us look at the motion. It states:
(I) That a select committee be appointed to examine-

Use of Leisure Hours

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 643

(a) the facilities, services and opportunities available to the community to spend leisure hours for the betterment of the individual and the community, and
(b) whether there is a role for the Commonwealth Government in co-ordinating the acitivies of State and local Government in the field of recreation and sport.
(2) That the committee recognise the responsibilites of the States in these matters and seek their co-operation in all relevant aspects.
By way of amendment, I move:
That the following paragraph be added to the motion:
'(3) That Commonwealth Government funding for all levels of sport and recreation be investigated, including international competition and community participation in sports and leisure. '.
As the honourable member for Wilmot (Mr Burr) said, there is a definite role for the Commonwealth Government in community participation in sports and leisure at the local level. Sport and recreation are very important in today's society and will become increasingly important as we move towards the twenty-first century. There is no doubt that not enough care or attention has been paid to these areas by governments for many years. I say it will become increasingly important as, no matter,what some people say, leisure hours will increase considerably over the next 20 years. It is no use waking up in 20 years' time and saying that we will quickly have to do something about the leisure industry. I use the word 'industry.' quite deliberately. I will mention more about that later.
I raise the point of leisure time and hours of employment because, as reduced hours of work occur, people and families will have to direct their attention to other activities. I do not mean just another game of tennis or golf, although that will occur, obviously, but a more creative and stimulating leisure time that will involve not only the great sports I have just mentioned but also participation in all sorts of activities, such as festivals, community activities, teaching and encouraging people to investigate the possibility of entering such arenas as bushwalking, canoeing, lifesaving, walking, and running, and getting families to participate together. That will have the flow on effect of keeping our family structures together and promoting family life, which is the backbone of our society. The setting up of a select committee to investigate the leisure area is long overdue. I can only bring to the House's attention the great success of the House of Representatives Select Committee on Tourism on which the honourable member for Bowman (Mr Jull) was so active. That Committee was set up some years ago and reported to the Parliament in a very detailed fashion and presented quite a number of responsible and far-reaching recommendations. The success of that Select Committee must be

kept in mind when considering this proposed committee on sport, recreation and leisure. If the members of this House are honest in their inten-
tions in regard to this very important part of Australian life, I am sure this amended motion will be passed.
I mentioned industry earlier. Sport, recreation
and leisure are part of an industry, in fact, it is a very big industry-or it should be. Tourism, which is part of the leisure area, is one of the biggest labour intensive industries we have. Thousands of people are employed in tourism, generating many millions of dollars. In fact, tourism contributes about 2.7 per cent of the gross domestic product. The leisure industry, I believe, can do the same. However, what has been done in the past? The short answer to that is nothing. We provided over $15,OOOm for health and welfare outlays in the recent Budget. Approximately one-third of that is directly used to cure people's illnesses. Thousands of millions of dollars are involved. What will we spend on sport and recreation this year? To quote from the statement put down by the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson) after the Budget, it is
almost $16m. I did not say $16,OOOm; I said $16m. A good slice of this will be a contribution to the Commonwealth Games fund for next year's Commonwealth Games in Brisbane and a $6m grant that will go mostly towards hockey and an equestrian centre. Of course, it may be coincidental but they are two of the sports involved in the boycott of last year's Moscow Olympics. Sport and recreation funding can also be seen in another light. Sales tax from sporting goods in this financial year will net the Government between $70m and $80m, yet only one-fifth of that is put back directly into the spOrt and recreation field. I believe there must be more Commonwealth Government funding, participation and consultation with State governments, local governments and the community and sporting groups at large.
At present I am trying to gather people in my bayside electorate of Isaacs to measure their enthusiasm or otherwise for a bayside games. At present several people in sport are very enthusiastic about the idea of a bayside games which is a
community participation sports festival. Whilst there may be a time during the games for serious competition, I envisage that it will be mostly community participation in many sports and recreation activities. Every year in the electorate of Isaacs we have the Chelsea Youth Week Festival. The Chelsea Youth Week Festival has been very successful, and I sincerely hope that it continues for many years. In 1983 it will be 25 years old. However, whether it be the Chelsea Youth Week

644 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Use ofLeisure Hours

Festival, the bayside games or any other games or festival, some Commonwealth monetary assistance for the local community would be most appreciated. Many good; hard working people put their hearts and souls into community activities such as the Chelsea Youth Week Festival. However, some assistance would be very welcome.
It is concepts such as the bayside games that should receive assistance. The honourable member for Robertson (Mr Cohen) helped to promote a similar idea in his electorate. That has been a tremendous success, with the Central Coast games being opened by the Premier of New South Wales late in September. I have been told that between 30,000 people and 40,000 people are expected to take part-a truly wonderful achievement. However, some Federal Government assistance could have made it a little easier and not so much of a heart-stopping struggle. I believe the Federal Government has to play a more direct role with the State and local communities. The present level of funding is pathetic.
It is Labor Party policy to fund and set up family leisure centres to be run by local councils and communities on a dollar for dollar basis along the lines of the scheme that the honourable member for Wilmot mentioned. That is one part of Labor's policy. A second part is the provision of funding for outdoor activities such as ovals and running tracks. A third part, which is equally important of course as the honourable member for Wilmot mentioned, is to provide extra Government funds to enable top sporting athletes to extend themselves in the world of international sport. All of these policies are very important. If we are ever to get people together in a community spirit the Commonwealth Government must become more involved.
As I mentioned earlier, my electorate runs along the bayside suburbs of Melbourne. There are 12 lifesaving clubs in my electorate. However, while a few sports, an elite few, are to receive $6m under the Budget, lifesaving clubs are to receive $110,000 through the Royal Lifesaving Society, exactly the same as last year. That means these lifesaving clubs-they are just that, lifesaving clubs-will be around 10 per cent worse off in real terms when one takes inflation into account. I think it is a disgraceful situation. However, if the Commonwealth Parliament can become more involved with community activities, as I believe it should, this proposed select committee will need to be set up. I welcome the opportunity to speak in support of this motion and the amendment to set up this proposed committee to look into all aspects of leisure in the hope of bringing down

some recommendations that will assist the Australian Government for many years to come.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Ian Robinson) -Is the amendment seconded?

Mr Milton-I second the amendment and reserve my right to speak.

Motion (by Mr Charles) put:

That the question be now put.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Hon. Ian Robinson)

Ayes

41

Noes

60

Majority

19

AYES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. e. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M. H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cross,M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Hurford, e. J. Jacobi, R.

Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller)
Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly, R.J. Kent, L. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. e. Ureo, T. Wallis, L. G. West,S.J.
Willis,R. Young,M.J.

NOES

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume, M. E. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N.A. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian
Carlton,J.J. Chapman, H. G. P. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Harris, O. MeD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. e. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Hunt,R.J.D.

Hyde,J. M. Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F.
Katter, R.C. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R~ M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Mittar, P.e. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. Peacock, A. S. Porter,J. R. Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S.
Tuckey, e. w.
White, P. N. D. Wilson, J. B. e.

Question so resolved in the negative.

Freedom ofInformation Bill

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 645

Amendment negatived.
Debate (on motion by Mr Jull) adjourned.
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed.
Mr SHIPTON (Higgins) (9.54)-1 am pleased to speak on behalf of the Government tonight and to support the Freedom of Information Bill. As honourable members know, this is an important initiative by this Government. I believe it is to be congratulated for introducing this legislation into the Parliament. The Opposition has seen fit to criticise the Government because the legislation does not go far enough. I point out to the Opposition that whilst the Bill was in the other place, the Government, in fact, accommodated a number of amendments-I think some 35 amendments in all-to the Bill. There was thorough discussion in that place in previous sitting of the parliament and the Bill comes before us in a very good form.
When this Bill is passed it will be the first freedom of information Act passed by any parliament operating under the Westminster system. The Congress of the United States of America has passed freedom of information legislation which has been the catalyst for this type of legislation in the Westminster system. Australia is again ahead in the ball game. We are ahead of the United Kingdom, New Zealand and Canada in introducing this legislation. Canada has freedom of information legislation before the House of Commons, but I understand that that has been delayed and that we will get to the post first. The Freedom of Information Bill is one which, when it becomes law, will give people access to information of government. I am sure that the Australian people will welcome that.
In dealing with this legislation we have to consider the notion of a bureaucracy. I think when one analyses bureaucracies one will find that public sector bureaucracies are more bureaucratic and hide-bound than private sector bureaucracies. There are private sector bureaucracies in organisations and in corporations. For instance, I think the Broken Hill Proprietary Co. Ltd has a bureaucracy. But a bureaucracy in the private sector is able to respond to change and to management direction and initiative much more quickly and in a more flexible fashion than a public sector bureaucracy. This Bill, in part, will make the federal public bureaucracy more responsible to the community. In fact, it will, in a way, encourage a response from the bureaucracy through the Parliament to the community. I welcome that. There is

no doubt that human beings, by their very nature, when organised into groups, become secretive. That is a function of a human being in large part. That is something that people have to fight. People like to keep family matters within the family. They like to keep firm matters within firm and corporation matters within the corporation. What we have done in this legislation is to say that matters that were formerly private and secret In government can now be brought into the open.
I think this Bill goes a long way. I support it because I think it goes far enough. I notice that Opposition members, in their speeches, seem to be obsessed with the secrecy of government. I think they have an over obsession with that. The Australian Labor Party is all in favour of things like freedom of information, conservation and reafforestation but I have never heard any positive policy or anything constructive come from the Opposition benches. Opposition members are never constructive but are always destructive.
This legislation has been amended in the Senate. I think it is a pretty good start. I think the proof of the pudding should be in the eating and not, as the Opposition says, by making further amendments at this time. I think the Attorney General (Senator Durack) in the other place has given an undertaking that he will keep an open mind in relation to this legislation and that he will have another look at it after it has been in operation for 12 months. I welcome that. The Bill imposes a positive obligation on departments and authorities to make public their organisation and structure. That is very good. If one listens to the Opposition one would think that the Government has done nothing. In fact, I think this Government has an incredible record for making government available to the people and involving the Parliament, in the sense of Opposition and Government members, in government. If one looks at the committee system which the Fraser Government has supported one will see that there are now more committees in this Parliament than under any other government in the history of Australia. The Fraser Government created the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure that does great work. The House of Representatives Estimates Committees that are a half-way house between the Committee of the Whole and the Estimates Committees of the Senate are establishing a personality of their own at this time. These developments show the commitment of this Government--
Debate interrupted.

646 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Freedom ofInformation Bill

ADJOURNMENT Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! It being 10 p.m .- under sessional order. I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

House adjourned at 10 p.m.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 20 August 1981. pursuant to statute:
Lands Acquisition Act-Statement or land acquired by agreement authorized under sub-section 7(I).
Postal Services Act-Australian Postal Commission-Bylaws-Postal (Staff)-1981-Amendment No.2.

Answers to Questions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 647 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Telephone Conversations: Privacy
Mr Sinclair-On 9 June 1981 (Hansard, page 3330) Mr Groom asked me the following question, without notice:
I preface my question to the Minister for Communications by informing him that over recent months I have frequently heard the personal telephone conversations of other people when I have been making telephone calls. This often happens to subscriber trunk dialling calls, especially from Parliament House, but it can occur also when making local calls. On one occasion I even heard a Government Minister speaking on my line to another person. Recognising that not only Government Ministers but also members of the general public expect their telephone conversations to be private and confidential, I ask the Minister: Is Telecom Australia aware of this problem? What is causing it? What action can Telecom take to ensure that telephone conversations remain personal and private?
The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
As I indicated at the time. I referred this matter to Telecom Australia. Telecom has advised that it is very conscious of the need to ensure that users of telephones have appropriate confidentiality in their telephone conversations and to this and quite a considerable amount of technical design effort has been directed towards preventing the intrusion of third parties across existing conversations. Nevertheless, with a complex telecommunications network capable of interconnecting some 5 milliori services and handling some 100 million local and STD calls each week some technical failures are unavoidable.
Continuing monitoring and technical tests by Telecom are undertaken to detect and correct service failures of this nature. Recent results of these checks do not indicate any significant increase in the lncidence of triple connections in .Canberra or elsewhere.
Telecom points out that it is greatly assisted in pinpointing technical failures and weaknesses if subscribers could report any service failures they experience, including triple connections, wrong numbers and cut-nffs to their service Difficulties and Faults Operations on 1100 at the time of the occurrence.
Perth Airport: New Te'rminal
Mr Hunt-On 9 June 1981 (Hansard, page 3332) Mr Beazley asked me a series of questions, without notice, concerning the Perth Airport International Terminal Complex project. I will answer each specific question separately.
I am advised that the Belmont City Council has allocated $37,000 on a campaign to oppose the site proposed for the new International Terminal Complex at Perth Airport.
I understand that the Belmont City Council is opposed to the proposed location on the grounds that it is linked with a decision against the early provision of a parallel north-south runway as a means of alleviating noise nuisance.
The preliminary finding of the Commonwealth-State Advisory Committee to Study Western Australia's Airport Requirements was that the early construction of the second parallel runway could not be economically justified as a means of alleviating aircraft noise problems. Nevertheless, this question is being addressed in detail in the airport master planning exercise currently underway. This master plan document will be

produced prior to the parliamentarY Standing Committee on Public Works (PWC) hearing and will report on the evaluation of planning options including the early provision of a parallel north-south runway. From the work done to date it is not anticipated that the findings of the master planning exercise will reverse the terminal location decision.
However, I should point out that the location currently proposed for the new International Terminal Complex does not preclude the early provision of a parallel runway. That option remains open if any subsequent examination decides in its favour.
Representatives from my Department have arranged to meet with representatives from the Belmont and Canning City Councils to discuss the planning and development of Perth Airport, I do not believe my personal involvement is required at this stage.
Special Arrangements for Disabled Persons: Department of Health
(Question No. 474)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) In view of the fact that 1981 is designated as the International Year of Disabled Persons, what special arrangements has his Department made to assist disabled persons.
(2) Do any special arrangements made include (a) increased employment of disabled persons and (b) improved access for disabled persons to any building or other facility occupied by his Department; ifso what are the details.
(3) What budgetary allocations were made in 1980-81 to facilitate any special arrangements for the disabled persons in his Department.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 458 on this matter by the Minister assisting the Prime Minister in which the honourable Minister provided a general answer as to the Government's commitment and philosophy to the employment of disabled people in the Commonwealth sector and the Commonwealth's approach as a major employer to this matter. The situation with regard to the Public Service Board and Departments generally was explained.
My Department currently employs a total of 25 disabled people throughout Australia. Engagement of staff with disabilities is arranged through the Special Placements Officers located within the Public Service Board's Regional Director's Offices. The Department has always been willing to employ any disabled people referred by Special Placements . Officers so far as suitable vacancies allow.
Initatives that particularly concern my portfolio in assisting the disabled in the community include:
(i) A new program under which a wide range of aids are made available without charge to disabled people who are not eligible for them under other governmentfunded programs. The categories of aids include home modifications, wheelchairs, walking aids, orthoses and special personal domestic aids.
(ii) An extension of the Medical Benefits Schedule as from I January 1981 so that persons aged less than 22

648 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Answers to Questions

years with cleft lip and cleft palate conditions ean claim medical benefits for orthodontic and associated treatment carried out after I January 1981 in the same way as they claim medical benefits for the professional services rendered by medical practitioners.
(iii) The Isolated Patient's Travel and Accommodation Assistance Scheme has been extended to provide assistance towards trllvel and accommodation costs incurred by cleft lip and palate patients who are required to travel long distances to obtain orthodontic and associated dental treatment.
Ambulance Subscriptions for Pensioners
(Question No. 767)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
Is it a fact that there is a discrepancy between ambulance subscriptions for pensioners in the Australian Capital Territory compared with those in New South Wales; if so, will he take action to remove this.anomaly.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No. Persons who are resident in the Australian Capital Territory and who are in receipt of an age pension, an invalid pension, a widow's pension or a supporting parent's benefit under the Social Services Act 1947, or dependants of such persons, are entitled to free ambulance transportation within the Australian Capital Territory.
Under existing reciprocal arrangements between the States and Territories for the operation of ambulance services, persons who are members of one scheme are entitled to free emergency ambulance transportation while travelling interstate. For the purposes of these arrangements, persons in the above categories who reside in the Australian Capital Territory and who wish to obtain free emergency ambulance transportation while interstate are required to obtain membership of the Australian Capital Territory Ambulance Subscription Scheme. The fee for this membership is $3.75 per annum, which is identical to the fee for pensioner membership in the New South Wales Ambulance Service.
Skin Cancer
(Question No. 768)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(I) What facilities are available in the Australian Capital Territory for the treatment of skin cancer and the provision of deep ray treatment.
(2) Is it a fact that all skin cancer patients must travel to Sydney for treatment.
(3) Is he able to provide details of the cost of this travel and whether subsidies are available for patients who are in receipt of socia Isecurity payments.
(4) Will action be taken to provide these facilities in the Australian Capital Territory; if so, what action.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) All usual modes of therapy for the treatment of skin cancer are available in the Australian Capital Territory. Superficial X-ray therapy is rarely used in modern dermatological practice and has been superseded by other forms of treatment. Deep ray therapy is, in the main, not used in the treatment of skin cancer.

(2) It is extremely rare for skin cal}cer patients to travel to Sydney for treatment. Occasionally patients may be referred at the direction of individual medical practitioners in the Australian Capital Territory.
(3) Travel cost details are not available since the occasional referrals do not necessarily come to the notice of the Capital Territory Health Commission and are not recorded. Two schemes exist for providing travel assistance for patients who are required to travel interstate for treat- . ment. However, they relate to treatment which cannot be provided in the Australian Capital Territory and therefore do not apply in the case of treatment of skin cancer.
(4) No action is necessary in view of (I) above.
Special Youth Employment Training Program
(Question No. 966)
Mr Hawke asled the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(I) How many trainees are currently being employed under the Special Youth Employment Training Program (SYETP) by (a) Commonwealth and (b) State Government Departments.
(2) How many SYETP trainees were taken on at these 2 levels of government during (a) 1978-79 and (b) 1979-80.
(3) How many SYETP trainees in total does the Commonwealth Government propose to take on during 1980-81.
(4) How many extended SYETP trainees does the Government intend to employ itself as part of the Commitment to Youth initiative to improve the labour market position of young persons unemployed for more than 8 months.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) 1,200 trainees. (b) 2,670 trainees.
(2) (a) 1978-79 Commonwealth SYETP 1,000 trainees; States SYETP 1,820 trainees.
(b) 1979-80 Commonwealth SYETP 1,800 trainees; State SYETP 4,745 trainees.
(3) During 1980-81 the Commonwealth took on 3,600 trainees.
(4) The provisions for extended SY ETP only apply to the private sector.
Patients' Medical Records
(Question No. 970)
Mr Good luck asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(I) Have the personal files on patients held by doctors ever been divulged to investigators, whether they were Australian Federal Police or Department of Health officers; if so, when and where did this occur.
(2) Will he give a categorical assurance that the personal and private information of patients contained in these files will not be divulged to anyone in the future.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am advised that during the course of investigations into possible breaches of the National Health, Health Insurance and the Commonwealth Crimes Acts relating to health matters, files or documents held by doctors, including personal patient files, have been seized under warrant for

Answers to Questions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 649

evidentiary purposes. Records of 16 doctors have been involved in the past five years insofar as officers of the Department of Health are concerned.
It is pointed out that 15 of the 16 doctors referred to, cover the number of times that Departmental officers have responded to Australian Federal Police requests for assistance under the terms of the search warrants. In the other instance, the medical practitioner voluntarily gave documents to a departmental officer during the course of an interview. The doctor also delivered other documents to the Department. Of course there have been many pther instances where AFP officers, in the'course of investigating inquiries initiated by my Department, have executed warrants without assistance from Departmental officers. I am advised that the further detailed information sought by the honourable member is not readily available from the AFP and to fully research the queries raised would require extensive redeployment of resources.
While both I and my colleague, the Minister for Administrative Services, accept the need to provide as far as possible information sought by honourable members, we do not consider it would be appropriate in this instance for us to authorise such an extensive redeploy~ent of resources away from other Health and AFP functions.
(2) Strict guidelines have been laid down by the AFP for the handling of patient records. These guidelines were outlined by the Minister for Administrative Services in the answer to Senate Question No. 172 (Hansard, page 142, 25 February 1981).
Nursing Home Subsidy Assistance
(Question No. 1003)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 1 April 1981 :
(I) What system is used to provide subsidy assistance to nursing home patients.
(2) Are participating scheme nursing homes receiving any funds from the Government.
(3) How many persons are in these homes.
(4) Is it assumed that the subsidy level and the age pension equals or betters the nursing home fee charged in 70 per cent of Australian nursing homes operating under the participating scheme.
(5) Is it a fact that a recent survey showed that instead of the 70 per cent level, the subsidy and pension was only equalled or bettered by 21 per cent in Tasmania to 58 per cent in South Australia.
(6) Can a policy of indexation of subsidy more readily meet the policy assumption referred to in part (4).
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Nursing homes may be approved under the National Health Act or the Nursing Homes Assistance Act. National Health Act homes receive nursing home benefits from the Commonwealth in respect of uninsured patients and from registered health insurance funds in respect of insured patients. Benefits are paid on a per diem basis.
Homes approved under the Nursing Homes Assistance Act have their approved operating deficits met by the Commonwealth. Again insured patients receive benefits from their funds and these benefits are classified as income for deficit financing purposes. Deficit funded homes can also have the cost of approved asset replacements met by the Commonwealth.
From I September 1981 the payment of benefits to all nursing home patients will be taken over by the Commonwealth,

thus relieving the hospital insurance funds of their commitments in this area.
(2) Participating nursing homes are approved under the National Health Act. As indicated in (I) above this Act provides that the proprietor receives specified nursing home benefits for each day in respect of which a patient is accommodated, currently either from the Commonwealth or from a hospital benefits organisation.
(3) There are some 40000 nursing home beds in private nursing homes operating under the participating nursing home scheme. At anyone time there would be close to 40 000 patients involved as beds in this area operate at close to 100 per cent occupancy.
(4) The Commonwealth Government introduced higher nursing home benefit levels in all States in October 1977 and undertook to review these benefits annually. In reviewing benefits each year the principle adopted by the Commonwealth is that benefits should be set at a level in each State which, together with the minimum statutory patient contribution (seven-eighths of the single rate pension plus .supplementary assistance), would cover fees charged for 70 per cent of beds in the State in non-Government nursing homes approved under the National Health Act. Fees are controlled by my Department and before a nursing home can increase its fees the proprietor must make application demonstrating that operating costs have increased.
(5) Benefits were last increased under the above formula on 6 November 1980. As fees increase during the benefit year some erosion of the protection afforded to patients by benefit levels does take place. A survey conducted by my Department on 7 May 1981 indicated coverage by benefits and minimum patient contribution ranging from 45 per cent in Queensland to 66 per cent in Tasmania. The coverage in South Australia was 60 per cent. In the case of Queensland I understand that a work value decision affecting nursing staff outside the wage indexation guidelines, accelerated the upward pressure on fees and hence the erosion of benefit cover.
If, however, the full age pension, as referred to in the honourable member's question, is taken into account the cover afforded by benefits plus full pension (with supplementary assistance) ranges from 75 per cent in South Australia to 80 per cent in Queensland.
(6) By adjusting nursing home benefits annually, the Government is endeavouring to limit the gap between fees and benefits so that nursing home care is within the reach of all those who need it, in line with the Government's commitment to the continued support of the aged and needy in nursing homes. I can assure the honourable member that the Commonwealth shortly will again be undertaking a review of nursing home fees in all States with a view to increasing benefits where necessary in November.
Nevertheless I am, of course, aware of the problem of patients and their relatives in meeting an increasing gap between fees and benefits as the benefit year progresses. As in all areas of Government expenditure the Government has a responsibility to the taxpayers of Australia who, as the Government has now decided to also meet nursing home benefits previously paid by hospital funds to insured patients, will be contributing close to $600m in a full year in payment to nursinghomes.
However, in line with the Government's continued and firm commitment towards the care of aged persons, the whole area of fees control of nursing homes is under review in consultation with the private nursing home industry. One of the matters addressed in this review will be the erosion of benefit protection under the present system, as cost pressures lead to fee increases throughout the benefit year.
I have indicated to the National Standing Committee of Nursing Homes and my Department that this review of the

650 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Fees control scheme should take place within the Framework of recognition of the need For proper care for patients, constraint on Government expenditure, simplifi<rd administrative controls, reduced Government intervention and appropriate incentives For proprietors.
As the honourable member will appreciate, Fees control of nursing homes is a complex issue involving as it does the proper care of the sick and frail aged, equity to both patients and proprietors, and Government responsibility to the taxpayers of this countrY. Any changes to the present system will thereFore require careful consideration. However, I am hopeful that the present review will lead to early proposals consistent with the framework I have outlined.
A New Start for the Under-Achiever Association
(Question No. 1194)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the work performed by the Association known as A New Start for the UnderAchiever (ANSUA).
(2) Is he able to provide the addresses for each branch of ANSUA in each State.
(3) Does ANSUA aid children with learning difficulties and/or delayed development caused by a minor nervous system dysFunction which include autism, MBD or MCD brain dysfunction, dyslexia, dysmetric dyslexia, dyspraxia hyper kin~is, hypo activity, nystagmus, perceptual disorder, specific language disabilities, vestibular disorders and poor motor sensory integration.
(4) What methods does ANSUA promote in the early detection and identification of children with learning difficulties.
(5) What are the common characteristics of primary and secondary school children with neurological dysfunction.
(6) What does the ANSUA primary and inFant grade program consist of.
(7) What is ANSUA 's secondary school program.
(8) Is it a fact that an independent research company conducted a survey into the effectiveness of ANSUA program and did that study conclude that a great deal of improvement had occurred for (a) 56 per cent of children aged 1-6 years (b) 47 per cent of children aged 7-10 years and (c) 35 per cent of children aged II years and above.
(9) Did that study also conclude that some improvement had occurred for (a) 37 per cent of children aged 1-6 years (b) 30 per cent of children aged 7-10 years and (c) 35 per cent of children aged II years or older.
(10) Was the total percentage of children who improved either slightly or greatly as a result of ANSUA programs in the region of 81 per cent.
(II) Has assistance been sought under the Special Education Program by ANSUA; ifso, what assistance.
(12) What assistance has been given to ANSUA under the (a) Children in Resdiential Institutions Program, (b), Integration of Handicapped Children in Regular Schools Program and (c) other special education programs.
(13) Is ANSUA eligible to apply For assistance under the Projects of National Significance allocation.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) I understand that ANSUA's head office is located at the corner of Elgar and Canterbury Roads in Box Hill, Victoria (Postcode: 3128). It should be possible to obtain the

addresses for each Branch in each State by contacting the head office.

(3), (4), (5), (6) and (7). I am advised that ANSUA's objectives include the provision of specific therapy programs
For children and young people suffering from delayed devel-
opment or learning difficulties. I do not have detailed knowledge of all of ANSUA's activities but I assume that further information could be provided by AN~UA.

(8), (9) and (10). I assume thanhe honourable member is

referring to 'ANSU A A Subjective Survey 1977' conducted by

John Aitchison and Associates on behalf of ANSUA. The re-

searchers who carried out the Survey noted that it was not

intended to be a properly designed and controlled experiment

to assess the effectiveness of the AN SUA program but rather

an assessment of the attitudes of parents whose children were

involved in the program.

'

(II') and (12) Assistance has not been sought directly From the Commonwealth's Special Education Program. If it were, it would not be possible to grant it, because funds available
under the Special Education Program For government and non-government special schools and classes are administered in the States. For government schools and classes Education
Departments determine expenditure priorities. For nongovernment schools and classes grants are recommended for approval to the Commonwealth.Education Minister by State
Education Departments. For ANSUA to be eligible for a grant it would be necessary for the State Education Minister to notify the Commonwealth Education Minister that in his
opinion ANSUA should be treated as a special school and be
funded at a particular level under the States Grants (Schools
Assistance) Act.

. (13) ANSUA is eligible to apply for assistance under the
Projects of National Significance allocation. Advertisements for this Program appeared in the national press in January and February 1981 and applications for 1981 funding closed on 27 February 1981. I am advised that ANSUA did not apply for
funding For 1981.

Expenditure Commitments: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 1223)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(I) What specific commitments for expenditure, excluding

normal recurring costs of running the Department such as

salaries and administrative costs, does his Department have

for (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.

'

(2) What sum is involved in each commitment and what is the purpose of the commitment.

(3) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that when a similar question was answered by a number of Ministers in 1976; it was claimed that obtaining the inFormation would involve collection of detailed information from a diversity of records and sources, and would therefore require unjustifiable use of staff resources.

(4) Has the development of forward estimates in his Department now been advanced to a stage where a similar reply
is no longer valid.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

I reFer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 1216 given by the Minister for Finance which appeared in the weekly Hansard of 10 June 1981.

Answers to Questions

20 August. 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 651

Expenditure Commitments: Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No. 1227)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) What specific commitments for expenditure, excluding normal recurring costs of running the Department such as salaries and administrative costs, does his Department have for (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
(2) What sum is involved in each commitment and what is the purpose of the commitment.
(3) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that when a similar question was ans~ered by a number of Ministers in 1976, it was claimed that obtaining the information would involve collection of detailed information from a diversity of records and sources, and would therefore require unjustifiable use of staff resources.
(4) Has the development of forward estimates in his Department now been advanced to a stage where a similar reply is no longer valid.
Mr Hodgman-I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Minister for Finance to QuestionNo. 1216, which appears in the weekly Hansard oflO June 1981.
Annual Reports and Other Publications: Department of Health
(Question No. 1247)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) What annual reports are produced by his Department and authorities under his aegis.
(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.
(3) Are other regular publications issued by his Department and these authorities; if so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of each.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2)-

Title of report

Cost of production
in 1979-80

Annual Report of the Director-General of Health . . . . . . . . . . . .
Medical Research Projects . . . . . . . Annual Report on Operations of the Registered
Medical Benefits and Hospital Benefits
Organizations . . . . . . . . . . Health Insurance Commission Annual Report Commonwealth Serum Laboratories, Report of
the Commission . . . . . . . . . Capital Territory Health Commission Annual
Report . . . . . . . . . . . .

$ 14,770 4,165
3,500 5,560 4,146 *5,264

37,405

'This figure includes an amount for the production of an Interim Report, the cost of which cannot be readily identified.
(3)-

Title of report publication

Cost of

Cost of

production distribution

in 1979-80 in 1979-80

Health Journal Australian Prescriber
National Health and Medical Research Council Session Reports
Technical Information Bulletin Pesticides Review Medical Benefits Schedule
Benefits for Consultations by Participating Optometrists
Medical Benefits for Services by Dental Practitioners
Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits for Medical
Practitioners Schedule of Pharmaceutical
Benefits for Approved Chemists
(plus cumulative monthly amendments)
Schedule of Pharmaceutical Benefits for Dentists
Extemporaneously Prepared Benefits Book
Food and Nutrition Notes and Reviews
Communicable Diseases Intelligence Bulletin
Vetspress
Labpress
Medipress Hospital and Pharmacy News
Annual Report to Staff, Commonwealth Serum Laboratories
InsideCSL

$ 31,067 93,178
18,809 8,811
950 135,000
4,000
4,500
92,980
48,703
4,042
7,736
12,929
5,214 1,500
639 1,641 2,179
535 2,300

$ 7,855 11,972
2,480 2,400
210 50,000
3,900
3,000
31,000
22,000 3,600
3,800 5,980 4,400 *tnil 'tnil 'tnil t2,OOO
tnil t633

476,713

155,230

* There are no distribution costs for these publications as they are circulated by representatives when visiting medical
practitioners etc. t Issued by Commonwealth Serum Laboratories.

Annual Reports and Other Publications: Department of Home Affairs and Environment
(Question No. 1257)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What annual reports are produced by his Department and authorities under his aegis.
(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.
(3) Are other regular publications issued by his Department and these authorities; if so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of each.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The following annual reports are produced by my Department and associated authorities:
Department of Home Affairs and Environment Annual -Report

652 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Christmas Island Annual Report Cocos (Keeling) Islands Annual Report Norfolk Island Annual Report National Fitness Annual Report National Women's Advisory Council Annual Report Australian Film Commission Annual Report Australia Council Annual Report Australian Film and Television School Annual Report Australian War Memorial Annual Report Supervising Scientist for the Alligator Rivers Region Annual Report , Australian National Parks and WildliFe Service Annual Report Australian Heritage Commission Annual Report
Australian National Gallery Annual Report , National Library of Australia Annual Report
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority Annual Report
(2) The cost of production of Annual Reports for 1979-80 was:

Public~tion

Cost

Department of Home Affairs Annual Report

1979-80 , , , . , , . . . ,

Christmas Island Annual Report 1979-80

Cocos (Keeling) Islands Annual Report 1979-80

Norfolk Island Annual Report 1979-80

National Fitness Annual Report 1979-80

National Women's Advisory Council Annual Re-

port 1979-80 . , . . .

Australian Film Commission Annual Report

1979-80 . . , . , . . . , . . . .

Australia Council Annual Report 1979-80

Australian Film and Television School Annual

Report 1979-80 " " "

Australian War Memorial Annual Report

1979-80 . . , . . , . . . .

Australian Heritage Commission Annual Report

1979-80 . . . . . . .

Australian National Gallery Annual Report

1979-80

.....

National Library of Australia Annual Report

1979-80

.....

$
3,500 3,000 4,500 2,000 3,000
4,000
12,073 36,198
650
1,328
2,171
4,184
6,915

83,519

The followingAnuual Reports were produced under the aegis of the Department of Science and the Environment in 1979-80, and will in future be the responsibility of my
Department:

Supervising Scientist for the Alligator Rivers Re-

gion Annual Report 1979-80

.....

Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service

Annual Report 1979-80

Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority

Annual Report 1979-80

1,955 2,652 2,457

7,064

(3) The following is a list of other publications issued by my Department and associated authorities, together with their
production and distribution costs. In cases where production

and distribution are not costed separately, just the total figure is given.

Publication

ProDistriduction bution Total

Australian Sports Directory National Estate Directory 'Artforce' (1980-81)
Australian Film and Television School Handbook
'Heritage Newsletter' (1979-80)
Australian National Gallery AnilUal Review 1979-80

$ 42,577

National Library

Publications:

Australian National Bibl-

iography

125,400

Australian Public Affairs Infor-

mation Service (Monthlies

and Annual)

81,400

Australian Government Publi-

cations (Quarterly and

Annual)

25,600

Australian Maps (Quarterly and

Annual),

6,200

Serials in Australian Libraries

Social Science and Humani-,

ties on computer microfiche

catalogue (Quarterlies)

11,000

Film Acquisitions (Quarterlies) 6,800

Acquisitions Newsletter (Quar-

tefty)

4,600

Australian Marc (machine read-

able catalogue) Record Ser-

vice Title Index on computer

microfiche ca talogue

(Monthly and Annual)

2,700

Australian Films (Annual)

4,400

National Library Microfiche

catalogue.(Quarterly)

6,600

National Union Catalogue:

Handicapped (Quarterly)

200

Australian Advisory Council on

Bibliographical Services

Annual

1,700

$ 11,932

$ 2,500 4,000
54,509

5,639 1,574

4,151

30,000 155,400
13,200 94,600
5,400 31,000 1,250 7,450
1,500 12,500 2,500 9,300 1,100 5,700

900 1,450
1,500
40

3,600 5,850
8,100
240

300 3,000

Employment of Private Consultants: Department of Education
(Question No. 1274)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by his Department in 1979-80; if so, (a) how many were employed, (b) who were they, (c) for what purpose was each employed and (d) what payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firm.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) to (d) The following consultants undertook a range of projects on the Department's behalf in 1979-80.

Name
Prof. J. Anderson (Flinders University)

Project

Cost

$

Survey of Users Views of Material for Teaching English to Migrants

587

Answers to Questions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 653

Name
Australian Council for Educational Research
Dr D. Beswick MrM. Hayden
(University of Melbourne) DrD. Davis
(Monash University) Ms E. Fesl
(Monash University) Prof. F. Gruen
(Australian National University)
Dr. J. McMaster (Canberra College of Advanced Education)
DrG. Webb (University of New South Wales)
Mre. Hubbert (Australian Council for Educational Research)
DrP. Meade (Kelvin Grove CAE)
Dr P. Meade (Kelvin Grove CAE)
DrJ. Martin (Australian National University)
Prof. D. Spearritt (University of Sydney)
Prof. P. Tannock Mr D. Tomlinson
(UniversityofWA) MrE. Will mot Dre. Young
(Australian National University)
Dr M. Petty (University of New South Wales)
Mr A. Faulkner (Centre for Urban Research and Action)

Project
Study of Staffing and Resources for Government Schools (funded as an Australian Education Council project in co-operation with States) Survey of Tertiary Student Needs . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Cost
$
8,750 7,359

Evaluation of Migrant Language Courses for Professionals Evaluation of Aboriginal Adult Literary Courses Validation of Student Costs

4,500 21,000
4,000

Evaluation of EPUY Evaluation of Secondary Allowance Scheme Education Experience of Migrant Children
Evaluation of Refugee Children's Contingency Program Evaluation of Assistance to Isolated Children . . . . Consultancy in Relation to NITE Report Study of Turkish and Lebanese Youth

21,787 10,078 5,960
19,994 9,270
528 24;353

The following consultants were engaged in relation to wmraitteinrigalsa.nd production of learning English in Australia

Name
Mr S. and Mrs M. Ellyard Mrs S. Hatherley Mrs B. Heffernan

Cost
$ 2,075
SOS 2,629

_ Na_me_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _Co_st

MrsS.Keating
MrG.Lewis MrK. May Mr D. McRobbie

$ S69 2,S80 190 800

The following consultants were engaged for Departmental staff training courses.

Name
Mr P. Boas DrJ. Damm MrR.Dick DrG. Hawker Mr G. Jackson MrA.Jarman

Project
Communication and Counselling Organisational Change Organisational Change RCAGA and its implications for Managers in the Service Adult Learning Principles Decision Making Models

Cost
$ 1,30S-
800 200
75 600 lOS

654 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Name Mr I. Oliver

Project Human Relations Theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Cost
$ 1,805

Employment of Private Consultants: Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No. 1279)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by his Department in 1979-80; if so, (a) how many were employed, (b) who were they, (c) for what purpose was each employed and (d) what payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firm.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Yes.
(a) Three.
(b), (c) and (d) Mr J. D. Horrigan, for an independent review of rental levels charged for tenancies of Governmentowned dwellings in the Australian Capital Territorypayment $10,000.
. Mr M. A. Bassett, for an examination and the making of recommendations on the system of determining compulsory third party premiums in the Australian Capital Territorypayment $11 ,744.
P. G. Pak-Poy and Associates Pty Ltd, for development of a computer assisted system for scheduling drivers and omnibuses in the public transport system of the Australian Capital Territory-payment $14,247.
Female Officers and Employees: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 1353)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) How many female officers and employees are employed in his Department, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each Division are married.
(3) How many females were appointed or commenced employment in his Department during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 1336 given by the Minister for Industrial Relations, as Minister assisting the Prime Minister, which appeared at page 3314 of the Hansard of 5 June 1981.
Female Officers and Employees: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 1355)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(I) How many female officers and employees are employed in his Department, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third, and (d) Fourth Divisions.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each Division are married.
(3) How many females were appointed or commenced employment in his Department during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister to Question No. 1336 (Hansard, 5 June 1981, page 3314).
Female Officers and Employees: Department of the Capital Territory
(Question No. 1357)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many female officers and employees are employed in his Department, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each Division are married.
(3) How many females were appointed or commenced employment in his Department during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) This information is published regularly in the Public Service Board's Annual Report to Parliament. The latest published figures are at page 140 of the Board's 1980 Annual Report.
(2) Statistical data on the marital status of male and female officers is not collected for the Australian Public Service. This is consistent with both Government and Public Service Board Policies on equal employment opportunity. The collection of statistics specifically on married women was discontinued in 1973.
(3) Tunderstand that the Minister assisting the Prime Minister, Mr Viner, has already provided a table which details appointment of women to the permanent staff of departments during 1979-80. (Refer Hansard, 5 June 1981, page 3314). The comment at (2) also applies to the recording of marital status of women appointees or engagees.
Entertainment and Hospitality: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 1431)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:
(1) What was the (a) estimated and (b) actual expenditure on entertainment and hospitality within Australia by his Department in 1979-80.
(2) What sum was spent in 1979-80 by his Department within Australia on entertainment and hospitality in respect

Answers to Questions

20 August 198 I REPRESENTATIVES 655

of (a) officers of his Department, other Commonwealth and State Departments, or representatives of Commonwealth or State statory authorities.
(3) What officers in his Department are permitted to authorise these expenditures.
(4) Did expenditure on entertainment and hospitality by his Department occur outside Australia during this period; if so, what sum was expended.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 1414 given by the Prime Minister which appeared in the Hansard of 5 June 1981, page 3315.
Overseas Travel: Department of Health
(Question No. 1455)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 198 I:
(I) How many officers and employees of his Department travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travels, including fares, accommodation, allowance, etc.
Mr MacKeIlar-The,answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Department had a quota for 24 overseas visits during 1979-80. 22 officers undertook the 24 visits for I979c80. In addition Department officers travelled overseas under the sponsorship of:-
The Department of Foreign Affairs The World Health Organization The Australian Development Assistance Bureau The Radiation Research Society of Japan The Organizing Committee of an International Symposium on Recent Advances in Ultrasound Diagnosis . The US. Public Health Service ,The Australian/Asian University Cooperation Scheme The International Rubber Research and Development Board St Vincent's Hospital Audiology Research Fund The Oilseeds Research Committee Smith, Kline-RIT The South Pacific Commission The Commonwealth Se'cretary General UNESCO The New Zealand Nutrition Society The Organizing Committee of a Conference on Foodborne Infections and Intoxications
(2) The total cost of the travel for the 24 visits was $97,514.49
Air Travel in Australia: Department of Transport
(Question No. 1480)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for-Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What sum was paid by his Department, or by Departments formerly encompassing the functions now performed by his Department, to each airline for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
A total of $2,036,679 was paid by my Department to fifteen (15) airlines for air travel within Australia during 1979-80.

Details of the amounts paid to each airline during this period are listed below:

Airline
Trans Australia Airlines Ansell Airlines MacRobertson Miller Airlines East-West Airlines Airlines of South Australia . . Connair . . . . . . . Burns Philp & Co. Pty Ltd (agents for Nor-
folk and Lord Howe Airlines) Bush Pilots Transwest Airlines Skywest Airlines Kendall Airlines Stilwell Aviation Air Tasmania North West Airlines Hazelton Air Service

Amount
$ 949,431 795,498 202,151
32,396 23,522 10,313
9,947 9,388 1,770
947 436 416 298 106
60
2,036,679

Australian Airline Companies: Cost Recovery Program

(Question No. 1680)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 198 I:

(1) What additional works and at what cost, will be needed
to permit Trans Australia Airlines to service all capital cities in Australia with the new airbus aircraft.

(2) Will any restrictions apply to the use of the airbus at

Capital City airports.

.

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) I am given to understand that TAA presently plans to operate scheduled A300 aircraft services to Sydney, Mel-
bourne, Brisbane, Adelaide and Perth. Preparations for the required upgrading of facilities at these airports are well advanced. No provision is being made at this stage for scheduled
A300 operations at Canberra, Hobart or Darwin. However,
my Department will be studying Canberra and Hobart with regard to their use as alternate aerodromes for wide bodied
jets.

Further development works for those airports currently
being upgraded, except Brisbane, are being planned for the
198 I-82 Financial year. These projects and their cost are to be considered by the Government in the Budget context and will
be subject to scrutiny by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works.

At the time approval for the introductory phase of the wide
body jet aircraft program was given, it was estimated that
$40m would be required for the initial provision of facilities to serve both airlines.

(2) If the full program is approved in the Budget no restrictions are expected.

Capital Territory Health Commission Grants
(Question No. 1718)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 198 I:

656 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Answers to Questions

How were the 1979-80 grants by the Capital Territory Health Commission of (a) $341,200 to the Canberra Mothercraft Society for the Queen Elizabeth II Home (b), $291,373 to the Red Cross Society (Australian Capital Territory) Blood Bank and (c) $28,200 to the Society of St. Vincent de Paul for Caroline Chisholm House, determined.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) The grant to the Canberra Mothercraft Society is determined by the Capital Territory Health Commission, having regard to information about anticipated receipts and expenditure for both capital and operating items for the forthcoming financial year submitted by the Society. The grant represents the anticipated deficit between receipts from patient fees and expenditure ..
(b) The grant to the Red Cross Society for the operation of the Australian Capital Territory Blood Transfusion Service is in accordance with an agreement between the States and the Commonwealth Government concerning assistance to Blood Transfusion Services operated by the Society. The agreement provides for the society to meet 5 per cent of the operating costs of the Australian Capital Territory, Blood Transfusion Service or contribute 10 per cent of the previous year's income from appeals and donations in the Australian Capital Territory, whichever is the less. The Capital Territory Health Commission meets the balance of the operating costs by way of a grant-in-aid.
(c) The grant to the Society of St. Vincent de Paul in respect of operating and capital costs for Caroline Chisholm House is determined by the Capital Territory Health Commission, having regard to estimates submitted by the Society. The Commission grant of $28,200 was about 85 per cent of total operating costs. Other revenue comes from donations and charges to residents.

Karralika Therapeutic Community
(Question No. 1723)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(I) How was the 1979-80 grant of $41 ;600 to Karralika
Therapeutic Community by the Captial Territory Health Commission determined.

(2) What functions does the centre undertake, and how is it

financed.

.,

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) The Capital Territory Health Commission determined
the level of assistance for the Karralika Therapeutic Community after assessing the Government subvention needed to maintain the centre as an integral component of the network
of services available in the Australian Capital Territory for the care of persons with drug dependent problems.

(2) The Karralika Therapeutic Community provides the

following services:

.

(I) treatment of drug dependence;
(2) facilitation of crisis intervention; and
(3) promotion of support for families and relatives of persons suffering with drug dependent problems.

The drug rehabilitation program, conducted over a period
of 6 months, advances residents through four levels of rehabilitation, assisting them to regain their place in society.

Funds for operating the centre came primarily from the Capital Territory Health Commission grant ($43,500 in

1980-81) with the balance coming from charges raised on residents and donations. Expenditure for the year is estimated to be $64,500.
Weston Creek Community Health Centre
(Question No. 1724)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How was the 1979-80 grant of $27 400 to the Weston Creek Community Health Centre by the Capital Territory Health Commission determined.
(2) What functions does the centre undertake, and how is it financed.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The 1979-80 Community Health Grant of $27400 allocated to the Weston Creek Community Health Centre Inc. was determined by the Commission having regard to the estimates of expenditure for the year submitted by that organisation to the Commission.
(2) This incorporated organisation complements the services provided by the Commission and private practitioners at the Health Centre. It is involved in preventive health activities which include courses in parenting skills, relaxation courses, breast self-examination clinics and a health club. In addition, play groups for children with special needs, senior citizens' activities groups and a bereavement group are conducted. A Community Health Worker and 2 part-time co-ordinators provide counselling, short-term case work and co-ordinate the various community health programs. They are supported by a large group of voluntary helpers.
The organisation is almost entirely funded by the Capital Territory Health Commission apart from some minor revenue from courses conducted by the organisation.
Royal Canberra Hospital
(Question No. 2087)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(I) Will he provide a list of the guests who attended the function on 9 August 1980 to celebrate the approval of the use of the title 'Royal' for Canberra Hospital, Australian Capital Territory.
(2) Was $6 500 spent on organising this function.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The function which was held on 9 August 1979 was essentially a party for members of the hospital staff. Also in attendance were:
the then Chairman of the Capital Territory Health Commission
three previous staff members of very long standing two hospital Chaplains 'four members of the Hospital Auxiliary Executive two hospital schoolteachers.
(2) The cost of the function was approximately $6,500 and was funded from a bequest to the hospital.
Reduction of Staff and Functions: Department of Education
(Question No. 2132)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:

Answers to Q'1estions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 657

Will he provide a detailed list of the-
(a) number of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of his Depart-
ment that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions are implemented.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer to question No. 2119 (Hansard, 5 June, page 3317) by the Minister assisting the Prime Minister.
Reduction of Staff and Functions: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No, 2135)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
Will he provide a detailed list of the (a) numbers of staff and (b) functions to be eliminated in all areas of his Department that are located in the Australian Capital Territory, when the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions are implemented.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 2119 given by the Minister for Industrial Relations, as Minister assisting the Prime Minister, which appeared at page 3317 of the Hansard of 5 June 1981.
Participation in Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting: Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 2178)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(I) How many (a) 2nd Division (b) 3rd Division and (c) 4th Division officers in his Department are engaged (i) full time or (ii) part-time in administrative, policy or other preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne.
(2) How many officers of his Department are expected to attend the meeting.
(3) What is the expected cost of their attendance at the meeting, including salaries, overtime, accommodation, travel and other expenses.
(4) What other expenses does he expect his Department to incur as a result of Australia's participation in, and conduct of, the meeting.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 2162 given by the Prime Minister which appeared in the weekly Hansard of 10June 1981.
Participation in Commo.nwealth Heads of Government Meeting: Department of the Capital
Territory
(Question No, 2183)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:

(I) How many (a) 2nd Division, (b) 3rd Division and (c) 4th Division officers in his Department are engaged (i) full time or (ii) part-time in administrative, policy or other preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne.
(2) How many officers of his Department are expected to attend the meeting.
(3) What is the expected cost of their attendance at the meeting, including salaries, overtime, accommodation, travel _and other expenses.
(4) What other expenses does he expect his Department to incur as a result of Australia's participation in, and conduct of, the meeting.
Mr Hodgman-I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Prime Minister to Question No. 2162, which appears in the weekly Hansard of 10 June 1981.
Work-related Back Injuries
(Question No. 2254)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 13 May 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the statement made by the Royal Australasian College of Radiologists that whereas pre-employment radiography of the lumbosacral spine was introduced in the I940s in an attempt to reduce the incidence of work-related back injuries by identifying factors which predispose to the subsequent development of lumbar disability, the accumulated data indicates that there is rarely, if ever any, predictive value from such an examination, that there is potential harm from gonadal irradiation without benefit to health and that the College considers that the practice is illadvised and should be condemned.
(2) Will he consult with his colleague, the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, with a view to informing employers and insurance companies of the views of the College.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) This matter has been drawn to the attention of the National Health and Medical Research Council and will be considered at its next meeting. A copy of Council's recommendation will be conveyed to my colleague the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs.
In the meantime copies of the statements .made by the Royal Australasian College of Radiologists have been forwarded to the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs.
Impact of FM Stat.ions
(Question No. 2304)
Dr Jenkins asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 14 May 1981:
(I) Has his Department been conducting an a'ssessment of the impact of new commercial and public FM Stations under 'Guidelines for the Planning of Public Broadcasting in Phase I' before issuing licences under Phase II.
(2) If so, (a) when did the assessment commence, (b) what specific areas do the assessment studies cover and (c) what stage have the impact studies now reached.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) At the present stage of FM sound broadcasting development, Public Broadcasting Phase I is incomplete,

658 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Commercial (FM) Broadcasting Phase I is also incomplete and legislation relating to supplementary FM radio licenses has recently been passed by the Parliament. Clearly it will not be possible to develop guidelines for Phase 2 of FM broadcasting, until the impact of Phase I (including the question of remaining frequency resources) has been assessed; and such an assessment cannot take place until the earlier Phase is complete.
Women's Refuges
(Question No. 2314)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 26 May 1981:
(I) Has the demand for women's refuges for the destitute (evicted, stranded without funds or refugees from grievous bodily harm) grown while their funding in real terms has fallen; if so, will the Government revise its spending priorities to guarantee first emergency accommodation.
(2) What steps has the Government taken to persuade Queensland to abandon its policy of requiring 12t per cent of funds to be raised by volunteers before-State or Federal funding is given even where the need is greatest and voluntary fund-raising least effective, resulting in the refuge at Rockhampton, Queensland, being unable to employ an, approved $10,000 per year child care officer.
(3) Does the Minister recognise the difficulty created by a major voluntary fund-raising public appeal which increases the demand for services sometimes faster than the supply of funds, so that mattresses on Hoors accommodate numbers beyond those approved while other destitute families are turned away.
(4) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the fact that in Queensland, Aborigines are especially in need of these services and comprised 3.5 per cent of all families and about 7 per cent of all persons sheltered recently in the Rockhampton refuge.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Progress reports on the women's refuges program which have been received by my Department generally indi: cate that there has been an increase in the demand for' services by women's refuges. However, their funding in real terms has not fallen. The number of women's refuges approved for funding under the Community Health Program has risen from 19 to the present 97 since the Governmentcame to office. Furthermore, Commonwealth financial support for women's refuges has risen from just under $50,000 in 1974-75 to $3.5m in 1979-80 and $3.82m in 1980-81. General revenue grants by the Commonwealth to the States for 1981-82 will include a component equal to the specific purpose payments made to the States for women's refuges in 1980-81, plus 10 per cent.
(2) and (3) It is a matter for each State Government to decide what level of funding will be provided by the State for women's refuges under the Community Health Program. For its part, the Commonwealth Government has been funding women's refuges' operating costs at the high level of 75 per cent.
The reference to an amount of $\0,000 per annum is presumably a reference to the assistance provided to women's refuges under the Children's Services Program which is administered by my colleague, the Minister for Social Security. Under that Program, an on-going grant of $\0,000 per annum has been made available to a number of refuges as a contribution towards the cost of employing child care workers and, in addition, a $2,000 grant is available to assist with the purchase of equipment etc.

I am informed that the Women's Shelter Committee at Rockhampton has lodged an application to the Department of Social Security for these grants but the application has not been processed because the funds available to the Program in 1980-81 have been fully committed. The application will be
further considered in the light of the funds situation in 1981-82.

I am unaware of any direct connection between the provision of funds to women's refuges under the Children's Services Progra'm and the level of funds provided by the Queensland Government for women's refuges under the Community Health Program.

(4) I am aware that, in some areas of Queensland, the

utilisation of women's refuges by Aboriginal women and chil-

dren is relatively high.

.

Acquisition of Rural Land by Overseas Interests
(Question No. 2318)
Mr Kerin asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 26 May 1981:
(I) Does the Foreign Investment Review Board keep separate figures for the acquisition of rural land by overseas interests.
(2) [f so, what was the value of rural land purchased by overseas interests in each of the last five years.
(3) What were the countries of origin of the purchasers.
(4) How much rural land has been bought during the period I January to 25 May 1981.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes, the Foreign Investment Review Board which was established in April 1976 keeps records of the proposals approved under the Government's foreign investment policy. These records do not, however, indicate whether the purchases take place. Nor do the Board's statistics record sales by foreign interests to Australians as these proposals do not require notification.
(2) The consideration for rural properties involved in proposals approved under the Governmen't's .foreign investment policy for the period April 1976 to 31 December 1976 and for the calendar years 1977, 1978, 1979 and 1980 was approximately $9.5m, $23.3m, $30.3m, $55.1 m and $68.9m respectively. It should be noted, however, that these figures include proposals by foreign purchasers who intend to come and live in Australia on a permanent basis. In 1980, for example, pro' posals by intending migrants accounted for some 32 per cent of the total consideration of $68.9m. Approvals to proposals involving intending migrants are normally given on the condition that if the persons concerned are unable or unwilling to take up permanent residence in Australia by a specified date the property in question be sold to Australians or other eligible persons.
(3) British and United States interests were the' main foreign investors in Australian rural land over the period April 1976 to 31 December 1980. However, interest was shown by investors from a wide range of countries and [ am forwarding to the honourable member detailed statistics compiled by the Board.
(4) Over the period I January to 25 May 1981 approval was given for foreign interests to acquire approximately 253,000 hectares for a consideration of approximately $44m. Of this total about $12m worth of land was to be acquired by foreign persons intending to migrate to Australia.

Answers to Questions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 659

United States Bases in Australia
(Question No. 2347)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice,'on 27 May 1981:
(I) Has the Soviet Union acknowledged that North West Cape, WA., Pine Gap, N.T., Nurrungar, S.A. and Darriman, Vic., are nuclear targets.
(2) [s it a fact that there is nothing secret or classified about Omega.
(3) Can he say whether Omega facilities are as open to public inspection as are lighthouses; if they are not, what is the reason.
(4) [s all information obtained and processed from United Slates of America installations in Australia available promptly on request to the Australian Government.
(5) Will the Government make an early complete public report on these installations and the quantity and significance of the information to (a) science, (b) industry and (c) military strategy and tactics.
(6) Can he say whether these installations are part of a global nuclear weapons system aimed at (a) mutually assured deterrence and (b) a flexible response counterforce strategy.
(7) Is the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty aimed at limiting the number of nations involved in control of and exposure to nuclear weapons.
(8) Does ANZUS or any other understanding between Australia and the USA. commit (a) Australia to retain USA. controlled facilities on Australian soil of (b) the USA. to (i) give preference to Australia's interests in some category of military decisions or (ii) avoid exposure of Australia to attack at the cost of some disadvantage or inconvenience to American interests in certain cases; if so, what are the details.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Government is not aware of any formal statements by the Government of the USSR that have "acknowledged that North West Cape, WA., Pine Gap, N.T., Nurrungar, S.A. and Darriman, Vic., are nuclear targets". Some Soviet commentators have made general assertions that the existence of the joint Australia/United States defence facilities in Australia is contrary to Australia's security interests. [n March 1981 the Soviet Ambassador to Australia is reported to have said that the upgrading of "United States' bases" (by which he seems to have been referring to the Joint Defence Space Research Facility (JDSRF) at Pine Gap and the TRANET station at Smithfield) could make Australia a target in a nuclear war.
(2) There is nothing secret or classified about the Omega Navigation [nstallation which is under construction at Darriman, nor about the world-wide Omega system of which it will form part.
(3) The Government has no information about access to Omega installations in other countries. When the Omega installation at Darriman has been completed it will be made open to public inspection.
(4) All information obtained and processed from the installations concerned, that is wanted by the Australian Government, is available to it promptly on request.
(5) No.
(6) (a and b) The JDSRF and the Joint Defence Space Communications Station (JDSCS) at Nurrungar are not parts of a weapons system. Nor would it be correct to describe the functions of the TRANET Station at Smithfield, or the

defence-related facilities as "part of a global nuclear weapons system". The primary function of the Naval Communication Station at North West Cape is the relay of very low frequency communications to United States submarines, including fleet ballistic missile submarines. As such it has an important role in that element of the United States nuclear weapons system. Neither of the phrases used by the honourable member iiI parts (a) and (b) of question 6 accurately describes current United States nuclear strategy.
(7) Yes.
(8) The Joint Australia/United States defence facilities and defence-related facilities in Australia are jointly operated and controlled by the two governments concerned not solely by the United States.
(a) Article" of the ANZUS Treaty States that the Parties "separately and jointly by means of continuous and effective self-help and mutual aid will maintain and develop their individual and collective capacity to resist armed attack" but does not specifically commit the Australian Government to provide facilities in Australia. The reference to that Article in the preamble to the bilateral agreements on the defence facilities jointly operated by Australia and the United States at North West Cape, Pine Gap and Nurrungar indicates the judgement of Australian Governments that hosting the facilities in Australia is of assistance in developing the individual and collective capacity of Australia and the United States to resist armed attack. The duration of the commitment of the Australian Government to hosting the specific joint facilities in Australia is recorded in the publicly available agreement on each facility.
(b) There are no understandings between Australia and the United States for the latter to give preference to Australia's security over its own. Nor are there agreements for Australia to give preference to the security concerns of the United States over Australia's own security interests. What do exist are agreements, including the ANZUS Treaty, and practices over the past 40 years, for the two countries to work together to protect their mutual security interests.
Health Insurance: Cosmetic Operations
(Question No. 2388)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(I) Has he discussed with organisations representing plastic surgeons the proposal to disallow health insurance cover for certain cosmetic operations.
(2) Will he promote public and parliamentary debate on these proposals before their implementation.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes, with representatives of the Australian Society of Plastic Surgeons and with representatives of the Al)stralian Medical Association.
(2) Changes involving certain cosmetic surgery procedures were implemented in the Medical Benefits Schedule with effect from I April 1981. As these changes are already in force the question of promoting debate before their implementation does not arise.
Urine Testing in Baby Health Centres
(Question No. 2391)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:

660 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) Further to his answer to question No. 1071 (Hansard, 26 May 1981, pages 2633-4), is his Department aware of any plans to discontinue urine testing through Baby Health Centres and the N.S. W. Metabolic Reference Laboratory.
(2) If so, what steps will he take to ensure continued urine testing in Baby Health Centres in the Australian Capital Territory.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Yes. On 16 April 1981 the Capital Territory Health Commission was advised by the Health Commission of New South Wales that the Newborn Urine Screening Program was to cease.
The main aim of the Urine Screening Program was the detection of phenylketonuria (P.K.U.). Screening for P.K.U. in the Australian Capital Territory is now done in the Commission's Path'ology Laboratory by "Guthrie" testing.
The investigation of urine samples from A.C.T. patients with symptoms suggestive of metabolic disease will continue to be done by the N.S.W. Oliver Latham Laboratories at North Ryde.

Student Assistance Review Tribunal

(Question No, 2400)

Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:

(I) How many decisions made by his Department to reject
applications for TEAS allowance have been reversed subsequently, upon appeal, in each State since I January 1976.

(2) How many of these successful appeals to the Student
Assistance Review Tribunal have thereupon been disallowed or disapproved by the Attorney-General's Department.

(3) Is it a fact that decisions of the Student Assistance Review Tribunal upholding appeals have been referred to the
Attorney-General's Department for legal analysis and opinion; if so, under whose authority have the referrals been made.

(4) Are the referrals standard procedure for all appeal decisions, both successful and unsuccessful.

(5) Is it a fact that TEAS appellants who have been successful during one year in upholding their application for
TEAS allowance, can be and have been rejected the following year, without variation in circumstances or eligibility criteria.

(6) If so, is the apparent inconsistency of the Student As-
sistance Review Tribunal attributable to advice received from the Attorney-General's Department.

(7) Can a case put to the Tribunal in support of an application for TEAS Allowance be properly based on the precedent set by the Appeal Tribunal in the preceding year or in preced-
ing years, with all circumstances and conditions of eligibility remaining unchanged.

(8) Are precedents established by the Tribunal binding on that Tribunal when no change has been made to the Tri-
bunal's terms of reference and no relevant amendment has been made to the Act under which the Tribunal operates.

Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Section 26 of the Student Assistance Act 1973 provides

that a Student Assistance Review Tribunal which reviews a

decision qf an "authorized person" (that is, an officer of the

Department so appointed under the Act), shall give a decision

either by affirming the decision, varying it (i.e. altering the de-

scuisbiosntaninceonoef

or more respects the decision), or

without however setting aside the

affecting the decision and

making a decision in substitutionfor the decision set aside (i.e.

reversing, or rejecting, the decision of the "authorized per-

son "). The following table indicates the total number of cases

in each State and Territory in which decisions concerning

entitlement to TEAS have been se~ aside (or varied in some

way) by Student Assistance Review Tribunals for the period I

January 1976 to 29 May 1981:

.

Reviewed "Set aside Varied

New South Wales

530

200

23

Victoria

649

206

64

Queensland

270

82

17

South Australia

115

32

2

Western Australia

157

43

3

Tasmania

48

14

3

Australian. Capital Terrri-

tory

98

47

3

Northern Territory

Total

1,867

"624

115

"These figures also include a small number of decisions which were 'varied' in 1976 where a break-down of figures between 'set aside' and 'varied' is not available.
(2), (3) and (4) The Attorney-General's Department has no authority to disallow a Tribunal decision (the decision can be changed only by appeal to the Federal Court or High Court). It is however open to the Department to seek advice from the Attorney-General's Department, as its .legal advisers, on Tribunal decisions which may have major policy implications because they suggest an interpretation of the existing legislation which is not consistent with the policy objective underlying that legislation. Of the total number of 1867 cases reviewed by Tribunals over the period I January 1976 to date, only 38 decisions were subsequently referred to the Attorney-General's Department. In half of these 38 cases, the Attorney-General's Department did not agree with the Tribunal's interpretation of the relevant legislation. On receipt of advice from the Attorney-General's Department, action is taken to advise Tribunals, amend the relevant legislation, revise administrative procedures or to implement whatever other measures may be appropriate in the light of that advice.
(5) It could happen that TEAS appellants who have been successful during one year in appeal to a Tribunal cpuld be rejected by a Tribunal, which may be a different Tribunal, in the following year without variation in circumstances or eligibility criteria. A related consideration is that an applicant for TEAS is required to lodge a fresh application each year, with the result that eligibility is reassessed annually by the 'authorized person '.
(6) It is the practice of the Department to draw to the attention of the Tribunal advice received from the Attorney General's Department on a particular decision, but the Tribunal while it may be guided by that advice is not bound by it in relation to any subsequent appeal.
(7) It is open to an appellant to prepare his case on whatever grounds he may wish, including the previous circumstances.
(8) The decision of a Tribunal is binding only in the case which has been the subject of the appeal, by virtue of section 26 of the Student Assistance Act 1973 which allows a Tribunal decision to be substituted for that of an authorized person in relation to a particular application for assistance for a particular year. Although holding that in the interests of uniformity previous decisions should not be disregarded without good reason, Tribunals have consistently taken the view that the circumstances of each appeal should be considered afresh and individually.

Answers to Questions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 661

'Dauphin' Map: Identification with Australia

(Question No, 2408)

Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Home

Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 3 June

1981:

.

(I) Has his attention been drawn to the 'Dauphin' map attributed to Pierre Desceliers, made in Dieppe probably in 1534, and held in the Manuscripts Department of the British Library, London.

(2) Has the large land mass labelled 'Jave-Ie Grande' in the
Dauphin map been identified with Australia, for example, by Kenneth Mc[ntyre in his recent book The Secret Discovery of Australia.

(3) Is he able to say whether a computer print-out of the
east coast of Jave-Ie-Grande in the Dauphin map, after havinll been programmed to make allowance for "erration (that is,
the factor of error attributed to deviations in compass readings as navigators proceeded south), bears a striking resemblance to the east coast of Australia.

(4) [s he also able to say whether the Dauphin Map formerly belonged to Sir Joseph Banks and was, presumably,
known to Captain Cook.

(5) Does the Dauphin map have enormous historical sig-

nificance to Australia; if so, will he ask the British Govern-

ment whether the map can be brought to Australia for public

exhibitions some time before the bi-centenary celebrations are

held in 1988.

.

Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Yes.

(2) The National Library of Australia has advised me that
Kenneth Mc[ntyre and other historical cartographers have identified with Australia the land of Jave-le-Grande on the
charts of the Dieppe hydrographers. Dr Helen Wallis of the British Library has suggested recently that the evidence for
Jave-le-Grande may have been obtained by the Dieppe hydrographers.from records of a Portuguese voyage to Australia in the I520s. The 'Dauphin map' in the British Library, the
earliest of the Dieppe maps, was produced in about 1536 for presentation to the Dauphin, later King Henry II of France.

(3) The National Library of Australia has further advised
me that a competition conducted lasLyear among Ausfralian
high sch~ols led Terang High School, Victoria, to develop a computer program which made allowance for the distortion
caused by erration (that is, the factor of error attributed to deviations in compass readings as navigators proceeded south). This confirmed previous studies correcting for magnetic devi-
ation and erration that the Dauphin map presents a strong likeness to the east coast of Australia. It is understood that the High School still retains the material, with which it won a prize awarded by BHP.

(4) The Dauphin map was presented to the British Library
by Sir Joseph Banks in 1790. Whether it was known to Captain Cook is still disputed by historians. It is probable, how-
ever, that Banks did not acquire the map before Cook's departure on his Third Voyage in July 1776 and it is unlikely that at that time the English knew of any of the other Dieppe maps.

(5) The historical significance of the Dauphin map.is of course very great, not only for Australia but also for Asia and
North America. The Dauphin map, housed in the Manuscripts Division of the British Library, is a large wall map on rollers, 8' 2" by 3' II", coloured and lavishly embellished. The
National Library has informed me that it appears from preliminary enquiries that it may be possible to arrange for the map to be exhibited in Australia as a contribution to the Bi-
centenary celebrations. [ will arrange for Mr Jones to be

advised of the outcome of the further inquiries as these are made.
Queensland Foresters Fund
(Question No, 2423)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(I) Did the Government intervene and arrange transfer of membership and continuity rights and payment of outstanding claims of members of the Druids fund in Tasmania following its collapse.
(2) Did the Government show the same concern to members of the Queensland Foresters fund, which collapsed shortly afterwards; if not, why not and were the members faced with medical and hospital bills which the Government refused to pay on their behalf.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) [am advised that before the closure of the Druids medical and hospital funds on 29 February 1980 the Druids management held talks with other registered organisations in order to obtain the best possible arrangement for its members. An arrangement was eventually made with the Medical Benefits Fund of Australia under which Druids contributors could transfer to tables providing corresponding levels of cover without the imposition of any additional waiting period or other penalties. All members of the Druids funds were advised accordingly.
With-regard to outstanding claims at the date of closure of the organisation, former contributors to Druids recently had the opportunity of proving any debts to the Scheme Administrator appointed by the Federal Court. These are now being evaluated and any monies available for distribution will be disbursed in due course by the Administrator.
(2) On ceasing operations on 29 March 1978, the Ancient Order of Foresters Friendly Society in Queensland (AOF) advised its members that to ensure continued hospital and medical benefits cover, they should immediately transfer to another health fund of their choice. Members were also advised that it would not be necessary to obtain a clearance form to effect transfer of membership, as arrangements were being made to directly advise membership details to the organisation the member chose to join. To facilitate the transfer of members to other funds, my Department undertook to provide, on behalf of AOF, the necessary membership details in respect of each application for transfer. [n addition, arrangements were made by the Department to ensure that continuity of membership was preserved for members who transferred to other health funds within a reasonable period. .
With regard to outstanding claims, a scheme for the winding-up of AOF has been drawn up and this matter is presently before the Federal Court. The proposed Scheme Administrator has placed advertisements informing contributors and creditors of the organisation that application has been made to the Court for an order that the Society's medical and hospital benefits funds be wound up. As in the case of Druids, it can be expected that, as soon as he is formally appointed by the Court, the Scheme Administrator will place advertisements calling for proof of debts.
Finally, [ should explain that there is no legislatiVe provision that would enable the Commonwealth to pay outstanding claims by contributors to registered health funds that are unable to meet their liabilities.

662 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Tertiary Students Loans Scheme

(Question No. 2440)

Mr Young asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:

(I) Will a loans scheme, administered by tertiary institutions, be introduced from the beginning of 1982 as a supplement to the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme; if so,
will the loans scheme be available equally to all tertiary students.

(2) If the loans scheme is to be a supplement to TEAS, will (a) post-graduate students, (b) tertiary students who are in-
eligible for TEAS, (c) disabled students, (d) students on Government pensions, (e) part-time students and (f) external students be eligible for the loans scheme.

(3) Will there be an age limit on eligibility for the loans scheme.

(4) Will students be eligible for a loan if they have an initial tertiary qualification.

(5) Who will secure the loans.

(6) Will students be required to obtain a guarantor for the loan.

(7) What will be the amounts students will be able to bor-
row under this scheme, and how many years will be allowed for repayment.

(8) What will be the interest rates on the loans, and will that interest be calculated at a fixed rate or reducing balance.

(9) Will students be required to make repayments of (a)
the interest and/or (b) the principal, during the studies; if not, will the interest (a) be paid by the Government, (b) be de-
ferred until after graduation or (c) not be charged during the period of study.

(10) Will there be any period of grace after graduation when students will not be required to make repayments; if so,
for what period and will interest be (a) paid by the Government, (b) deferred or (c) not charged during that period.

(II) What arrangements will be made if a student does not gain employment on graduation or becomes unemployed dur-
ing the period of the loan repayment and will the repayment of the (a) principal only or (b) principal and the interest be
deferred or will the calculation of interest be frozen or will the Government take over the repayments.

(12) Will the tertiary institutions responsible for the
administration of the scheme also be responsible for administering its repayment and its debt collection if students default
on repayment.

(13) Will tertiary institutions receive extra funding to cover the cost of administering the loans scheme.

(14) Will a student who borrows under this scheme owe the

money to the institution, the Government or a private lending

institution.

.

Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

The Government proposes to introduce a tertiary student loans scheme in 1982. The scheme will provide a form of as-
sistance additional to that provided under the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme (TEAS) and will be administered by tertiary institutions and the banks.

It is necessary for the Government to work out various de-
lails relating to the scheme in consultation with the banks and tertiary institutions. I shall announce the arrangements for the scheme as soon as possible after this process has been completed. Until that time the honourable member will appreciate that I am not in a position to respond any further to the various points raised in his question.

Special Humanitarian Program
(Question No. 2444)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:
(I) How many Timorese have been admitted to Australia from Jakarta and Lisbon under the Special Humanitarian Program established in October 1980.
(2) How many Timorese who are eligible to enter Australia under the Program are still in Jakarta and Lisbon.
(3) Is the Government considering taking action regarding those several hundred Timorese in Lisbon and Jakarta who want to come to Australia but are not eligible under the Special Humanitarian Program either because they have no relatives in Australia or because they left East Timor after 30 September 1980; if so, what action.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the .honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) As at 31 May 1981, a total of 413 Timorese in Lisbon and 549 in Jakarta had been approved for entry visas under the Special Humanitarian Program established last October for Timorese outside Timor on or before 30 September 1980.
(2) At the same date, the Australian Embassies in Lisbon and Jakarta were processing applications lodged on behalf of 529 and 195 Timorese respectively. Their eligibility for migrant entry will not be known until visa pro~essing has been completed. This is being expedited by the Australian Embassies in those cities.
(3) In adopting the cut-off date of 30 September 1980 the Government was meeting the needs of a specific group of people who had already left East Timor, were experiencing difficulties of adjustment in Libson, Jakarta and elsewhere, and had personal claims on Australia's resettlement resources by virtue of relatives already established here.

National Energy Research

(Question No. 2452)

Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and energy, upon notice, on 4 June 1981 :

(1) Did the Minister advise in reply to my question No.259
(Hansard, 25 February 1981, page 204) that in relation to national energy research and development the National Energy Research, Development and Demonstration Council
(NERDDC) has committed a total of $59.7m for research into alternative forms of energy.

(2) If so, (a) to what financial year does the commitment of

Government funds to NERDDC for the purpose referred to

in part (I) apply and (b) how does allocation of funds relate

to the 1980-81 budgetary commitment of $18.4m to the

National Energy Research, Development and Demonstration

Program, as mentioned in the Minister's Press Statement of 5

April 1981.

.

Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) The wording in the honourable member's question is not entirely correct. The relevant part of my answer is on page
205 of Hansard for 25 February 1981 and is worded as
follows:

'In relation to energy research and development the National Energy Research, Development and Demon-
stration Council (NERDDC) has committed a total

Answers to Questions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIYES 663

amount of$59.7m for expenditure for this purpose, including several projects examining the potential for alternative fuels'.
(2) (a) The $59.7m referred to in my reply was the total value of the grants which had been approved under the National Energy Research, Development and Demonstration Program since its inception in 1978 to 25 February 1981. The $59.7m was committed over the period 1978-79, 1979-80 and in 1980-81 to 25 February 1981. Of the $59.7m, $37.9m was committed from Appropriation Funds and $21.8m from the research levy on coal production. The $59.7m includes forward commitments in 1981-82 and 1982-83. Those forward commitments enable the funding of projects to be assured for periods up to three years.
(b) $18.4m was the value of the grants approved in 1980-81 to 5 April. At 25 February 1981 the value of the grants approved in 1980-81 was$17.7m which forms part of the $59.7m mentioned in (a) above.
Curriculum Development Centre
(Question No. 2454)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the results of the recent survey carried out by a University of Queensland researcher which shows that (a) 47 per cent of Australia's 328,000 children with specific learning difficulties are receiving no support in their schools and (b) 64 per cent of an estimated 96,000 children with behavioural problems are without help of any kind.
(2) If so, are the results of this survey a true indication of the unfulfilled needs of children with specific learning disabilities.
(3) Had his attention been drawn to this survey when the decision was taken by the Government's Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions to dispose of the Curriculum Development Centre.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(l) I am aware of the results of the receet survey carried out by a University of Queensland researcher concerning children with specific learning difficulties and behaviour problems. This information comes from the document entitled 'A Survey of Special Education in Australia' which is the report on the national survey of special education undertaken by the Fred and Eleanor Schonell Educational Research Centre for the Commonwealth Schools Commission.
(2) In terms of numbers of children these results represent the best possible estimate based on a sample survey of primary and secondary regular schools. In terms of special assistance the results indicate the estimated extent to which children with learning difficulties are receiving support in overcoming their difficulties. from trained persons, either indirectly through support for teachers, or directly through support for the children themselves. However, children with learning difficulties receive daily attention from classroom teachers with general training and experience which can be assumed to equip them to some extent to meet the particular needs of these children. It should be noted that in-service training for classroom teachers is continually available through State Education Departments which are supported in their efforts to improve the skills of teachers through the Commonwealth's Services and Development Program which is administered by the Commonwealth Schools Commission.
(3) I was aware of the survey before the decision was taken by the Government to abolish the Curriculum Development Centre unless State Governments agreed to meet 50 per cent

of the cost of the Centre's operations. While the implications of a joint responsibility are under discussion, the Government has said in its Statement on Commonwealth Education Policy and Financial Guidelines to the Commonwealth Education Commissions that it will continue to be prepared to share in the cost of curriculum projects sponsored by the Australian Education Council and in any projects it assesses as being of national significance that are not so regarded by the AEC.
Australian Citizenship: Papua New Guinea Persons
(Question No. 2458)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:
(1) Is it a fact that prior to self-government in Papua New Guinea persons born in the Territory automatically had Australian citizenship under Section 10 of the Australian Citizenship Act 1948.
(2) If so, is it also a fact that (a) this section of the Australian Citizenship Act has not been repealed with respect to the Territory of Papua and New Guinea and (b) that a person born in the Territory prior to independence in 1975 still has Australian citizenship.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Prior to Independence persons born in Papua acquired Australian citizenship by birth while persons born in New Guinea became Australian protected persons.
(2) Changes in Australia's citizenship legislation consequent upon Papua New Guinea independence were effected by regulations made under the provisions of the Papua New Guinea Independence Act and the Australian Citizenship Act. These regulations came into force upon Independence on 16 September 1975 and generally provided among other things that:
Birth in Papua or New Guinea no longer confers the status of Australian citizen or an Australian protected person respectively.
Australian citizens, however their citizenship was acquired, and Australian protected persons who automatically became Papua New Guinea citizens on 16 September 1975 ceased to be Australian citizens or protected person on that date.
Australian citizens and Australian protected persons who did not automatically acquire Papua New Guinea citizenship on 16 September 1975 retain their existing status.-
Institute of Freshwater Studies
(Question No. 2465)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, (:m 5 June 1981:.
(1) Does he propose to take action to establish an Institute of Freshwater Studies in Australia; if so, what action.
(2) What sum has been spent on freshwater' studies in Australia by (a) the CSIRO, (b) any other Commonwealth Government entity, (c) each State, (d) any tertiary 'educational institution and (e) the private sector in each of the last five years.

664 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Answers to Questions

(3) Is he able to say what countries have set up Institutes of Freshwater Studies (or bodies of some analogous name) and what sum is spent by them each year.
(4) Are any of these countries considered to have more serious freshwater problems than Australia; if so, which ones.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) No.

Commonwealth
CSIRO Australian Atomic Energy
Commission Other
States Local Government Tertiary Education Institutions Private Sector

$m 5.12 $m 3.73
0.43 0.96
5.45 0.78 2.16 0.25
13.76

(2) Expenditures on water research in all sectors is only

However, more detailed information on the expenditures of

available for 1979 calendar year as follows:

Commonwealth organisations is as follows:

CSIRO Australian Atomic Energy Commission Department of National Development and E-
nergy

1976-77 2,746,077
520,000
389,198

1977-78 2,991,477
410,000
389,983

1978-79 3,024,994
430,000
390,000

1979-80 3,544,488
421,000
414,737

1980-81 3,802,822
n.a.
470,497

(3) The following countries have national organisations with functions similar to those proposed for an Australian institute of freshwater studies: Canada, Finland, Federal Republic of Germany, Hungary, Holland, South Africa, Spain, United Kingdom and USSR. Reliable information is not available to my Department on their expenditures.
(4) My Department does not have sufficient information to evaluate water resource problems in other countries vis-a-vis the situation in Australia.
Conzil1c Rio Tinto of Australia Limited
(Question No. 2471)
Mr Oren asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:
By what period under the agreement between the Foreign Investment Review Board and Conzinc Rio Tinto of Australia Liinited is CRA to achieve majority Australian ownership.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows: .
In my statement of 8 June 1978 announcing the terms of arrangements for the naturalisation of foreign owned companies, I indicated that the Government did not believe it would be realistic to impose a strict timetable by which companies would be required to introduce majority Australian equity. The Government took this view in recognition of the fact that the rate of progress depends to an extent on commercial considerations which are largely outside a company's contro\. In addition, it was recognised that directors of a public company are obliged at law to take into account the interests of all shareholders and that their obligations to their shareholders would not permit them, for example, to make a new issue of shares regardless of the commercial circumstances prevailing from time to time.
Although participating companies are not therefore expected to commit themselves to a firm timetable for the introduction of majority Australian equity, the Government does require that they reach an understanding with it through regular discussions with the Foreign Investment Review Board on the practical arrangements for achieving majority Australian ownership and on progress made to this end.

In 1979 CRA Limited was granted naturalising status in terms of the Government's foreign investment policy, following arrangements reached between the Government, -CRA Limited and its parent company The Rio Tinto-Zinc Corporation Ltd (RTZ). CRA and RTZ have given undertakings to the Government to pursue the naturalisation ofCRA in terms of the policy and have made a public commitment to this end. In particular, CRA and RTZ are committed to achieving the appropriate level of Australian ownership within a reasonable time period and are required to hold regular discussions with the Foreign Investment Review Board to report on the progess being made towards naturalised status.
Australian equity in CRA has increased from 27.4 per cent to 38.9 per cent since early 1979.
Naval Communications Station, North~West Cape
(Question No. 2486)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the United States of America Administration testimony before the Sub-Committee on Military Construction of the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on Appropriations, US Senate, Military Construction Authorization, Fiscal Year 1973, May-June 1972, page 299, in which it was stated that $1,743,000 was being requested for the Naval Communications Station Harold E. Holt, -Exmouth, WA, which provides fleet broadcasts and tactical ship-to-shore communications and supports Naval Security Group operations and the Defence Communications System.
(2) What Naval Security Group operations are conducted at North-West Cape.
(3) If no operations are conducted, are Naval Security Group personnel attached to North-West Cape; if so, what are their duties.
(4) If no Naval Security Group personnel are attached to the US staff at North-West Cape, despite the testimony reo ferred to in part (I) to the contrary, are personnel from (a) any other branch of the National Security Agency, (b) any

Answers to Questions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 665

branch of US naval intelligence or (c) any other US intelligence organization attached to North-West Cape.
(5) If so, from which branches do those personnel come, how many are attached and what are their functions.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) None.
(3) No National Security Group personnel are attached to North-West Cape, neither have any National Security Group personnel ever been stationed there.
(4) (a)-(c) No.
(5) See answer to (4) above.
Projected Labour Force Growth
(Question No. 2513)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:
(I) What is the projected labour force growth each year to 200 I on the basis of the projections contained in the Review of Australia's Demographic Trends prepared by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs in February 1981.
(2) How many additional jobs must be created on average each year to achieve a recorded unemployment rate of (a) 4.5 per cent and (b) 2 per cent by (i) 1985, (ii)1990 and (iii) 2001.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The Review of Australia's Demographic Trends prepared by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs provides a range of population projections for the year 200 I based on indicative assumptions regarding fertility and migration. No separate projections of the labour force were provided.
Growth in the labour force depends not only on population growth but also on movements in labour force participation. Participation rates are subject to a number of influences, including changes in economic opportunities, personal aspirations and social values. Projections of the labour force are of necessity imprecise. The Review notes however that, in broad terms and on the basis of recent trends in participation, '. . . growth of the labour force is likely to be at a lower (and diminishing) rate compared with the last twenty years.' (page 32).
Given the considerable uncertainty attached to popUlation and labour force growth, it is not'possible to forecast how many additional jobs are required each year in order to reduce unemployment to a specified rate.
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations: Recommendation 7 of 4th Report
(Question No. 2590)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10June 1981:
What measures (a) have been taken and (b) are planned, to fully implement recommendation 7 of the 4th Report of the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations entitled Provision of Roads: A Report on the Relations Among Governments in Australia, 1981.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(a) and (b) The Government's policy is fully consistent with the ACIR's recommendation that the Commonwealth should not reintroduce the hypothecation of fuel excise.
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations: Recommendation 9 of 4th Report
(Question No. 2591)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
What measures (a) have been taken and (b) are planned, to fully implement recommendation 7 of the 4th Report of the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations entitled Provision of Roads: A Report on the Relations Among Governments in Australia, 1981.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) and (b) The Roads Grants Act 1981 provides that Commonwealth grants for Local Roads must either be expended by State authorities on the construction and maintenance of Local Roads or passed on to Local Government Authorities for the construction and maintenance of Local Roads.
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations: Recommendation 22 of 4th Report
(Question No. 2592)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981 :
What measures (a) have been taken and (b) are planned, to fully implement recommendation 22 of the 4th Report of the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations entitled Provisions of Roads: A Report on the Relations Among Governments in Australia, 1981.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) and (b) The Commonwealth Government's decisions on levels of assistance to be made available for roads take account of the competing needs of other Commonwealth financed programs including those in the transport area.
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations: Recommendation 23 of the 4th Report
(Question No. 2593)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Tranport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981 :
What measures (a) have been taken and (b) are planned, to fully implement recommendation 23 of the 4th Report of the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations entitled Provision of Roads: A Report on the Relations Among Governments in Australia, 1981.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) and (b) The Roads Grants Act 1981 provides a uniform 9 per cent increase in funding in 1981-82 for each of the three road categories (i.e. National Roads, Arterial Roads, Local Roads) for which Commonwealth !lrants are provided.
The distribution of Commonwealth.grants to be provided in future years is yet to be determined. The Government's consideration of this matter will take account of the fact that National Roads are eligible for full Commonwealth funding, whereas the other road categories attract substantial levels of investment from State and Local Government.

666 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations: Recommendation 26 of the 4th Report
(Question No. 2594)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
What measures (a) hilVe been taken and (b) are planned, to fully implement recommendation 26 of the 4th Report of the Advisory Council for. Inter-government Relations entitled Provision of Roads: A Report on the Relations Among Governments in Australia, 1981.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) and (b) The Commonwealth has announced annual funding levels for roads covering the period up to 1984-85. In determining these funding levels, the Government took into account a range of factors including possible cost increases. The announced annual funding levels are firm and final amounts.
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations: Recommendation 27 of the 4th Report
(Question No, 2595)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
What measures (a) have been taken and (b) are planned, to fully implement recommendation 27 of the 4th Report of the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations entitled Provison of Roads: A Report on the Relations Among Governments in Australia, 1981.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is follows:
(a) and (b) Between 1964 and 1977 periodic analyses of road needs in Australia were undertaken by the former Commonwealth Bureau of Roads. Since 1977 roads investigations have been, and will continue to be, an ongoing responsibility of the Bureau of Transport Economics.
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations: Recommendation 28 of the 4th Report
(Question No, 2596)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
What measures (a) have been taken and (b) are planned, to fully implement recommendation 28 of the 4th Report of the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations entitled 'Provision of Roads: A Report on the Relations Among Governments in Australia, 1981'.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) and (b) Consideration is currently being given.to the timing and content of the next Bureau of Transport Economics roads studies. While it is not envisaged that a direct study of road consumer attitudes will be undertaken I understand that road consumer related issues will be considered.
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations: Recommendation of 4th Report
(Question No. 2597)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981.

What measures (a) have been taken and (b) are planned, to fully implement recommendations I to 6, 8, \0 to 21, 24 and 25, 35 and 36 of the 4th Report of the Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations entitled 'Provision of Ro~ds: A Report on the Relations among Governments in Australia, 1981'.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Recommendation I No action is required to implement this recommendation
since all three spheres of governments currently have responsibilities in the roads field.
Recommendations 2,3 and 4 The provisions of the Roads Grants Act 1981 are consis-
tent with the general principles enunciated in these recommendations.
Recommendation 5 The classification of roads is primarily the responsibiW.y of
the States. A uniform national classification system for roads has been developed by the National Association of Australian State Road Authorities (NAASRA). The possible need for review or further development of this system is therefore appropriatelya matter for NAASRA to consider.
Recommendation 6 The Commonwealth Governmenfs policy is to continue to
provide financial assistance to the States and Northern Territory for roads.
Recommendation 8 The Roads Grants Act 1981 provides for Commonwealth
grants to the States and Northern Territory to be earmarked for three categories of road-national roads; arterial roads; and local roads.
Recommendation \0 The Roads Grallts Act 1981 provides for the implemen-
tation of a formula approach which will enable individual local authorities to be aware in advance of the amounts that they will receive from within Commonwealth local roads allocations.
Recommendation II Quota requirements have been discontinued under the
Roads Grants Act 1981.
RecommendatiOlis 12 and 13 The Roads Grants Act 1981 provides that Commonwealth _
grants may be applied to meet all administrative costs directly attributable to projects included in approved national roads programs. The Act also provides that part of the general administrative overhead expenses related to the cOnstruction and maintenance of national roads (up to a maximum of 4 per cent of the annual expenditure otherwise incurred on projects in an approved program) may be charged against Commonwealth grants for national roads.
The States are required to meet all other general administrative costs.
Recommendation 14 The arrangements in respect of national roads for which the
Roads Grants Act 1981 provides are consistent with this recommendation.
Recommendation 15 The arrangements In respect of arterial roadsJor which the
Roads Grants Act 1981 provides are consistent with this recommendation.
Recommendations 16 and 17 There is no direct Commonwealth supervIsIon of local
roads projects. However, the Roads Grallls Act 1981 provides that Commonwealth assistance to the States/Northern Territory for local roads is conditional upon the States/Northern

Answers to Questions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 667

Territory disbursing Commonwealth grants either in accordance with a program of allocations approved by the Commonwealth Minister or in accordance with the principles formulated pursuant to the Act. The Act also provides that certificates by State Auditors-General may be requIred in respect of expenditure of Commonwealth funds.

(5) Has he suggested or is he proposing to suggest to the Western Australian Government that its ports be operated by private enterprise.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Recommendations 18 and 19 These recommendations relate to arrangements between
State and Local Government bodies in each State. No Commonwealth action is proposed.
Recommendation 20 Commonwealth general revenue assistance to Local.
Government is provided by way of the Loca/ Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976. The Act requires that Commonwealth assistance be unconditionally passed on by the States to local government bodies.
Recommendation 21 The preamble to this recommendation (page 106; para-
graph 396 of ACIR Report) suggests that the relevant issues are essentially ones for resolution between State and Local Government in each State. No Commonwealth action is proposed.
Recommendations 24 and 25 In June 1980 the Government announced specific annual
levels of financial assistance to the States and Northern Territory for road~ covering the five year period to 1984-85.
The Roads Grants Act 1980 appropriated in full the grants announced for 1980-8 \. The Roads Grants Act 1981 appropriates in full the grantsannounced for 1981-82 as well as minimum levels of funding for national roads in 1982-83 and 1983-84.
Legislative arrangements covering the remainder of the current five year funding program and funding levels for years beyond 1984-85 are still to be determined. The decision to defer introduction of legislation covering the remainder of the period to 1984-85 is consistent with the views expressed by State Roads Ministers.
Recommendations 35 and 36 These recommendations relate to arrangements between
State and Local Government bodies in each State. No Commonwealth action is proposed.
Western Australian Ports
(Question No. 2598)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10June 1981:

(I) The view expressed in the report that the 1978-79 loss on port operations in Western Australia may constitute a sub" sidy to port users of that State appears to conJorm to the accepted concepts on subsidies. However, it is not sufficient to focus solely on the results for one year. The results over the long term are more important for assessing the extent of the subsidy since the financial results can be expected to vary greatly from year to year. I emphasise that it is possible that such subsidies are in the best interests of the Western Australian community. However, that matter is primarily one to be determined by that State Government. In this regard, the statement from the report quoted by the honourable member in his question has a footnote which provides an important qualification. The footnote reads:
'The existence of a subsidy does not necessarily imply that charges should rise; it may also be possible to reduce cost through raising the efficiency of port operations as well as increasing port utilisation. In addition, past non-commercial investment decisions may give rise to costs which cannot be covered by revenue at any level of charges'.
(2) The question of whether public transport authorities should obtain a return on funds employed is a matter for the particular level of government concerned. The Commonwealth Government is actively pursuing the question of cost recovery in areas of transport within its jurisdiction. However, the honourable member should be aware that an important element in cost recovery relates to historical costs; the full recovery of these costs may be inimical to economic efficiency. The achievement of, for example, social equity or regional development objectives may also inRuence the desirable level of cost recovery.
Until such matters as these are reviewed by the level of government concerned, it is not possible to evaluate the extent of subsidy involved in the situation referred to by the honourable member.
For a comprehensive exposition of these issues, I refer the honourable member to a report of a seminar conducted by my Department at the request of the Co-ordinating and General Group of the Australian Transport Advisory COUJlcil. This report is published as 'Transport Pricing and Cost Recovery Seminar' Australian Government Publishing Service, Can" berra, 1980.

(I) Does he accept the view propounded on page 23 of the joint report of the Bureau of Transport Economics and the Director-General of Transport, Western Australia, 'A Study of Western Australian Ports, 1981', that losses by Western Australian Ports may reRect a very substantial subsidy to port users.
(2) Is there any substance to the proposition that public transport authorities, under jurisdiction of any level of Government, should obtain a return on funds employed; if so, is it a fact that the subsidy referred to in part (I) is considerably larger.
(3) What estimates is he able to provide of the likely Statewide subsidy to port users in 1978-79 had the ports been required to earn profit rates on funds employed of (a) 2 per cent, (b) 5percentand (c) 10 percent.
(4) Do the cost recovery rates mentioned on page 25 of the Report include a return on funds employed by the port authorities.

(3) The income from all sources, including subsidies paid to port authorities, required to achieve profit rates of 2 per cent, 5 per cent and 10 per cent on accumulated funds employed would have been $40.5m, $45.5mand $53.8m respectively, but since the situation proposed by the honourable member is hypothetical, it would be idle to speculate abdut the likely sources of this income, such as government subsidies, had such a profit requirement been in force three years~ago.
(4) No, the cost recovery rate is simply the ratio of gross revenue to gross outgoings.
(5) No.
Schools Commission and Tertiary Education Commission: Funding Guidelines
(Question No. 2611)
Mr Dawkins asked the Minister for Education, uportnotice,on 10June 1981:

668 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) What rate of cost increase is projected for 1982 in the funding guidelines for the Schools Commission and the Tertiary Education Commission.
(2) What is the basis of the calculation and in what ways does it differ from the calculations previously made by the Commissions.
(3) How does this projected increase compare with the actual increases in (a) 1979, (b) 1980 and (c) the period I January to 9 June 1981.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) With effect from the beginning of 1982 the current retrospective adjustments for price level change will be replaced by a prospective allowance for price movements. In making this change, the previous arrangements for cost adjustment have been converted in their entirety to a prospective basis. The allowance for price-level change is derived from estimates of movements in national economic indicators in the light of factors affecting costs in education.
Other factors taken into account in determining the level of the allowance include the rate of cash flow, the likely timing of tribunal awards and the proportions of salary, non-salary and capital items in the overall levels of expenditure ,of the programs.
Under these arrangements, the overall prospective allowance to cover cost increases from December quarter 1980 to average 1982 prices is 16 per cent.
Actual increases in costs in recent periods have been: 1979-8 per cent; 1980-12 per cent; I January to 9 June 1981: Not available.
Teachers and Students: Number
(Question No. 2615)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) How many teachers and teaching staff were employed in each State and Territory for each of the last five years.
(2) How many students were enrolled in each State and Territory for the same years.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The number of teachers employed in schools in each State and Territory in Australia for each of the last five years for which figures are available are set out in Table I below:
Table 1
TEACHERS, BY CATEGORYOFSCHOOL,l975TO . 1979(a)
(Number of full-time teachers plus full-time equivalent units of part-time teaching)

New South Wales1975 1976 1977 1978 1979
-_ Yictoria1975 1976

Non-

Government Government

Scliools

schools

40,692 42,374 44,518 44,460 46,243
35,264 37,612

10,172 10,367 10,517 10,928 11,435
9,497 9,628

Non-

Government Government

Schools

schools

1977 1978 1979
Queensland (b)1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980
South Australia1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980
Western Australia (c)1975 1976 1977 1978 1979
Tasmania (c)1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980
Northern Territory (c)1975 1976 1977 1978 1979
Australian Capital Territory1975 1976 1977 1978 1979
Australia1975 1976 1977 1978 1979

39,273 40,557 40,779

10,207
10,616 11,344

17,183 18,162
18,910 18,889 19,472r 19,512

3,951 4,068 4,242 4,412
4,595 4,749

12,957 13,427 14,125 14,475 14,603 14,628

1,899 1,989 2,070 2,152 2;295 2,394

9,824 10,345 10,777 11,436
11,495

2,069 2,199 2,326 2,445
2,569

4,247

717

4,241

720

4,360

729

4,584

757

4,752

792

4,908

831

1,096

123

1,195

129

1,376

137

1,445

173

1,360

185

2,174 2,312 2,441 2,514 2,497

563 600
678 715_ 770-

123,441 129,668_
135,931 138,360 141,210

28,990
29,700 30,905 32,198 33,986

r-revised (a) 1980 data are provided for Queensland, South
Australia and Tasmania but are unavailable for other States and Territories. (b) There are no part-time teachers reported for
Queensland government schools. Teachers occupying posts during the temporary absence of permanent teachers are excluded..
(c) Prior to 1979 pre school teachers in primary schools in
Western Australia, and the Northern Territory were included in teacher numbers. They have been excluded from 1979 onwards in order to improve comparability
with teacher statistics for the rest of Australia. The statistics are not available on the revised basis prior to 1979 and the. data presented for 1975 to 1978 are

Answers to Questions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 669

therefore not completely comparable with those presented for 1979 in those States. Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics
Statistics of staff other than teachers are not produced by the Australian Bureau of Statistics. In 1977, 1978 and 1979 the Commonwealth Schools Commission collected statistics of school staff, including those not specifically defined as teachers (1977, 1978 and 1979

for government school staff but 1977 and 1979 only for non-government school staff). It should be noted that due to differences in coverage and definitions these statistics, presented in table 2 below, are not completely compatible with those presented in table I
above, and furthermore the Commonwealth Schools Commission warns against comparisons across States and Territories within Table 2.

Table 2 SCHOOLS STAFF DEFINED AS OTHER THAN TEACHERS
Government Schools

New South Wales

Victoria

Queensland

South Australia

1977 1978 1979 1977 1978 1979 1977 1978 1979 1977 1978 1979

Executive staff School support (a) Administrative
support (b)
Ancillary staff Instructional Clerical Other (c)

252 248 245 164 163 4,267 4,415 4,595 1,709 1,709-

161

94

96

97

646 1,179 1,359 1,462

98 103 102 520 1,046 1,150

49 1,243 1,191 1,396 119 142 165 609 556 563

3,078 4,422
1,575

3,331 4,419 1,648

3,012 4,338 1,649

1,501 3,691

2,121 4,208

2,014 1,631 3,157

2,439 1,419
661

2,421 1,489
579

2,425 1,485
578

2,094 564 319

2,285 554 380

2,309 511 423

Executive Staff School support (a) Administrative
support (a)
Ancillary staff Instructional Clerical Other (c)

Western Australia

Tasmania

1977 1978 1979 1977 1978

67

64

79

28

25

938 1,020 1,129 312 408

104 189 152

90 103

737 891 991 406 625 1,046 1,098 1,205 339 239
595 606 616 238 243

Northern Territory

Australian Capital Territory

1979 1977 1978 1979 1977 1978 1979

49

13

4

10

5

6

6

586 278 246 334 231 251 270

51

41 237 272 116 109 106

425 473 370 360 309 273 291

464

46

88 229 187 147 145

223 146

88

96

79

83

91

Other Professional Staff Teacher Librarian/Librarian Guidance Officer/counsellor etc Other . . . . . . . . . Total-Other Professional Staff .
Ancillary/ Administrathe Staff Instructional . . . . . Administrative/clerical General . . . . . . . Total-Ancillary/ Admin Staff

Non-Government Schools

New South Wales Victoria

1977

1979

1977

Queensland

1979

1977

South Australia

1979

1977

1979

273.5 12.9 16.2
302.6

320.0 26.5 21.2 367.7

271.4 53.8 32.2
357.4

323.1 66.6 36.3
426.0

300.3 696.2
1,112.0 2,108.5

388.1 786.9
554.8 1,792.8

671.9
861.1 799.5 2,332.5

771.5 986.1
882.9 2,640.5

103.1 12.7 17.3
133.1

110.6 14.4 17.3
142.3

298.9 290.3
327.7 916.9

393.4 328.4
383.7 1,105.5

68.0 5.2 4.8
78.0
189.6 193.2 217.6 600.4

86.6 5.3 12.1
104.8
176.5 211.6 217.6 605.7

Other Professional Staff
Teacher Librarian/Librarian
Guidance officer/counsellor etc Other . . . . . . . .
Total-Other Professional Staff

Western Australia

Tasmania

Northern Territory

Australian
Capital Territory

Australia

1977 1979 1977 1979 1977 1979 1977 1979 1977 1979

72.7 82.4 24.8 28.0 5.0 4.0 25.6 29.5 844.1 984.2

9.6 10.0 3.7 5.5 0.3

3.6 2.5 101.8 130.8

12.3 14.2 1.6

0.6

1.0 85.0 102.1

94.6 106.6 30.1 33.5 5.3 4.0 29.8 33.0 1,030.9 1,217.1

670 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Answers to Questions

Western Australia

Tasmania

Northern Territory

Australian
Capital Territory

Australia

1977 1979 1977 1979 1977 1979 1977 1979 1977 1979

Ancillary/ Administrative Staff Instructional Administrative/clerical
General Total-Ancillary/Admin Staff

123.2 161.9 26.2 35.9 12.7 20.8 39.6 41.88 1,662.4 1,989.9

211.9 224.4 688.0 73.5 8.7 12.6 46.0 54.7 2,375.4 2,678.2

243.0 273.5 65.9 6.8.4

5.9

9.7 51.2 46.8 2,822.8 2,437.4

578.1 659.8 160.1 177.8 27.3 43.1 136.8 143.36,8860.6 7,105.5

(a) Includes guidance/counselling officers, psychologists, social workers etc. (b) Includes planning officers, finance officers, etc, and some non-teaching staff on extended paid leave.
(c) Includes caretakers, groundsmen, general assistants etc. Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission

(2) Students enrolled in schools in each State and Territory 1975-1980 are set out in Table 3 below.
Table 3
STUDENTS, BY CATEGORY OF SCHOOLS, 1975 TO 1980

. Non-

Government Government

schools

schools

New South Wales1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980(p)
Victoria1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980(p)
Queensland1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980(p)
South Australia1975r 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980
Western Australia1975r 1976r 1977r 1978r 1979 1980(p)
Tasmania1975r 1976r 1977r 1978r

788,943 799,737 809,976 812,156 807,761 799,304
618,112 624,707 626,317 623,609 614,419 606,147
327,574 334,313 341,301 345,970 349,182 353,401
234,712 233,614 233,210 230,455 224,525 218,682
195,024 199,557 205,108 207,649 207,029 206,634
74,332 74,533 74,250 73,702

218,868 218,435 219,198 220,763 224,941 230,384
198,839 201,083 203,318 207,160 211,141 216,125
91,148 91,713 92,852 93,994 94,863 97,174
38,885 39,299 39,446 39,441 39,972 41,116
43,373 43,810 44,257 44,844 45,581 46,595
13,838 13,825 13,938 14,251

All schools
1,007,811 1,018,172 1,029,174 1,032,919 1,032,702 1,029,688
816,951 825,790 829,635 830,769 825,560 822,272
418,722 426,026 434,153 439,964 444,045 450,575
273,597 272,913 272,656 269,896 264,497 259,798
238,397 243,367 249,365 252,493 252,610 253,229
88,164 88,358 88,188 87,953

Non-

Government Government

schools

schools

1979 1980
Northern Territory1975r 19.76r 1977r 1978r 1979 1980(p)
Australian Capital Territory-
1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980(p)
Australia1975r 1976r 1977r 1978r 1979 1980(p)

73,046 72,332
16,525 19,\07 20,224 21,\08 21,410 22,309
35,210 37,636 38,924 39,773 39,346 39,268
2,290,426 2,323,204 2,349,310 2,354,422 2,336,718 2,318,077

14,401 14,620
2,725 2,837 3,021 3,178 3,746 4,\05
12,164 12,879 13,811 14,575 15,568 16,366
619,840 623,881 629,841 638,206 650,213 666,485

All schools
87,447 86,952
19,250 21,944 23,245 24,286 25,156 26,414
47,374 50,515 52,735 54,348 54,914 55,634
2,910,266 2,947,085 2,979,151 2,992,628 2,986,931 2,984,562

(p) preliminary
Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics
Perth Airport~
(Question No. 2629)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) Have any airport engineering and construction staff been transferred from the Perth Airport project to the Brisbane Airport project in the period February to June 1981; if so, what were the reasons for the transfers, how is it proposed to make up the deficiency in respect of the Perth Airport project and how many officers by category were involved.
(2) What works are planned for Perth Airport and what is the latest estimate of costs involved and timetable for completion.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 671

(I) Yes. One Engineer Class 3 was transferred from the
Perth Airport Internatio(lal Terminal Complex project to the Brisbane Airport Redevelopment project for a period of 10 weeks. This was necessary because of an -urgent need to pre-
pare evidence for Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works hearings on the Brisbane Airport project. It was also
necessary to apply additional drawing staff to the Brisbane
Airport Project during that period, effectively this meant the transfer of one Draftsman Grade 2 from the Perth Airport project for 10 weeks.

Additional staff resources will be applied to the Perth Air-
port project when the immediate demands of the Brisbane Airport project have been met.

(2) Major works planned for Perth Airport, in addition to
those currently underway, are listed below with latest civil works cost estimates and anticipated completion dates

(a) Approved by Government

02/20 Runway Extension

$1.Om

1982

(b) Approved by Government and

subject to examination by the

PWC and the allocation of funds

New Air Operations Buildings Control Tower Air Traffic Services Centre Technical Maintenance Centre
(c) Approved in principle and/or subject to specific Government approval, examination by the PWC and allocation of funds International Terminal Complex
Domestic Terminal Building Extensions-Stage 2Domestic Apron Extensions Stage 2Engineering Services to Airline
Flight Service Facilities Redevelopment of Existing Terminal (for domestic airline use when the internationals vacate)

$3.5m

1985

$26.0m late 1985 early 1986
$2.8m early 1983

$0.7m early 1983

$0.7m

1982

$9.0m

1986

Canberra Airport
(Question No. 2630)

Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) What works are planned for Canberra Airport following the Government's 1980 election undertaking in respect of the Airport.
(2) What are the individual estimates of cost involved and when is it expected each stage of development will take place.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Government has given approval in principle to upgrading works for Canberra Airport. Proposed works include the provision of a new passenger terminal complex comprising terminal building, aircraft parking apron and link taxiways, car parks and access roads, and the extension of the west-side parallel taxiway to the northern end of the main runway.
The Government has also approved improvements to the security checking arrangements.
(2) The following table provides the estimated cost of various works proposed. The development of the new passenger terminal complex and the extension of the parallel taxiway is

expected to be completed and in operation prior to the bicentennial.
The improvements to the security checking arrangements are due for completion in October 1981.

Work

Indicative estimated cost

Passenger terminal complex and extension to parallel taxiway
Security checking arrangements

$20m (1980 prices)
$71,345 (contract price)

United Kingdom Immigration Rules
(Question No. 2635)

Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:

(1) Is he able to say what are the revised immigration rules which became effective in February 1980 in the United Kingdom.

(2) If so, under the revised immigration rules, what is the situation of people admitted for temporary purposes.

(3) What is the status of fiances and women who are not United Kingdom citizens.

(4) What is the age limit for working holiday makers.

(5) Are there any restrictions of entry to the United King-

dom for Commonwealth citizens.

-

Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable members' question is as follows:

These are not mallers which come within the responsibili-
ties of my portfolio. I suggest the honourable member contact the British Government or its representatives in Australia.

Citizenship Applications
(Question No. 2639)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) What was the average period required for the' processing of citizenship applications each year since 1979 and during the period I January to 9 June 1981.
(2) What was the (a) shortest and (b) longest period lapsed between application and the granting of Australian citizenship.
(3) What plans are there for the expansion of the citizenship branch of his Department given that from I January 1982 only Australian citizens will be eligible to vote while there was an estimated 1.5 million non-Australian citizens living in Australia who are eligible to apply for citizenship.
(4) Is he able to say how many overseas-born Citizens there are in each Commonwealth electoral division and how many will be (a) eligible and (b) not eligible to vote from I January 1982.
(5) What sum was raised through applications for citizenship each year since 1979 and during the period I January to 9 June 1981.
(6) What sum was spent processing citizenship applications during the same period.
(7) How many persons are employed in each regional office to deal with the processing of citizenship applications.

672 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) The average period of time from date of receipt of application until date of approval was 14 1/2 weeks in 1979, 14 weeks in 1980 and 20 weeks during the period I January to 31 May 1981.

(2) It is not possible to provide an accurate answer. The time between receipt of application and conferral of citizenship varies considerably. Where applicants choose to have
citizenship conferred at ceremonies conducted by officers of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, the aver-
age time for conferral is only several weeks in addition to the processing time as indicated in (I) above. Where citizenship is conferred at ceremonies arranged by local government
authorities, the time factor in addition - to the processing period is governed by the frequency of ceremonies arranged by particular local government authorities. In some cases of
genuine emergency, citizenship has been granted within a matter of a few days.

(3) Following the decision of the recent Review of Com-
monwealth Functions that citizenship procedures be streamlined, a joint management review of citizenship procedures is
to be established shortly. The implications for staffing of proposed amendments to electoral legislation as well as possible amendments to citizenship legislation will be considered bytheJMR.

(4) Table A below shows the numbers of overseas-born persons of all ages who are Australian citizens in each Common-
wealth electoral division. The statistical data were extracted
from the 1976 Census and are the latest available. Information to answer (a) and (b) is not available.

(5) Nil.

. (6) Precise info,rmation is not readily available. In view of the fact that total costs include salaries arid payments in the nature of salaries, overheads,- printing, postage and a variety of other expenditures, I am not prepared to direct that the requisite resources be committed to such an exercise.

(7) NSW-27 persons; WA-6 persons; Victoria-25 per-

sons; Tasmania-I person; 'Queensland-8 persons; NT-I

person; SA'-5 persons; ACT-3 persons. Total-76 per-

sonsasat31 May 1981.

.

Area offices of the Department of immigration and Ethnic Affairs in Townsville, Newcastle, Parramatta, Wollongong, Albury/Wodonga, Gee10ng and Launceston also process applications for Australian citizenship. With the exception of Parramatta Area Office, which has 5 'persons processing applications for citizenship, the processing of applications for citizenship in other Area offices does not occupy persons on a full time basis as they also perform other Departmental functions.
Table A
1976 CENSUS: OVERSEAS BORN BY ELECtORAL DIVISION BY CITIZENSHIP

Citizenship

Commonwealth Electoral Division

Not Australian Other stated

Banks Barton Benelong Berowa Blaxland Bradfield' Calare

New South Wales

8,154 7,766

246

.

10,632 9,781

415

10,761 10,592

514

8,313 10,065

302

14,823 12,867

575

9,231 10,720

197

3,797 3,459

194

Commonwealth Electoral Division
ChiHey Cook Cowper Cunningham Dundas Eden Monaro Farrer Grayndler Gwydir Hughes Hume Hunter Kingsford-Smith Lawson Lowe Lyne Macarthur Mackellar Mitchell Newcastle New England North Sydney Parramalta Paterson Phillip Prospect Reid Richmond Riverina Robertson Shortland St George Sydney Waringah Wentworth Werriwa Migratory
Balaclava Ballarat Batman Bendigo Bruce Burke Casey Chisholm Corangamite Corio Deakin Diamond Valley Flinders Gellibrand Gippsland Henty Higgins Holt Hotham Indi . Isaacs Kooyong Lalor La Trobe Mallee Maribyrnong McMillan

Answers to Questions

Citizenship
Not Australian Other stated

11,422 6,834
3,516
14,669 8,886 6,375
4,295 23,612
2,649 8,713 2,476 6,463
18,061 10,331 18,656
4,037 6,718
9,442 9,160 7,592
2,796 13,322 12,130
3,206
16,977 19,719 15,228
4,338 6,050 5,667
5,355 15,501 18,222
9,439 18,564
10,638
440

17,131
8,472 2,931
25,901 9,377 6,119
3,944 21,690
2,295 11,188 2,293 4,482
19,761 14,592
15,692 3,264 11,677
13,199 11,561 5,790
3,375 14,938 14,710
2,606
17,885 22,784 16,447
2,926 2,914 6,539
4,862 12,546
23,879 12,812 19,490
17,587 1,814

Victoria
14,866 4,200 14,991 3,361 13,420 17,515 8,665 10,858 4,752 11,3'/0 10,520 11,023 7,486 17,994 6,855 13,779 14,330 12,638 16,389 6,400 7,749 12,695 19,614 9,892 4,282 15,D28 8,693

10,727 3,535
13,957 2,945
14,604 19,230 13,477
9,101 4,999 13,007
13,918 9,232
13,180 23,695 4,742
12,004
9,600 18,845
20,348
4,721 13,342
9,262
26,894 17,089
2,693 13,995 8,107

556 235 201 697 387 360 180 1,079 184 383 133 280 899 359 720 170 345 421 295 343 146 446 610 133 630 735 865 180 246 320 261 599 1,215 543 761 545 440
527 235 715 164 372 776 352 344 200 680 392 334 342 1,204 745 466 468 639 603 269 419 563 1,075 472 167 565 339

Answers to Questions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 673

Commonwealth ElecLOral Division

Citizenship Australian

Other

Not stated

Commonwealth Electoral Division

Citizenship
Not Australian Other stated

Melbourne Melbourne Ports Murray Scullin Wan non Wills Migratory
Bowman Brisbane Capricornia Darling Downs Dawson Fadden Fisher Griffith Herbert Kennedy Leichhardt Lilley McPherson Maranoa Moreton Oxley Petrie Ryan Wide Bay Migratory
Adelaide Barker Bonython Boothby Grey Hawker Hindmarsh Kingston Port Adelaide Sturt Wakefield Migratory
Canning Curtin Forrest Fremantle Kalgoorlie Moore Perth Sterling Swan Tangney Migratory
Bass Braddon Denison Franklin Wilmot Migratory

21,159 19,448 5,225 14,592 2,495 19,520
100

29,013 20,011
3,905 15,392 2,677 21,330
816

Queensland
6,971 6,896 3,350 3,466 5,960 7,519 5,708 11,617 8,019 3,896 9,150 6,640 7,769 2,935 7,516 7,823 6,349 7,594 4,454
166
South Australia
16,501 5,575 17,333 10,752 10,003 12,165 17,734 10,629 16,713 16,664 5,538
120
Western Australia
9,410 11,556 9,544 14,203 9,872 10,009 18,892 14,260 15,759 13,288
184
Tasmania
3,741 2,992 5,951 3,387 2,219
51

8,072 6,239 3,766 3,453 4,954 13,841. 7,089 10,458 6,288 5,342 6,296 6,246 9,581 1,923 7,327 13,014 7,853 8,960 3,938
528
14,350 4,932 34,341 8,416 12,860 9,974 12,068 17,444 16,424 13,422 4,806
384
22,845 13,190 8,413 17,334 16,991 18,052 18,865 22,236 17,393 23,588
1,428
4,515 3,805 6,245 4,282 2,779
254

1,610

Northern Territory

1,873 165 720

Northern Territory Migratory

7,071 9,855

369

46

102

o

139

Australian Capital Territory

1,076 172

Canberra Fraser

I 1,034 I 1,1 56

321

11,803 11,771

340

331 418

Expenditure Commitments: Department of Foreign Affairs

260

(Question No. 1211)

53 365 364

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:

348

(I) What specific commitments For expenditure, excluding

686 normal recurring costs of running the Department such as

394 salaries and administrative costs, does his Department ha~e

232 For (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.

390 381 479

(2) What sum is involved in each commitment and what is the purpose of the commitment.

150

(3) Has his attention been drawn to the Fact that when a

425 similar question was answered by a number of Ministers in

907 1976, it was claimed. that obtaining the inFormation would in347 volve collectlon of detailed inFormation From a diversity or

346 records and sources, and would thereFore require unjustifiable 300 use of staff resources:'

237

(4) Has the development of Forward estimates in his De-

partment now been advanced to a stage where a similar reply

is no longer valid.

455 216

Mr Street-The answer to. the honourable

441 member's question is as follows:

389 383 320 521

(I) to (4)-1 reFer the honourable member to the answer given to Question on Notice No. 1216 given by the Minister For Finance.

322 535

Reciprocal Pension Arrangement with Greece

335

(Question No. 2046)

140 16

Mr O'Keefe askedthe Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 6

May 1981:

472

(I) Does Australia have a reciprocal arrangement with the

437 Greek Government on the payment of age pensions to Greeks

469 'who have become naturalised Australians returning' to

601 Greece.

531 352 571

(2) IF so, what sum is this arrangement costing the Australian taxpayer.

588 Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has

619 418
74

provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(1) Under an agreement completed on 4 November 1972, age, invalid, wives and widows pensions granted in Australia 134 became. payable in Greece. The agreement was not limited to
109 naturalised Australians. Conversely, the agreement provided 277 For corresponding Greek pensions to be paid in Australia. The 112 agreement became redundant in relation to Australian pen142 sions when general portability of pensions was introduced
6 From 8 May 1973.

674 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) Exp~nditure on all Australian pensions paid to former residents of Australia in Greece during the financial year 1979-80, as a result of general portability of pensions, was approximately $IOm.
Millmerran Coal into Oil. Project, Queensland
(Question No. 2461)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:
(I) Has he received an environmental impact study and/or a feasibility study in relation to the Millmerran coal into oil project located south-west of Brisbane, Queensland.
(2) If so, (a) does either study state that the scheme envisages using 25,000 tonnes of washed coal per day and will therefore also use a massive quantity of water in the production process and (b) do the studies also state the problem of supplying water to the Millmerran coal into oil project may entail damming the Severn River; if not, what alternative pro, posals have been put forward.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. Neither I nor my Department have received any study reports on the Millmerran project and I understand that no Commonwealth approval has yet been sought for the project. However, if such approval is sought and the project is deemed to be environmentally significant, the provisions of the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act could apply.
(2) Not applicable.
Aborigines: Administration of Law in Queensland
(Question No. 2498)
Mrs Darling asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:
(I) Further to his reply to my question without notice on 26 November 1980 (Hansard, pages 53-4) concerning the document entitled 'Country reports on human rights practices', submilled to the United States of America Congress by the USA Department of State, can he say whethere misgivings have been expressed officially or unofficially to the Queensland Government that propagation of the fact that Queensland has been accused of administering certain laws relating to Aborigines in a way that has the effect of discriminating between the rights of white and black Australians (a) will have a pernicious effect on Australia's international relations particularly with Third World developing countries arid (b) could jeopardise the participation of some Commonwealth countries in the 1982 Commonwealth Games to be held in Brisbane.
(2) Has he expressed any concern to the Queensland Government that continuing doubt over the implications of abolishing the Queensland Aborigines Act and the Torres Strait Islanders Act may increase any misgivings presently felt by certain Commonwealth countries in participating in the Brisbane Commonwealth Games.
(3) Does he hold any concern of this nature.
.Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I). (2) and (3) The Commonwealth appreciates "that the review of the Aborigines and Torres Strait Islanders Acts is of major concern to Aboriginal people. The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has on several occasions discussed this maller

with the Queensland Minister for Aboriginal and Island Affairs and a number of the communities concerned. The Commonwealth will continue to maintain a close interest appropriate to its responsibilities in this area.
'H'
Colleges of Advanced Education
(Question No. 2510)
Mr Vren asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:
What is the estimated cost of increasing from 50 per cent to 100 per cent the recurrent support provided by the Commonwealth Government for courses in non-government colleges of advanced education.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
In its Advice to the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission on financial assistance for advanced education for the 1982-84 triennium, the Advanced Education Council estimated that the additional cost. of fully supporting those non-government teachers' colleges. ~hich are now partially supported would be $1.4m (at December 1980 cost levels).
Age Pensions: Means Test
(Question No. 2521)
Mr Charles Jones asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:
What is the estimated cost of abolishing the means test and paying the full pension or benefit on the-
(a) age pension for persons over (i) 60 (ii) 65and
(iii) 70 years of age, (b) widows' pension, (c) invalid pension, (d) supporting parent's benefit, (e) special benefit, (f) employment benefit, and (g) sickness benefit.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The estimated additional full year cost at current rates of pension and benefit of abolishing the income test for current pensioners and beneficiaries is as follows:
(a) age pensioners (i) 60 years and over $308m (ii) 65 years and over $259m (iii) 70 years and over $182m
wives of age pensioners $6m (b) widow pensioners $37m (c) invalid pensioners (including wives) $43m (d) supporting parent beneficiaries $19m (e) special beneficiaries $0.3m (f) unemployment beneficiaries $6m (g) sickness beneficiaries $3m
It is not possible to reliably estimate the additional cost pfproviding income test free pensions or benefits, other than age pension, to those persons not currently in receipt of pension or benefit, as the following information is not available:
the numbers of persons who currently meet the eligibility criteria for a pension or benefit but who are excluded onin- -come grounds

Answers to Questions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 675

the number of persons who would leave full-time work in order to work part-time and be then eligible for the full rate of unemployment benefit.
In the case of the aged an estimate can be made of the cost of abolition of the income test allowing for those who would be newly eligible. It is estimated that the cost of abolition of the income test for persons of age pension age at current rates would be in the order of:
(i) $438m for those aged 60 to 64 years;
(ii) $4 13m for those aged 65 to 69 years; and
(iii) $193m for those aged 70 years and over.
The relevant pensions for those of age pension age include age, invalid, widows and service pensions.
The above costs are gross costs as they make no allowance for the additional revenue that would be gained from taxation of the payments.
Review of Commonwealth Functions
(Question No. 2589)
Mr Morris ask the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) What measures have been taken to implement decisions Nos. 3 and 4 arising from the Review of Commonwealth Functions under the heading of Industry and Commerce (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1846) up to the date of preparation of the answer to this question.
(2) What measures are planned to fully implement each decision.
(3) What cost alterations are expected from each decision for 1981-82 compared to the situation prior to the decision in respect of (a) capital costs and (b) recurrent costs.
(4) What consultations or concurrence are required with other levels of government or organisations prior to each decision being implemented.
(5) What is the expected impact on employment levels of implementing each decision.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) In regard to the ship design function, existing projects are being completed and new projects are not being accepted.
(b) The Shipbuilding Board was abolished on 30 April 1981 and shipbuilding bounty administration staff has been reduced from 17 to 12 to date.
(2) (a) When existing ship design projects are completed the function will cease within the Department. A private enterprise organisation that has made an offer of employment to specialised staff intends to carry out part of the Ship Design Group's functions.
(b) Reduction of shipbuilding bounty administration staff to zero over the next eighteen months when constructions commenced under the Ship Contruction Bounty Act 1975 are expected to be completed.
(3) The ship design, Shipbuilding Board and shipbuilding assistance functions did not incur capital costs. Recurrent costs for 1981-82 are expected to be $8,978,517 less than 1980-81 costs. Shipbuilding bounty continues under new simplified Bounty (Ships) Act 1980 administered by Department of Business and Consumer Affairs.
(4) Public Service Board, Department of Administrative Services and relevant staff organisations.

(5) Staff level of Department expected to be reduced by 43 which includes 26 engaged in ship design functions and 17 in shipbuilding assistance functions by early 1983.
Natural Disasters
(Question No. 1001)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
(I) What is the Government's exact approach to natural disasters.
(2) What natural disasters have involved the Commonwealth Government in the expenditure of funds in each of the States and for what sum for each disaster, during the last five years.
(3) Has the Queensland Government made approaches to the Commonwealth Government for additional assistance for recent disasters; ifso, for which disasters.
(4) What response has there been to the Government's policy proposals published in the Policy Information Paper issued in May 1979.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The Government's approach is based on the view that all elements of the community, including individuals, private organisations and governments, should be expected to take reasonable precautions against the effects of natural disasters on property and other assets they own. The question of what type of action should be taken is a matter for individual bodies to determine in. the light of their own particular circumstances, but clearly a significant option available to them is to take out appropriate insurance cover.
State Governments are constitutionally responsible for determining what government assistance should be offered to individuals and organisations affected by natural disasters within their own areas. However, the Commonwealth recognises that the cost of such assistance can, by the very nature of natural disasters, be large and unpredictable, and impose an undue burden on State finances. Accordingly, under long standing arrangements, the Commonwealth provides financial support to the States (and the Northern Territory) when expenditure on approved measures of natural disaster relief exceeds their assessed financial capacities, with the States assuming responsibility for administering and providing relief assistance.
The Commonwealth also recognises that it has considerable physical resources at its disposal which can be mobilised at short notice at the request of the States or in connection with disasters occurring in its own territories. Co-ordination of the provision of such physical assistance is carried out by the Natural Disasters Organisation. In addition, the Commonwealth undertake various activities which assist the community in improving its preparedness to cope with natural disasters including, for instance, the operations of the Bureau of Meteorology.
In participating in these various ways in the planning for and handling of the effects of natural disasters, the Commonwealth's involvement is designed to complement, rather than to duplicate or cut across, the proper responsibilities of members of the community, the States and the insurance industry.
(2) The natural disaster relief arrangements are not designed to provide assistance to a State on a disaster-by-disaster basis, but rather to assist a State in meeting the cost of natural disaster relief assistance provided during a year when it goes

676 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Answers to Questions

beyond the amount originally set to rellect the State's financial capacity. Accordingly, information in the Form sought is not readily available. Details of Commonwealth assistance to individual States under the natural disaster relieF arrangements are available in 1981-82 Budget Paper No. 7 and in earlier issues of this Budget Paper.
(3) Yes. The Queensland Government did, on various occasions during the period of the recent drought, request extensions to existing drought relieF measures and the introduction of various new measures. It also sought, and obtained agreement to, increases in the limits applying to approved measures for the relieF of personal hardship and distress in connection with lIooding which occurred in the Cooktown and Ingham areas of north Queensland in January 1981, and to some minor variations to these measures in relation to the lIooding which occurred in the Sandgate area of Brisbane in December 1980.
(4) There has been very little response to the Policy InFormation Paper on Natural Disaster Insurance issued by the Government in May 1979. This Paper sets out in detail the reasons For the Government's decision not to proceed with the implemention of a natural disaster insurance scheme of the kind previously mooted.
The only substantial response was From the Insurance Council of Australia which expressed disappointment at the Government's decision but advised that it had established a working party to explore the policies and proposals outlined in the Paper. The Council has since Forwarded a Submission on these matters to the Treasurer and this is under consideration within the Department of the Treasury.
Canberra: General Rates
(Question No. 1778)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Was Canberra's general rates For 1979-80 assessed to recover From ratepayers only 86 per cent of the estimated cost of providing general municipal services; iF so, what was the reason.
(2) Is it planned to raise this percentage so that Canberra ratepayers wholly pay For their municipal services; iF so, when.
Mr Hodgman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) InI979-80, Canberra's general rates were set to recover 73 per cent of total expenditure on Municipal-type services (excluding water and sewerage costs). A Further 15 per cent of these costs was recovered by municipal Fees and charges, a notional grant to libraries based on grants in New South Wales and assessed charges For services to Government organisations. These two sources total 88. per cent of the costs of municipal services. The remaining 12 per cent was the agreed contribution by the Commonwealth Government and recognises the impact of the Commonwealth in determining the costs of Canberra. Factors taken into account in determining the level of contribution include:
higher standards determined by the Commonwealth because of national seat ofgovernment considerations;
the particular impact of the large number of non-rateable government buildings; and
large amounts of vacant Commonwealth land which impacts directly on municipal costs.
As well, Canberra did not derive any benefit From the 1.75 percent share of personal income tax collections allocated to local governments through the State Governments in 1979-80.
(2) The proportion of total expenditure the Commonwealth seeks to recover From ratepayers is~ determined on a

year by year basis having regard to both budgeted expenditure levels and the level of rates paid in State capital cities.

National Semiconducto'r Corporation
(Question No. 2383)
Mr n~rry Jones asked the Minister for Science
and Technology, upon notice, on 2 June 1981:
(1) With respect to the AustraH~n Government's offer to provide $19m in Facilities in Canberra to the National Semiconductor Corporation (Natsemi), of Santa Clara, CaliFornia, United States of America, is the proposed feasibility study on the project to be carried out by Natsemi itselF.

(2) Is the need For a Feasibility study on the project a

'precondition to the provision of 'Government support to

Natsemi.

..

(3) Is he aware of any other cases where Government assistance is conditional on a Feasibility study being carried out
by the beneficiary itselF.

(4) IF the proposed Feasibility study is to be carried out by Natsemi itselF, does the precedent set mean that Feasibility studies will in Future be carried out by beneficiaries as a matter of routine or is.this case to be regarded as an exception; iF so why.

(5) Is it a fact that Government assistance to companies,
For example. that given to General Motors, to set up enterprises in Australia which are totally Foreign-owned and
controlled, has not led to the development of an indigenous technology but has led to the almost total control of technology in Australia by overseas interests; if so, in what way
will the Natsemi project differ From the G M precedent.

(6) On what basis is the estimate of 1,200 permanent jobs in Canberra calculated and how many of these estimated jobs
will be For (a) skilled or (b) semi-skilled workers.

(7) Is it a Fact that the Canberra plant will be For the Fabrication of silicon waFers only, and not For the chips themselves, that is, after microcircuitry has Oeen applied and the waFers are broken into discrete units to which casing and terminals are applied elsewhere.

(8) Is he able to indicate what is the size of the labour Force employed by Natsemi in their plants in (a) Korea. (b) Hong Kong, (c) Malaysia, (d) Singapore, (e) Taiwan, (f) Mauritius, (g) Thailand, (h) Indonesia, (i) Mexico and (j) The
Philippines.

(9) Is he Further able to say what other Natsemi plants are devoted to the Fabrication of silicon wafers alone and what the total employment is in each of them.

Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

The Government's decision to invite the National Semicon-
ductor Corporation (NSC) to examine the Feasibility of establishing a silicon waFer Fabrication plant in the ACT was
announced by the Minister For the Capital Territory on 24 March 1981. The Government indicated its willingness to lease land and buildings on a rent-Free basis in return For cer-
tain undertakings From NSC. This rellects the Government's policy of promoting private sector investment and employment opportunities in the Australian Capital Territory. The
undertakings by NSC will relate to the transFer of technology particularly with respect to applications of microelectronics, "most Favoured customer" access to NSC products, access by CSIRO to production Facilities and the training of Aus-
tralians, thereby helping Australian industry to improve its international competitiveness.

Answers to Questions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 677

NSC's decision to consider Canberra as a possible site for its proposed plant followed negotiations initiated by the Canberra Development Board, a body established by the Commonwealth Government to actively promote expansion of the private sector in Canberra, particularly in relation to commercial, industrial and tourist developments. The project would involve major investment and provide employment opportunil.ies in the Australian Capital Territory, and also result in other significant national benefits. Any decision by NSC will of course be a commercial decision taken by the company itself in the light of circurnstances as it sees them.
Against this background, specific answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:-
(I) Yes.
(2) The purpose of the feasibility study is to enable NSC to decide whether it will proceed with the proposed silicon wafer fabrication plant. It is also one of the pre-conditions for Government assistance, the other being the successful negotiation of heads of agreement with NSC.
(3) Companies proposing to establish new operations in Australia normally undertake feasibility studies to satisfy themselves of the commercial viability of such proposed operations. Governments of all complexions generally wish to be satisfied that projects have been shown to be economically viable before special assistance is made available.
(4) The offer of Government assistance does not remove the need for feasibility studies of the type described above. Moreover NSC, as a result of its studies, will have to satisfy the Government that the plant is economically viable. The Government has already established an interdepartmental mechanism to evaluate the project and report to Cabinet. A private business consultant has also been engaged to provide ind.ependent advice to the Government on commercial aspects of the proposa\.
(5) I am not aware of similar assistance being given to General Motors and I do not believe the NSC proposal is comparable to the General Motors' case. The. claim that technology in Australia is almosttotally controlled by overseas interests is grossly exaggerated, as is the claim that foreign owned and controlled enterprises have not engaged in the development of indigenous technology. Government policies generally do not differentiate between Australian and foreign enterprises. If NSC decide to proceed with the proposed plant, national benefits can be expected including the development of our own microelectronics industry and the opportunity for Australian industry to improve its competitiveness through the more effective application of microelectronics technology. There will also be a beneficial impact on the Australian Capital Territory regional economy as a result of a more diversified employment base.
(6) The estimates of job numbers were originally supplied by NSC but have been confirmed through investigations undertaken by a senior-level interdepartmental team which visited the United States and Europe in January 1981. The estimates are based on an around-the-clock production operation. The rtlsponse to Question 2092 provided by my colleague, the Minister for the Capital Territory, is also relevant to this question. Current data on the breakdown of skills shows: 20 per cent workforce in professional categories; 30 per cent in skilled technician categories; and 50 per cent in semi and unskilled groups.

(7) The proposed wafer plant will involve application of integrated circuits to raw silicon wafers by advanced photographic and chemical technologies. The silicon wafers will then be exported to NSC operations in Asia for subsequent testing, dicing, assembly and packaging.
(8) Not known. It is my understanding that none of the plants listed are engaged in wafer fabrication.
(9) NSC's wafer production currently occurs in the United States of America (Santa Clara, California; Danbury, Connecticut; and West Jordan, Utah. A fourth plant is currently under construction in Arlington, Texas) and at Greenock, Scotland. Total employment is not known.
Publicly Funded Research
(Question No. 2422)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(I) Did his statement of 12 May 1981 that Australian science and technology must be integrated with economic and social goals (Hansard, page 2230), have the agreement of the Treasurer.
(2) Have Government earnings and projected earnings from CSIRO inventions more than repaid public expenditure on CSIRO and do private enterprise interests based and controlled in Australia not have the resources to be as cost effective in basic and long-term research projects as CSIRO and other publicly funded research.
(3) Does the Government accept that irrespective of private research, Australia will lose in the international market as well as culturally by failing to move towards parity with other developed countries in proportion of Gross National Product allocated to publicly funded research.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Government accepts the view expressed in the Declaration on Future Policies for Science and Technology made by Science and Technology Ministers of OECD countries in March this year, and the contribution of science and te.chnology to the achievement of national economic and social goals will be most effective if policies for science and technology are integrated with other aspects of government policy, particularly economic, social, industrial, including ene.rgy, education and manpower policies. Policy formulation in particular areas of government activity takes account of the relevanc.e of overall economic and social policy and involves consultation and co-ordination between ministries at many levels. Science and technology policy is no exception.
An example of the Government's concern with integrating S&T policy with overall economic and social policy can be seen from the Prime Minister's 18 September 1980 Statement to the House concerning the Commonwealth's projectresearch funding program. The Prime Minister asked the Australian Science and Technology Council (ASTEC) to prepare a statement of national objectives for research. He also asked ASTEC to indicate the extent to which programs of financial assistance provided by the .various Government funding bodies Were meeting those national objectives.
(2) CSIRO exists to undertake general scientific research on behalf of the Commonwealth in support of Australian economic lind social goals. The measure of CSIRO's success is not in earnings from inventions but in satisfying these goals. National benefits from basic and long-term research projects are difficult to measure, but the only recent study (carried out jointly by the Industries Assistance Commission and the CSIRO Division of Entomology) conservatively estimated

678 REPRESENTATIVES 20 August 1981

Answers to Questions

that direct, measured national benefits were worth more than twice the total costs of undertaking the research. Indirect benefits were also likely to have been substantial.
Research carried out by private enterprises properly focuses on work likely to show gO\ld commercial returns, and private research resources are naturally geared to this end. In the main, therefore, these resources are inappropriate for basic and long term research projects. The Government believes, however, that there are many areas where collaboration ~an benefit both commercial and national interests. Such collaboration is actively encouraged by CSIRO.
I
(3) This question is based on a false premise. The figures in the table below indicate that the proportion of Australia's gross domestic product allocated to publicly funded R&D is

of the same order as in comparable OECD countries. The major difference between Australia and other countries, as is also shown in the table, is the relatively low level of R&D funding undertaken by private enteq:>rise. This is the basis for the concern on the role of the private sector expressed in the statement of 12 May 1981.
The Government has, however, moved to rectify this situation by encouraging private sector R&D through the Australian Industrial Research and Development Incentives program. In the last four years Government funding has increased from $14m in 1977-78 to $53m in 1980-81. This injection of public funds into the private sector R&D effort is designed to encourage a higher level of product and process innovation, and hence competitiveness, in Australian industry,

COMPARISON OF RESOURCES COMMITTED BY AUSTRALIA AND SELECTED OECD COUNTRIES TO R&D IN 1977 OR NEAREST YEAR (a)

OECD class

Country

GERD

TotalGERD as percen tage
of GDP

Government funded(b) component ofGERD
as percentage , of GDP

Business enterprise( c)
funded component
ofGERD as percentage
of GDP

Large Rand D performing countries
Medium Rand D .performing countries
Small Rand D performing countries

USA FRGermany UK (d)78-79
Japan 77-78 France
Switzerland Netherlands Sweden (d) 77-78
Belgium Canada 77-78 Australia 76-77
Italy Norway
Finland Denmark 76-77
New Zealand 77-78 Ireland
Iceland Portugal 78

$USm
44,800 11,083 6,611
14,234 6,754
1,391 2,116 1,500
1,059 2,086
920
1,909 503
322 433
126 75 13
57

2.4

1.29

1.05

2.1

0.95

1.13

2.1

1.01

0.93

1.9

0.56

1.12

1.8

0.77

0.73

2.3

0.48

1.77

2.0

0.91

0.97

1.9

0.71

1.11

1.3

n.a.

n.a.

1.0

0.66

0.33

1.0

0.70

0.23

1.0

0.42

0.42

1.4

0.86

0.50

1.1

0.48

0.52

1.0

0.54

0.46

0.8

0.70

0.11

0.8

0.48

0.27

0.7

0.54

0.05

0.3

0.27

0.04

(a) Additional detail is presented diagramatically on fig. I. page 120, Science and Technology Statement 1980-81.
(b) For the purpose of international comparisons between federal and unitary countries, this category includes provincial and local government. Thus the figures for Australia include both Commonwealth and State Government.
(c) Includes Government trading enterprises.
(d) Natural Sciences and Engineering only. Other countries include the Social Sciences and Humanities. GERD-Gross Domestic Expenditure on Rand D. Source: International Statistical Year 1977-New Zealand 1977 and Preliminary International Tables DST/SPR/79.28,
OECD, Paris 19.81.

CSIRO Division of Oceanography and Fisheries Research
(Question No. 2448)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Science a,nd Technology, upon notice, on 9 June 1981:

(3) Was the Australian Marine Sciences Technical Advisory Council (AMSTAC) consulted on the proposed change; if not, why not.
(4) If there were consultations with AMSTAC what were they and when did they take place.

(I) Has the Government announced a decision to transfer the CSIRO Division of Oceanography and Fisheries Research from Cronulla, New South Wales, to Hobart, Tasmania; if so, when was the decision announced.
(2) Was this decision announced before the Senate Standing Committee on Science and the Environment had completed its inquiries into marine science in Australia.

(5) Is the proposal currently before the Joint Statutory Committee on Public Works.
(6) Did the New South Wales branch of the CSIRO Officers' Association recommend that a Regional Marine Laboratory be set up in Hobart but that the headquarters of the Division should remain near a major capital on the mainland; ifso, what consideration has been given to this proposal.

Answers to Questions

20 August 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 679

Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) Yes. On 15 April 1980 the Prime Minister announced the Government's intention to establish a CSRIO marine sci-
ence centre in Hobart at a cost of about $25m, including $9m for a research vessel. In that media release the Prime Minister also referred to the transfer of the CSIRO -Division of
Fisheries and Oceanography from Cronulla, New South Wales, to Hobart.

(2) Yes.

(3) CSIRO advised AMSTAC of the possible relocation.

(4) On 6 November 1979 CSIRO advised AMSTAC of the
possible relocation to Hobart of a substantial portion of the Sydney-based activities of the Division of Fisheries and
Oceanography. Attached to this advice was an extract from a CSIRO submission to the Location of Australian Government Employees (LAGE) Committee concerning relocation of
CSIRO activities to Tasmania and a copy of a statement made available to the CSIRO staff associations informing them of this possibility.

AMSTAC also considered the Report of CSIRO Ocean Sci-

ences Review Committee and the accompanying Decisions of

the CSIRO Ellecutive on Marine Science in Closed Session at

its meeting on 19 February 1980. The Director, CSIRO Insti-

tute of Biological Resmlfces, was present at this meeting by in-

vitation and participated in the discussion.

_-

The policy decisions reached by the Ellecutive are set'out in
the CSIRO Marine Science Policy Statement issued in June 1980 and widely distributed in July 1980. The Statement appears in the 1979-80 CSIRO Annual Report, pages 36-41.

(5) Yes. CSIRO appeared before the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works in Hobart on 21 and 22 May 1981 regarding the proposed CSIRO Marine Laboratories,

Hobart. The hearing was adjourned and CSIRO's further appearance before the Committee was in Sydney on 9 July 1981.
(6) Yes. The New South Wales Branch of the CSIRO Officers' Association did so recommend. The recommendation was not made to the CSIRO Ellecutive, but to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works in the course of its hearing in Hobart on 22 May 1981. There has been no indication of support by the Council of the CSIRO Officers' Association for the views of the Association's New South Wales Branch.
Electoral: Broadcast of Election Speeches
(Question No. 2677)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(1) How much time was made available for broadcasting election speeches or political advertisements in respect of each political party on each radio broadcasting station and television station in connection with the election held on 18 October 1980.
(2) What was the percentage distribution of time purchased by parties and candidates on commercial broadcasting and television stations_
(3) What were the costs charged for this time and what was the percentage distribution between parties and candidates of these costs.
Mr SincIair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer provided to Senator Mason's question No. 136. (Senate Hansard, 31 March 1981, pp 936-954).


