House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 125, 1981 Wednesday, 23 September 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--THIRD PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-THIRD PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the
Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House "Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry "Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas AnthQny
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.c.
Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee - The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.c.
The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senatonhe Honourable Anthon~ John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, K.e.M.G., QC. Chairman a/Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deput)' Chairmen a/Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Dona.ld Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader a/the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader a/the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden DeplIl)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader oJthe Liberal Party oJ Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. Deput), Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAllstralia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G. Leodera/the Nalional Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony DepulJ' uaderofthe NatiollalCountry Par/yofAustra(ia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Lobor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor PartJ'-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony, Rt Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewell. Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.e. Brown, Robert James Bungey, Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Hon. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest
Child,Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Han. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley
Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, e.H. Free, Ross Vincent Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey Q'Halioran Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John
Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.e. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles
Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allen Clyde Howard, Han. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunnet Hurford, Christopher John Hyde, John Martin Innes, Utquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher,Qld
Richmond, N.S.W. Chiftey, N.S.W. Macatthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. Bonython, SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith, N.S. W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qld Parramatla, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic.
Hunter, N.S. W. Canning, WA. Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden, Qld
Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
Henty, Vic. Robertson, N.S. W.
Wentwotth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne,N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld McMillan, Vic.
Lilley, Qld Fremantle, WA. Herbert, Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. ,
Holt,Vic. Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Faner, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S.w. Fraser, A.e.T. Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas. Braddon, Tas. Boothby, SA Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qld. Riverina, N.S. W.
Petrie,Qld Denison, Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Griffith,Qld Gwydir, N.S.W.
Adelaide, SA Moore,WA. Melbourne, Vic.

NCP
NCP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP LP
ALP LP LP LP LP LP
NCP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP ALP ALP LP
LP NCP ALP
ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP
ALP LP ALP
Ll' LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP
LP LP ALP ALP NCP LP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP NCP
ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles Killen, Hon. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
K.e.M.G. MacKellar, Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., e.H.
McVeigh, Hon. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Han. William Lawrence Mounlford,John Graham Newman, Han. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Han. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Han. Andrew Sharp Parler, James Robert Robinson, Han. Ian Louis Rocher, Allen Charles Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scoll, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden, Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., Q.e. Spender, John Michael, Q.e. Street. Han. Anthony Austin TJlmbling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.e.
Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Han. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George West, Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.e.
Willis,Ralph Wilson, Han. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker,S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle, N.s.W. Bowman,Qld Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S. W. Canberra, A.e.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Watringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S. W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S. W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld La Trobe, Vic. Ryan,Qld Shorlland, N.S.W. St George, N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid, N.S.w. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S. W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. Sturt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP' LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Counlry Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins (to 8 September), Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Scott (from 8 September), Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY -Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Oonald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATloNs-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERs-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges,Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKs-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman (from 25 August), Senator Kilgariffand Senator Martyr (from 25 August), and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston (from 9 September), Senator Georges, Senator Hamer (from 8 September), and Senator Robertson (to 9 September), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman (from 20 August), Mr Dean (t020 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen (from 23 September), Senator Elstob, Senator Hill (from 23 September), Senator Kilgariff (to 23 September), Senator McIntosh, Senator Martin (to 23 September), Senator Martyr (from 23 September), Senator Sibraa, Senator Teague (from 23 September), and Senator Young (to 23 September) and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOusE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Mi~ister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin (from 25 August), Senator Missen, Senator Sibra. and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE A: Parliament-Mr Speaker, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Hurford, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Barry Jones, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister assisting the Prime Minister), Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Holding, Mr Hurford, Mrs Kelly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Foreign Affairs-Mr Street (Minister for Foreign Affairs), Mr Beazley, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Fry, Mr Jacobi, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Defence-Mr Killen (Minister for Defence), Mr Burr, Mr Campbell, Mr Connolly, Mr Kerin, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Morrison, Mr Peacock, Mr Scholes, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE B: Department of Social SecuritY-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport and Minister representing the Minister for Social Security), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Harris, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mildren, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.

Department of Health-Mr MacKellar (Minister for Health), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Cunningham, Mr Harris, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Veterans' Affairs-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology and Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mrs Darling, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Mr Macphee (Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs), Mr Adennann, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs), Mr Adermann, Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Milton, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE C: Department of the Capital Territory-Mr Hodgman (Minister for the Capital Territory), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Dr Cass, Mr Coleman, Mr Fry, Mr Harris, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lusher and Mr Scholes.
Department of Home Affairs and Environment-Mr Wilson (Minister for Home Affairs and Environment), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Howe, Mr Lusher, Mr Uren and MrWest.
Department of Science and Technology-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mrs Darling, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Mildren.
Department of Communications-Mr Sinclair (Minister for Communications), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Wallis.
Department of Administrative Services-Mr Newman (Minister for Administrative Services), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Humphreys, Mr Lusher, Mr Milton and Mr Scholes.
Attorney-Genera!'s Department-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister representing the Attorney General), Mr Birney, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Coleman, Mr Dean, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Holding and Mr Lusher.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE D: Department of the Treasury-Mr Howard (Treasurer). Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Mr Willis.
Department of Finance-Mr Howard (Treasurer and Minister representing the Minister for Finance), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Hurford, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Mr Shack and Mr Tambling.
Department of Transport-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Jull, Mr Morris, Mr Scott, Mr Shack, Mr Tamblingand Mr Wallis.
Department of Primary Industry-Mr Nixon (Minister for Primary Industry), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Kerin, Mr Mildren, Mr Tambling and Mr Wallis.
ESTIMA TES COMMITTEE E: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs-Mr N. A. Brown (Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Mildren and Mr Peacock.
Department of Industrial Relations-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations), Mr Burr, Mr Charles, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Dr Theophanous.
Department of Education-Mr Fife (Minister for Education), Mr Beazley, Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Dawkins, Mr Fisher, Mr Free, Mr Barry Jones, Mr McLean and Mr Peacock.
Department of Housing and Construction-Mr McVeigh (Minister for Housing and Construction), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Howe, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Mr Uren.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE F: Department oflndustry and Commerce-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs acting for the Minister for Industry and Commerce), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hicks, Mrs Kelly, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Trade and Resources-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of National Development and Energy-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources representing the Minister for National Development and Energy), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Howe, Mr Keating, Mr Milton, Mr O'Keefe, Mr Porter and Mr Uren.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. O. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (TableJ-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (ProceduraIJ-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk Assistant-A. R. Browning Clerk Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-I. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-I. C. Cochran Procedure Office-J. K. Porter
Table Office (ProgrammingJ-B. C. Wright (Acting) Table Office (Bills and PapersJ-J. W. Pender (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaJJ(HouseofRepresimtativesJ-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaJJ(SenateJ-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. de S. C. MacLean (Acting)
JOINT HOUSE
Secrelary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 123 of 1981)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Apple and Pear Export Charge Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 147 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Export Ch~rge Act 1976.
Apple and Pear Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1460f 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Levy Act 1976.
Appropriation Act (No.1) 1981-82 (Act No. 1640f 1981)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 165 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year endingon 30June 1981.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 145 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 124 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 126 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 125 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 130 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (lnsurance Bus;ness) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Life Insurance Business) Act 1981 (Act No. 128 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of certain life insurance business having a connection with the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981 (Act No. 129 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of the registration of certain vehicles in the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian CapitalTerritory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 127 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 150 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 50 of the Austrillian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1977.
Australian National University Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1660f 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Natiollal University Act 1946.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 168 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 177 of 1981)An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905, and for related purposes.
Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 151 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act 1905 in relation to the exportation of food.
Commonwealth Grants Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 173 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973.
Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 153 of 1981)- An Act to amend laws relating to companies and securities and for related purposes.
Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 182 of 1981)An Act to amend the Continental Shelf(Living Natural Resources) Act 1968 to facilitate the collection of levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and of amounts payable under certain agreements, and for certain other purposes.
Crimes (Currency) Aat 1981 (Act No. 1220f 1981)An Act to make provision with respect to offences connected with the counterfeiting of money or certain kinds of securities and other activities injurious to Australian currency, and for related purposes.
Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 152 of 1981)- An Act ~to amend the Cllstoms Act 1901 in relation to the exportation of food.
Customs (Valuations) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 157 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.
Defence Acts Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 178 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relat,ing to defence.

Derence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 144 or 1981)- An Act relating to retirement and death benefits in respect or members or the Derence Force.
Departure Tax Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 131 or 1981)An Act to amend the Departure Tax Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Departure Tax Collection Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 132 or 1981) An Act to amend the Departure Tax Collection Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981 (Act No. 148 or 1981)An Act to provide ror confidentiality in relation to certain epidemiological studies.
Export Grants Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 119 or 1981)- An Act relating to export grants.
Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1800r 1981)- An Act relating to payments under certain fisheries agreements.
Fisheries Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 181 00981)An Act to amend the Fisheries Act 1952 to racilitate the collection or levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and or amounts payable under certain agreements, and ror certain other purposes.
Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 (Act No. 179 or 1981)An Act to impose a levy on the grant or certain licences in respect or roreign fishing boats.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1750r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1981 (Act No. 156 or 1981)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes or companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation runds.
Income Tax (Indi dduals) Act 1981 (Act No. 15500981)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes or companies, or corporate unit trusts and or superannuation runds.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 143 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Internationa! Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act(No. 3) 1981 (Act No. 1540r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Judges' Pensions Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 158 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Judges' Pensions Act 1968.
Meat Export (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 149 or 1981)An Act to provide penalties ror certain offences against the Exports (Meat) Regulations.
National Health Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 163 or 1981)- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953.
Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 174 or 1981)- An Act to amend section 3 or the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966.
Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 161 or 1981)An Act to amend the Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1977, and ror related purposes.
Norrolk Island Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12000981)- An Act to amend the Norfolk Island Act 1979.
Queensland Grant (Special Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 172 or 1981)- An Act to grant financial assistance to Queensland.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 198i (Act No. 121 00981)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16000981)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.1) 1981 (Act No. 1330r 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 13400981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1981 (Act No. 13500981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1981 (Act No. 13600981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1981 (Act No. 137 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1981 (Act No. 138 or 1981)-
An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.

Sales Tax Amendme~t Act (No.7) 1981 (Act No. 1390f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1981 (Act No. 1400f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1981 (Act No. 141 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1420f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Services Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 159 of 1981)An Act to amend the Social Services Act 1947, and for related purposes.
Social Services Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 170 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 105A of the Social Services Act 1947.
States Grants (Capital Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 171 ofl981)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure of a capital nature and to authorize the borrowing of certain moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 1620f 1981)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act(No. 2) 1981 (Act No. 167 of 1981')- An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1760f 1981)An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 169 of 1981)An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Crimes Amendment Bill 1981__ )nitiated in the Senate. First Reading.
-Domicile Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Domicile (Consequential Amendments) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Dried Sultana Production Underwriting Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Read...g.
Freedom of Information Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. IA-9A) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.

Petitions

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1657

Wednesday, 23 September 1981
Mr SPEAKER CRt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Recognising the high youth unemployment in Australia and the overall effectiveness of the CYSS programme in equipping young people with skills necessary for their place in the workforce.
We strongly oppose the close of the Community Youth Support Scheme programme and call you, the Minister, to reinstate this programme immediately.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to effect the above.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Robert Brown.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That a need exists within the community for the Community Youth Support Scheme.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government not remove any funds for the Community Youth Support Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Donald Cameron and Mr Humphreys.
Petitions received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth; that the decision of the government to terminate the Community Youth Support Scheme from October 31 1981, will deny unemployed youth the significant skills and support that the scheme provided. This will result in greater hardship and alienation of these young people from society.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should reconsider the closure of the Community Youth Support Scheme and continue its funding in recognition of its significant contribution to the welfare of unemployed youth.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Campbell.
Petition received.

Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the abolition of the Community Youth Support Scheme shows a callous indifference and lack of sensitivity to the needs of the unemployed youth of Australia.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government continues to fund the Community Youth Support Scheme throughout Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dawkins.
Petition received.

Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the' House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully showeth:
That the serious youth unemployment problem is a direct result of the community's failure to create sufficient jobs.
In these circumstances the decision to abolish Community Youth Support Schemes (CYSS) is a socially retrogressive step. The CYSS Projects provide valuable support services and work training for many young unemployed.
We the undersigned are concerned that the closure of CYSS Projects may lead young une'mployed to become involved in anti-social behaviour such as crime, vandalism, prostitution, rebellious behaviour and mob action. There is the even more frightening prospect that many more young people will give up hope of obtaining a job, become idle and even contemplate suicide.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government reverse its decision to abolish CYSS Projects and provide sufficient funds to enable the various CYSS Centres to continue their valuable work with the young unemployed in the future.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ewen Cameron, Mrs Child, Mr Innes, Mr Milton, Mr Peacock and Mr Uren.
Petitions received.

Community Youth Support Scheme

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Ballarat respectfully showeth:

(i)' that the action of the Government in terminating the
Community Youth Support Scheme will have serious effects upon the life possibilities of a significant number of young
people who, through circumstances totally outside their control, are not able to find any form of paid employment,

(ii) that the action of the Government fails to understand that many unemployed youth do not fit into the retraining initiatives proposed and that part of the need within the total
context of school-to-work transition is to have support structures based around the Community Youth Support Scheme
model,

(iii) that the failure many young people in

to a

provide position

soufchhisguhppvourltnserwabililliptylactoe

crime, violence, vandalism, drug abuse, and even suicide, and

that the incidence of homelessness and family breakdown will

be further aggravated,

1658 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Petitions

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government give immediate attention to the re-instatement of the Community Youth Support Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham and Mr Mildren.
Petitions received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Gippsland, Victoria respectfully showeth that the decision to abolish the Community Youth Support Scheme is a socially retrogressive step. The program provides valuable support services and work training for many young unemployed.
In doing so, we believe that the Government has, in effect, turned a blind eye to the social and economic problem of increasing youth unemployment.
Without CYSS or a similar alternative, the Government has taken away the only form of support being offered to the unemployed youth of Australia. The Government has taken away the place where young unemployed people' come for various reasons, from general support, counselling, skills training, advice on Legal aid and medical services, to help with employment issues. The only place where they can even chat and drink coffee with those in similar circumstances.
The Government has allocated more money into Training Programs. They can be no solution standing alone as they are not jobs, nor apprenticeships, which are sorely needed, and they do not necessarily offer any guarantees of being better equipped for employment.
A Community Youth Support Scheme is still greatly needed and in abolishing the program, the Government is not fulfilling its obligation to the youth and future leaders of this country.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government reverse its decision to abolish CYSS projects and provide sufficient funds to enable the various CYSS centres to continue their valuable work with the young unemployed until a more appropriate service can be provided.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petitioners in the electorate of Oxley respectfully showeth that we fiercely oppose closures of Community Youth Support Schemes as announced in the Federal Budget and the undersigned do humbly request that the Government of Australia will reconsider the plight of all the young people who are affected by this decision.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hayden.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble pet-
ition 'or the undersigned citizens of Geelong respectfully
showeth:

That the serious youth unemployment problem is a direct result of the community's failure to create sufficient jobs.
We, the people of the Geelong Community, request that the Community Youth Support Schemes (CYSS) throughout Australia, be restored.
We particularly ask that the Geelong and Corio CYSS Schemes be on-going after the proposed closure date, 31 October, as they have contributed much to our community. CYSS has provided interests, support, opportunities for service, a voice in the community and job training for its thousands of participants over the past four years in Geelong.
CYSS is an important part of our community and we as a community, support it especially in times of high youth unemployment that seriously affects our region.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government reverse its decision to abolish CYSS Projects and provide sufficient funds to enable the various CYSSCentres to continue their valuable work with the young unemployed in the future.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Scholes.
Petition received.
Diabetics: Insulin
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That in view of the recent standardisation of insulin and insulin syringes, having the effect of increasing the cost of both items to the Diabetic in general, and as every insulindependent Diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily according to medication.
Your petitioners therefore humbly' pray that syringes be made available on the N.H.S. and that insulin prescriptions revert to 10 bottles as previously supplied.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Charles, Mrs Child, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Holding, Mr Kent, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Dr Theophanous and Mr Willis.
Petitions received.
Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the proposed changes to assistance to the passenger motor vehicle and components industries after 1984 shall lead to the collapse of the vehicle manufacturing industry in Australia. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Industries Assistance Commission report be not given effect.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Howe, Mr Hurford, Mr Kent, Mr Mildren and Mr Milton.
Petitions received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled.. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth: That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade postal and mail services throughout Australia will place in jeopardy the eXisting services and the security of the mails by:

Petitions

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1659

downgrading a large number of official post offices

reducing the number of post offices open for business

during the lunch period

.

'reducing the number of street posting boxes

delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices

downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified staff

using private contractors for mail cartage.

Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian
Government will take immediate action to prevent the Aus-
tralian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will downgrade the postal and mail services of the citizens of Australia.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Cunningham.

Petition received.

.Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Murtoa Post Office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fisher.
Petition received.

Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Ouyen Post Office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fisher.
Petition received.

Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Dimboola Post Office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.

Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fisher.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Ballarat East Post Office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to p'revent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr MildreD.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Avoca Post Office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore .pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgra<!e the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mildren.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the State of New South Wales respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade postal and mail services throughout Australia, will place in jeopardy the existing services and the security of the mails by:
downgrading a large number of official post offices; reducing the number of post offices open for business during the lunch period; reducing the number of street posting boxes; delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices; downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified staff; and using private contractors for mail cartage.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will

1660 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Petitions

downgrade the Postal and Mail services of the citizens of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Robert Brown.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Kalgoorlie respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of 40 official post offices places in jeojardy the existing Postal and Mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the Postal and Mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Campbell.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Corrimal respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade Postal and Mail services throughout Australia will place in jeopardy the existing services and the security of the mailsby:-
downgrading a large number of official post offices; reducing the number of post offices open for business during the lunch period; reducing the number of street posting boxes; delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices; downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified staff; and using private contractors for mail cartage.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will downgrade the Postal and Mail services of the citizens of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
We, the people who have signed this petition, ask all parties, Labor, Liberal, Democrats and others, to stop the latest increase in taxes, and the forever increases in taxes which hit all people of the country of Australia in all goods and consumer goods and we call for a referendum on taxes and interest rates.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Jenkins, Mr Kent, Mr Milton and Mr Scott.

Petitions received.
Defence Service Home Loans
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the members of the Women's Services of the 1939-45 War not at present considered eligible for Defence Service Home Loans should qualify as 'Australian Soldiers' under the Defence Service Homes Act. They volunteered for service with the Naval, Military and Air Forces, serving wherever they were sent in whatever capacity they were required. and yet are refused Defence Service Home Loans.
They took the oath to resist His Majesty's enemies which meant to fight His Majesty's enemies, and although not used in actual combat in war zones, they were available for that use and had a sufficiently grave need arisen would have been used, to serve with distinction as have women of other lands.
In accordance with the Acts and Regulations of the period, the women of the Military Forces had enlisted for service anywhere, some of the Naval women to sail in any waters, others with service on warships optional, while the women of the Airforce could have been sent to Papua New Guinea or other -territories under the control or care of Australia.
Ex-servicemen of the Royal Australian Navy, the Australian Imperial Force and the Royal Australian Air Force who volunteered in the 1939-45 War but were not sent to War Zones are granted home loans. Not to grant eligibility to all Ex-servicewomen of 1939-45 War is unjust and unfair.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you favourably consider amending the Defence ServiCe Homes Act by repealing Sub-section 4 (2A) (b) (c) (d) of the Principal Act as amended by No. 137 of 1978, and grant eligibility to all members of the Women's Royal Australian Naval Service, the Australian Women's Army Service, the Women's Auxiliary Australian Air Force, the Australian Army Medical Women's Service, and the Voluntary Aid Detachment of 1939-45 War.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Jenkins, Mr Lloyd, Mr Mildren and Mr Milton.
Petitions received.
Sales Tax on Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the proposed sales tax of 2.5 per cent on books, magazines and newspapers represents a tax on knowledge which should not be contemplated in a civilised country. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that this proposed sales tax. be withdrawn from the budget proposals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Campbell.
Petition received.
Sales Tax on Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the Federal Government's Budget proposal to levy sales tax of newspapers, magazines and books is seen as an unwarranted burden upon

Petitions

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1661

sources of inFormation and knowledge to which the community had had cheap and ready access since the Federation of the Nation.
Your petitioners thereby humbly pray that the Parliament protest against this budget proposal of the Federal Govemmerit.
And your petitioners asin duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hayden.
Petition received.

Trans Australia Airlines

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members oFthe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth:

Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans Australia Airlines For the provision of essential air services.

The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans
Australia Airlines within:4 years is contrary to the national interest.

Sale of Trans Australia Airlines would inevitably result

in-

.

(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;

(ii) higher domestic air Fares.

Your petitioners thereFore humbly pray that the House of
Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans Australia Airlines.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Kent and Mr Morris.

Petitions received.

Health Care Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members oFthe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits For the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test for Free public hospital care;
That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programmes will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.
Your petitioners thereFore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce a system of: health care based on ability to pay, and access to health care based on medical need.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.

Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) the fi.nancial situation of students enrolled at Australian post-secondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as

indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) the imposition of post-secondary tuition Fees of comparable levels to those imposed prior to 1971 would Force many currently enrolled students to discontinue their studies and deter many persons willing and able at present to undertake post-secondary study From doing so.
(iii) those students and potential st\ldents From social groups currently under-represented and disadvantaged in the post-secondary education system would be most severely affected by the reintroduction of fees for post-secondary education.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
I. post-secondary tuition fees not be re-introduced For any courses or For any category of students
2. the visa charges upon private overseas students be removed immediately
3. the Minister of Educatiori immediately clarify the government's attitude to the re-introduction of postsecondary tuition Fees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Toxic Shock Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned by the threats to women's health and lives posed by Toxic Shock Syndrome"and urge the Following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
(I) Tampons, sanitary napkins, vaginal deodorants and similar sanitary products to be re-c1assified under Therapeutic Agents (not under "Cosmetics" as at present), in order to bring them under the scrutiny of the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee. We believe manuFacture must be under the strictest hygienic conditions.
(2) After re-c1assification, we urge an immediate govemment-Funded inquiry into all aspects of manufacture and content of these products. This must lead to: (i) contents of product and instructions For correct usage to be shown on packaging; (ii) removal of synthetic fibres, chemicals or ingredients that are potentially or actually harmFul to users:
(3) Allocation of extra funding For ongoing research by the National Health and Medical Research Council into these products, results of this research to be made public to ensure all health workers and potential users are Fully informed. This campaign of public education would necessitate multilingual distribution of the inFormation where appropriate.
Your petitioner~, thereFore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert possible threats posed to women's health by implementation of the above measu res.
And your petitioners as in duty bound ~ill ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Institute of Early Childhood Development
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the Hou~e of Representatives in Parliament assembled.

1662 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Petitions

The Petition of the under-signed citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the Federal Government should reconsider the proposal to merge the Institute of Early Childhood Development with another tertiary institution.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Institute of Early Childhood Development be allowed to continue operating as an independent and autonomous institution providing specialised skills and unique training applicable to the development of children aged 0-6 years.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.

Tertiary Education

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:

I. the proposal to introduce fees for higher and secondary
degrees will mean that access to post-graduate and recurrent education will be limited to the rich; Australian research and
ability to cope with technological change will suffer; this proposal must be seen as a step in the direction of the introduction of fees for all tertiary students.

2. the proposed introduction of a loans scheme for students

will mean graduating with a heavy debt or being denied a ter-

tiary education if loans are refused because a student is seen as

a "poor risk" (particularly affecting women and those doing

non-vocational tiary education

cwoiutrhsoeus)t;coonulrysethreesrtircihctwioinllsbaenadbltehetobguertdaenteor-r

indebtedness.

3. in regard to the proposal to restrict eligibility for TEAS and the foreshadowing of reviewing TEAS levels only in the
light of the availability of loans, it should be noted that any further downgrading of TEAS, which is already inadequate, can only further limit access to education.

4. the proposed restriction of Adult Secondary Assistance to those needing qualifications for employment will severely
restrict access to a full high school education and necessary
bridging education to tertiary education for those who left school early.

5. the proposal not to fund 30 Colleges of Advanced Education if they are not rationalised is an attack on teacher education. This attack will create teacher shortages in the mid
I980s, restrict access to education now and endanger the future quality of teaching available to Australian children.

Your petitioners therefore pray that:

(i) post-secondary tuition fees not to be introduced for any courses or for any category ofstudents,
(ii) that the TEAS scheme be extended so as to more fully meet the real financial needs of students,
(iii) that a comprehensive loans scheme not be introduced, (iv) that there be no restriction of Adult Secondary
Assistance, (v) that the proposal not to fund 30 CAEs unless they are
rationalised be rescinded.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Dawkins.

Petition received.

Aboriginal Land Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That the projected repeal by the Queensland State Government of the Aborigines Act 1971-1979 and the Torres Strait
Islanders Act 1971-1979 will almost certainly lead to the degazettal of all Aboriginal reserves in Queensland, as has
already been the case with Aurukun and Mornington Island.

That if, as is likely, the Aboriginal communities from these
reserves are placed under similar shire council legislation on fifty year leases, they will be exposed to serious encroachment on their land by mining and tourist interests.

That it is also quite clear, on past evidence, that these interests will have the full backing of the Queensland Government and the rights of Aboriginal people to land rights and self-management will not be granted by that Government.

That the Commonwealth Government has the power to legislate and acquire land for Aboriginal people under its constitutional powers since the amen-dments to the Constitution in 1967, but it is your Petitioners' sincere belief that it failed to act in 1978 and thus, failed in its duty before the people of Aurukun and Mornington Island.

That the Aboriginal people of Queensland have stated that they want land rights and self-management.

Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Common-

wealth Government make use of its constitutional and legis-

lative powers to grant full land rights and self-management to

the Aboriginal people of Queensland.

.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by MrFry.

Petition received.

Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is increasing Interest Rates on Home Mortgage Loans without due concern for its impact on the general community and ask that the Government re-consider its attitude to Low and Middle income earners.
Your Petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert any further effects of increases in interest rates on Home Mortgage Loans which cause Financial, Social and Psychological pressures on families.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent.
Petition received.

South-west Tasmania: Wilderness Area
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at proposed future hydro-electric developments in South West Tasmania. This area is on the Register of the National Estate and therefore is of national concern.
Your petitioners therefore humbly call upon the Federal Parliament not to allocate funds or allow funds to be raised for development of roads or dams in the South West of Tasmania but rather to provide such funds as would enable the preservation of this area. This is a national issue and therefore Tasmanians should not be made to bear any financial burden resulting from its preservation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Klugman.

Petitions

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1663

Petition received.
Plant Variety Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
1. Note that legislation establishing plant variety rights in other countries has had adverse effects, namely:
(a) Virtual monopoly control of seed production has passed into the hands of a few large international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation.
(b) The varieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and will not grow without the aid of artificial fertilisers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers.
(c) The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, rendering them vulnerable to disease and other environmental threats.
2. Recognise the maintenance of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to prevent exclusive control over plant genetic material from falling intil private hands.
3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gardeners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden produce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment of plant variety rights in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Milton.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is not fulfilling its responsibility in ensuring an adequate standard of living for all Australians, which is.causing untold hardship on relief agencies' limited resources, and require the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
I. That the-Commonwealth Government raise the level of all pensions and benefits at least to the poverty line.
2. That the Commonwealth Government reconsider its recent decisions in relation to the health system and cuts to Commonwealth activity.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert further poverty and suffering in our community by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Milton.
Petition received.
Medibank
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully requests that the Federal Government ensures that:

a. Il honours its 1975 election promise to maintain Medibank-a free, universal health insurance scheme, and institute methods of improving hospital and health services for the Australian people.
b. The Community Health Program remains a Federal Government responsibility, with increased funding and expansion of services.
c. Il abandons means-testing and the re-introduction of charges a( public hospitals which will severely disadvantage low and middle income groups.
d. Every effort be made by the Federal Government to meet the health care needs and demands of the Australian community.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled will give earnest consideration to this most vital matter.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Milton.
Petition received.
Medibank
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits for the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test for free public hospital care;
That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programs will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce Medibank.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.
Rights of Disabled
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. The .failure of the Federal Government to seek information from the census re disabled people-i.e. partial or total disability-to enable for adequate planning of, and for, types of services needed by disabled people to be undertaken.
2. The failure of the Federal Government to lead the way in employment of disabled people by employing a greater number of such people within the Commonwealth Public Service-note the small number currently employed within the Service.
3. The wastage of the Federal Government funds perpe-. tuating large, bureaucratic institutions and organisations where there are often few disabled people on their boards and little emphasis is placed on consumer participation in decision making.

1664 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Petitions

4. The failure of the Federal Government to encourage independence of disabled people, or to develop 'normalised' systems-attendant care.
5. The failure of the Federal Government to provide 'noninstitutionalised' specialised accommodation for those people who would not be able to benefit from, or cope with attend~nt care.
6. Failure by the Federal Government to alter, or create a 'disability' allowance means test free for all disabled peoplethis would assist with necessary equipment and mobility costs.
7. Failure to provide a national compensation scheme thus saving time and enabling people to be automatically covered in the event of a disability.
8. Failure by the Federal Government to abolish tariffs on all equipmenLavailable to the disabled-e.g. Optacon.
9. Mismanagement of Federal I.Y.D.P. Funds-e.g.nonreceipt by some States of funds through unresolved negotiations.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that immediate action be taken to remedy the above stated and that the Federal Government recognise that disabled people are citizens who should have equal rights.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament Assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia being employed in the automotive products industry respectfully showeth:
I. That the automotive products industry is vital to the livelihood and well being of many thousands of Australian workers and their families.
2. That if imported automotive products are allowed to flow freely into the Australian market it will deprive over 100,000 workers in the industry of their work opportunities.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Parliament recognise the rights of Australian workers in this industry and that the proposals to reduce the level of protection in the future be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Theophanous.
Petition received.
Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament Assembled. This petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Henty P.B.R. Division of Repco respectfully showeth that:
I. The automotive products industry is vital to the livelihood and well being to many thousands of Australian workers and their families.
2. If imported automotive products are allowed to flow freely into the Australian market it will deprive over 100,000 workers in the industry of their work opportunities.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Parliament recognise the rights of Australian workers in this industry and that proposals to reduce the level of protection in the future be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.

Petition received.

Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament Assembled. Through ,the Federal Leader of the Opposition, the Hon. B. Hayden, M.H.R. we the undersigned citizens of Australia:

Wish to strongly condemn the great decrease in Federal Government Funding to the States and as a result, the serious
downturn in employment, hospitalisation, medical care, hOWling, hospitals, schools, education, student opportunities and in
public utilities generally.

This, together with increased interest rates, indirect taxation and risirig prices, is causing untold hardship.

We demand of Government that there be an immediate easing of fund restrictions and the imposition of a Resources Tax and Wealth Tax to meet these national needs.

Further, we demand of Govern~ent that there -be an im7

mediate substantial increase in pensions, allowable iricome

above pensions, rise in tax ~eiling and extended issue of

Health Benefit Cards to the 2,000,000 underprivileged, aged,

incapacitated and unemployed Australians.

-

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

byMrUren.

Petition received.

Australian Development Assistance Burea,u
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament Assembled. This Petition of the undersigned students in Australia respectfully showeth that:

(i) Overseas countries, Australian tertiary institutions and Australia has a vested interest in the well-being and progress of the overseas students in Australia in terms of international goodwill towards Australia and future trade-and other econ'
omic benefits.

(ii) Overseas students in -Australia face serious difficulties in Australia, and that their success in their studies is closely linked to their general welfare.

(iii) The managervent of the student training programme as part of development assistance requires a combination of special skills effectively utilized, which the Australian Devel-, opmental Assistance Bureau (ADAB) has effectively carried out since its creation in 1976.

(iv) Matriculation students and students in the smaller tertiary institutions do not have any other source of welfare and educational supervision and the provision of sUGh aid by their institutions will be financially impossible as well as an inefficient allocation of resources.

Your petitioners therefore pray that:

I. The State Offices of ADAB be retained in their present form.

2. Should the State Offices of ADAB be abolished, the func-

tions of ADAB should not be disperse,d to the commonwealth

Department of Education a[1d tertiary institutions but _should

remain in agency.

the

hands

of-

a

well

co-ordinated

a

n

d

,ce

ntral
'

i

sed

And your petitioners as in duty bourid will ever pray.

by Mr Innes. '

Petition received.

MinisterJorlndustrial Relations

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1665

MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
Notice of Motion
Mr HAWKE (WiIls)-1 give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House is of the opinion that the Minister for Industrial Relations no longer possesSes the confidence of the House, having deliberately misled the House in his answer to a question in the House on 15 September 1981 as disclosed by the publication in the media today of the contents of a confidential Cabinet document which contradicts that answer.
Suspension of Standing Orders
Motion (by Mr Sinclair)-by leave-agreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the honourable member_ for Wills moving forthwith the motion of which he has given notice.
Want of Confidence Motion
MrHAWKE(WiIl~) (1.53)-1 move:
That this House is of the opinion that the Minister for Industrial Relations no longer possesses the. confidence of the House, having deliberately misled the House in his answer to a question in the House on 15 September 1981 as disclosed by the publication in the media today of the contents of a confidential Cabinet document which contradicts that answer.
Those who are capable of taking an objective view of what happened in this House yesterday will recall one thing very clearly, and that is that in all the speeches that came from the Government side it was remarkable that there was virtually no defence of the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner). Indeed, the closirig speech, the wind-up, on behalf of the Government came from the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen), and the Minister for Defence--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman is not entitled to recapitulate the debate of yesterday. His motion is a separate motion; it must remain separate.
Mr HAWKE-I appreciate that, Mr Speaker. The motion that I have moved on behalf of the Opposition refers to the fact that the allegations in respect of the Minister for Industrial Relations have been confirmed by the publication in the media today of the contents of a confidential Cabinet document. As I have referred to the media, I think it appropriate that at the outset I should establish just what has been said in the media today on this issue. I refer in the first place to the publication in the Bulletin of today of the contents of the Cabinet document. An article at page 22 of today's issue of the Bulletin states:
A secret document reveals that elements within the Fraser cabinet were prepared to sacrifice what they had asserted was essential in the national interest-securing the deregistration of the Bl,lilders' Laborers' Federation (BLF)-in a tawdry attempt to discredit the former Industrial Relations Minister Andrew Peacock.

The article then quotes in fact what was contained in the answer by the Minister to the House. The article goes on to state-
Dr Jenkins-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. Should not the time limit in this debate be 30 minutes for the first speaker?
Mr SPEAKER-No, the time limit is 30 minutes if there is a motion of censure of the Government which the Government takes as an issue of confidence. This is not such a case.
Mr HAWKE-The article makes it quite clear then what the assessment is of the relationship between the Minister's answer and the statement in the confidential document. It says:
That is in flat contradiction to the advice and information which Viner gave in clocumentary form to the Federal cabinet in early May.
This document headed 'Monthly Survey of Industrial Relations Developments', marked 'Confidential', and signed by Viner has on 'pages seven and eight a section headed 'Other major developments-BLF Deregistration.'
It goes on to quote in full the section of the Cabinet document dealing with this matter of the BLF deregistration. It has this to say:
'Briefings i have received indicate substantial progress has
been made in gathering the necessary material to prosecute this matter. But from my own experience--
The Minister is talking about the fact that he does not come as any stranger to' this question of deregistratioh proceedings. He says:
But from my own experience in deregistration proceedings I should not wish to understate to the cabinet the difficulties and complexities involved in achieving success in this kind of matter. Not the least of these difficulties is the necessity for obtaining detailed and comprehensive affidavits.
He then says in the document to Cabinet:
.'Nevertheless, I am reassured--
This'is the Minister for Industrial Relations who has told the House about the state of unpreparedness-
by the extent of the progress made and the quality of preparation that has taken place to date.
The writer of the article goes on to say:
Obviously from his reference to his own experience in deregistration proceedings, Viner, a lawyer before he turned politician, had personally examined the BLF deregistration documents before announcing his gratification with 'the progress and quality of preparation that has taken place.'
To muddy further the already murky waters there are other factors which suggest that, rather than a detached governmental consideration of what were the national interests involved in seeking .BLF deregistration, the whole affair degenerated into a political ploy, designed to lessen Peacock's standing with his parliamentary colleagues whose votes would be important in any future leadership or deputy leadership struggle.
The writer goes on to say:

1666 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Minister for Industrial Relations

It was a deliberate set-up.
That is from today's Bulletin which published the relevant section of the confidential Cabinet document which contrasts with the answer which the Minister gave to this House on 15 September.
It is very important that in this matter we understand what the basic facts are, as distinct from the pathetic attempts by the Minister and by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) to divert attention. The memo to the Cabinet which has now been published in today's Press-I mention only the Bulletin-and which went to the Cabinet at the beginning of May 1981 was written by the Minister for Industrial Relations after the receipt of the Attorney-General's Department document. In other words, the Attorney General's Department document which was referred to by the Minister on 15 September is the document which was available to the Minister when he wrote his memo to the Cabinet. If we turn to Hansard of 15 September, when the Minister answered the Dorothy Dixer from the honourable member for Kingston (Mr Chapman), we will see that the Attorney-General's Department document is published and is dated 16 April 1981. In other words, it is quite clear that when the Minister submitted his document to the Cabinet at the beginning of May, covering as it did his report for his Department for the month of April, he had in his possession at that time-when he wrote the minute that went to the Cabinetthat document to the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) from the Senior Assistant Crown Solicitor.
Is it not remarkable that on 15 September when the Minister answered the Dorothy Dixer he relied upon the same document to give the opposite answer? In the answer he gave to the House on 15 September he said that he had had the chance of examining 'the file from its inception'. He went on to say:
. . . it is appropriate that I place some facts on the record so as to show the circumstances surrounding preparation of the case and the state of unpreparedness when I assumed responsibility for the portfolio.
So the Attorney-General's document-if we can shorthand it that way-used on 15 September to show the state of unpreparedness was the document which was available to the Minister on 16 April. Following that date, a fortnight later he made a report to the Cabinet in which he did not talk about the state of unpreparedness; he said:
. . . I am reassured by the ex tent of the progress made and the quality of preparation that has taken place to date.
So the same document was used for different purposes. In the circumstances it is appropriate that we look briefly, in the time available to us, at what

the document had to say. The document that was used to tell the Cabinet the truth about satisfaction with the state of progress and the quality of preparation is the document that was used for the opposite purpose later in this House, to misinform this House. What did the document say? As I pointed out, the Minister, in quoting selectively from the Attorney-General's document on 15 September, said:
Progress in the preparation of the case has be~n very slow . . .
However, as I remind you, Mr Speaker, in that selective quotation he declined to quote the next sentence which stated:
The principal reason for this has been the delay in support from the private building industry.
He went on to establish that point. He went onto establish that in. the opinion of the Senior Assistant Crown Solicitor things might get going by the end of May and the matter might be finalised by November of 1981. The document which was used by the Minister in April to make his report to the Cabinet was a document which clearly, on the face of it, justified the proposition which he truthfully put to the Cabinet in showing that, as far as he was concerned, the progress being made in the situation satisfied him.
Presumably there may be some attempt-let us dispose of it immediately-to say that the document that went to Cabinet covering the period of the month of April may have distinguished, as far as the Minister was concerned, between the position up to 16 April when he assumed the portfolio and what had been achieved miraculously in the period between 16 April and the end of April. Let us just get the facts quite clear so that that canard can be got rid of immediately. April 16 was Maundy Thursday. That is when the poor are supposed to be served. Of course, all the Minister was concerned about was to give poor Andrew a serve. Following that we had four days of Easter and the ANZAC Day weekend. At the most, between the assumption of the portfolio by the Minister on 16 April and the end of April there were eight working days. Is it going to be suggested that miraculously, because of the arrival of this legal genius, in eight days something was changed? Of course it is not. The truth is that this Minister knew, on the basis of the Attorney-General's document that was before him, that the correct, honest and truthful report to make to the Cabinet was that he should express satisfaction with the progress that had been made and the quality of the preparation. Those are the facts.
What do we find in the development which has taken place since that time? It is very interesting, I

Minister jar Industrial Relations

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1667

suggest, that perhaps the most effective way of picking up--
Mr Tuckey-You have lost your place.
Mr HAWKE-No, I have not lost my place but the Minister has lost his way. Perhaps the most effective way of pointing out what has happened is to consider the Prime Minister's statement this morning. The Prime Minister was caught outside Parliament House this morning. He gave an off the cuff Press conference. We can find the state of play here. I have here a transcript of the interview with the Prime Minister this morning. He said:
Let me just go through the facts because I think it would be a good idea if everyone does understand the facts of this particular matter very clearly indeed.
He is asserting that we get the facts clear and immediately he tells an untruth. This is what he said:
Then there was the Attorney-General's advice that was tabled in the Parliament about the 16 or 17 April . . . '
Now, that is an untruth.
Mr Cadman-You are playing with words.
Mr HAWKE-We hear these expressions of dumb silence from the Government side. This is the transcript of what happened this morning. It states:
The report . . . was given on a monthly basis . . . Then there was the Attorney-General's advice that was tabled in the Parliament about the 16 or 17 April which indicated that it was quite plainly a very long. long way off going into the courts.
That document was not tabled in the Parliament on 16 or 17 April. The Prime Minister went on with what would have to be the most convoluted statement that any Prime Minister has ever given and concluded by saying:
There is no conflict in these particular matters at all. so long as people look at the facts and the time sequence involved in those facts.
I ask honourable members to understand this: There is this attempt by the Prime Minister and by the Minister to suggest that in some inexplicable way something has happened to change the nature and quality of the document to the Attorney-General tabled by the Minister on 15 September. The facts are irrefutable. It is the same document which in April led the Minister to express his satisfaction. It is the same document which was deliberately used by the Minister to mislead this House on 15 September.
If we want to spend any time looking at what happened in the Estimates Committee, which, in fact, led to this situation, we will find on examination of the questioning and the answers given in the Estimates Committee that what was concerning members of the Committee was not some

comparison between the previous Minister and the existing Minister. The point was: 'Well, look at the time that has been taken. The Minister took over on 16 April. We are meeting on 8 September and there is still no application'. The Committee was properly concerned. But that is not the issue here which can in any way justify this Minister or this Prime Minister avoiding the fact that the House has been lied to. The fact still remains that what was finally before this Parliament was the same information as that which was available to the Minister to give the opposite story, the true story, to the Cabinet in April last.
What we get down to is this: The members of this House simply have to ask themselves what attitude they will have to this Parliament, what attitude they will have as members. Will they be prepared to accept and condone the abuse of them as members by the Minister in this way? The facts are simple and irrefutable. When, as far as the Minister was concerned, the facts were looked at objectively and when the Attorney-General's document was used objectively, the Cabinet was told the truth. When the facts and the same document were looked at by the Minister on 15 September, and were not looked at objectively but were looked at through that poisonous prism of hatred for the honourable member for K6oyong (Mr Peacock), the House was told a totally different story. The facts are extraordinarily simple and straightforward. This House was told the opposite story. It was told lies on 15 September because the Minister, in collusion with the Prime Minister and other Cabinet colleagues, decided that they were going to get the honourable member for Kooyong. This was a miserable, collusive attempt to get the honourable member. It is recognised universally throughout the Press today that that is what happened, and because they decided that they would do that, they came into this House and, through the mouth of the Minister for Industrial Relations, told the opposite story to the one that had been told to the Cabinet at the beginningofMay.
We might be able to get into the minds of members on the Government side of the House just how this matter should be looked at if we examine the answer of the Minister for Industrial Relations to this House on 20 August. I ask honourable members to listen carefully to what the Minister for Industrial Relations had to say. He was asked a question about the Builders Labourers Federation, and this is what he said:
This Government is concerned at any allegation or suspicion of illegal. improper or corrupt activities.
He went on to say:

1668 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Minister for Industrial Relations

If there is any suspicion or taint of corruption, improper activity or illegal activity, it is the responsibility of the Government to act firmly and promptly to see that that kind of conduct is searched out, rooted out and dealt with.
In other words, the Minister came into this House and said quite specifically: 'If there is any suspicion of improper activity it is the responsibility of the Government to act firmly and promptly to see that that sort of conduct is searched out, rooted out and dealt with'. Mr Speaker, you could not have clearer evidence of the fact that there has been improper conduct by the Minister himself. It is the height of hypocrisy for the Minister to come into this House and launch an attack upon a trade union, condemning it for improper conduct, but in the process of condemning an outside body for improper conduct himself to engage in lying to the House, telling the House a different story from the one he told the Cabinet. In these circumstances I say to members of this House that the only honourable course for them, when they know they have been told a lie as distinct from the truth told to the Cabinet, is for them to demand, and support the motion for, the resignation of this Minister.
Mr SPEAKER-Is the motion seconded?
Mr Holding-I second the motion and reserve my right to speak.
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (2.13)-1 am glad of the opportunity to speak to the House today. Having read what was published in the Bulletin this morning and noted the kinds of comments that were made in that publication and the inferences that were sought to be drawn from the document that came into the possession of the Bulletin, I think it is important that I do have this opportunity to put clearly to the House the position at the time when I reported to Cabinet at the end of April this year and the position I put to this House in the Estimates Committee on 8 September, to this House last week, and to this House yesterday. When those matters are properly analysed and properly understood it will be clearly seen that there is no contradiction between what I have said to this House and what I have said to the Cabinet.
When I was before the Estimates Committee and when I spoke to the House on Tuesday last and again yesterday, I pointed out that my concern was to put the facts on record to show that the case for deregistration was not ready for lodging with the court and could not have been ready to be lodged with the court by the end of April. That is the central fact which I think all honourable members in this House need to understand. If anybody reads the Hansard record of 8 September-I referred to some of the passages

yesterday-and the Hansard record of Tuesday last, it will be clearly seen that what I said on those occasions is correct, namely, that the case was not ready for lodging and could not have been ready for lodging in April of this year.
Mr Robert Brown-That is not what you said originally.
Mr VINER-Therefore--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will resume his seat.
Mr Robert Brown-I take a point of order, Mr Speaker. The claim has been made that the Minister is responsible for lies and he is lying again to the Parliament.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Hunter will remain seated. I remind the House that it is the practice, when a Minister is under attack, that he be listened to in silence.
Mr Hawke-But not when the attack is being made.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Wills spoke. I ask him to remain silent. I ask all honourable members to remain silent so that the Minister may defend himself. I call the Minister for Industrial Relations.
Mr VINER-I am quite sure that I can confidently assert to this House, to my colleagues and to the public that what I have said to the House on each of those occasions I have referred to is correct and will bear any examination by any member of this House. Yesterday I quoted certain passages from the record of the House of Representatives Estimates Committee E on 8 September, including the point that was made by the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock) and the statement. I made, which I quote:
It was utterly impossible in April to file the proceedings.
I said again:
Let me complete my answer. It was utterly impossible to lodge the proceedings in April because they simply were not prepared. The whole material was not gathered and that material was not in a form appropriate for filing of any documentation. What I sought from the Department was an intensification of effort in the gathering of that material and in the preparation of it.
After I took over responsibility I was briefed by my officers on 22 April. I was informed then of the procedure that they were applying as a task force to gather the material, to put it into-to use a legal term-proofs of evidence or statements of prospective witnesses, to have those matters checked out by counsel, to have them returned to the task force, to have them checked again by witnesses and then to have them put by the task force, under the supervision of legal counsel from the Victorian Bar and a senior officer of the

Minister/01' Industrial Relations

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1669

Attorney-General's Department, into affidavit form. Anyone who has practised law, any member of the public who can understand this kind of thing, will readily appreciate the amount of meticulous and detailed work that has to go into the preparation of a case of this kind. I think anyone would understand the veracity of the statement. I made to Estimates Committee E and to this House that in April it was utterly impossible to have that case in a state of readiness for filing in April.
There is in my mind a clear distinction between progress in the gathering of material and having a case prepared to the point of its being ready to file in the court. Let me come directly to the Bulletin article. I will quote it so that everybody knows the relevant part of it:
Briefings [ have received indicate substantial progress has been made in gathering the necessary material to prosecute this matter.
I invite all honourable members to listen to this:
But From my own experience in deregistration proceedings I should not wish to understate to the cabinet the difficulties and complexities involved in achieving success in this kind of matter. Not the [east of these difficulties is the necessity For obtaining detailed and comprehensive affidavits.
Let me take that first statement again. It states:
But From my own experience in deregistration proceedings I should not wish to understate to the cabinet the difficulties and complexities involved in achieving success in this kind of matter.
All honourable members may not be aware-I suspect that the honourable member for Wills is not aware-that I am probably the only member in this House who has ever appeared in a deregistration proceeding in a court or an arbitration commission. The fact is, I inform the honourable member for Wills and the House, that when I was in practice at the Bar in Western Australia. I defended the metal trades unions in Western Australia against a case for deregistration.
Mr Barry Jones-Did you lose the case?
Mr VINER-I defended it successfully. Hence, as I say, one should read that sentence against the background of what I said. Let me read it again:
But From my own experience in deregistration proceedings I should not wish to understate to the cabinet the difficulties and complexities involved in achieving success in this kind of matter.
I was at pains to make it clear to Cabinet, if it had not been clear to it before, that a great deal needed to be done, not only to get this case into a state of readiness but also in order to succeed. I draw the attention of the House and honourable members to the second sentence in that passage. It states:
Not the least of these difficulties is the necessity For obtaining detailed and comprehensive affidavits.

As I said earlier today and as I demonstrated yesterday in my description of what is involved in the preparation of this kind of case, all the gathering of evidence has to find its way, in the end, into a proof of evidence or a statement acceptable to counsel who will prosecute the case and into affidavit form so that it may support the case.
Against that background, when one looks at the other statements, which the honourable member for Wills tries to bring in claiming that they are a contradiction of what I had said to the House before, was it not in order for me, after having been briefed by my officers and to understand what they were doing and also to understand the difficulty of their case, to make the statements that were made to the Cabinet to which I belong? Substantial progress had been made in the gathering of information; but, certainly, substantial progress had not been made in getting that case ready for trial. Certainly, the case had not been advanced to a state of readiness where it could be filed in the court in April.
I continued:
Nevertheless, I am reassured by the extent of the progress made-
That is, in the gathering of evidence and the pulling together of all those threads that were necessary-
and the quality of preparation that has taken place to date.
I speak very highly of the officers of my Department and those seconded from the Attorney General's Department for the work they were doing. If honourable members go to the document which I tabled in the House last week-the advice from the Senior Assistant Crown Solicitor to the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) which sets out the facts as he found them on 16 April-one can understand the complexity of the case, the state of preparedness at that time in terms of its readiness to be lodged, what had to be done in order to bring it to a state of readiness, and the difficulties that they were experiencing in bringing everything together.
Now, if, as I confidently assert-it is the undoubted fact-what I was seeking to do in this House before the Estimates Committee, before the House last week and before the House yesterday, was to demonstrate clearly that the case was not ready for lodging with the court and could not have been ready to lodge by the end of April, where is the foundation for the accusations that have been so lightly made by the honourable member for Wills-accusations lightly made, accusations extravagantly made and accusations which are unsustained? I have the utmost confidence in knowing the kind of responsibility that I

1670 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Minister for Industrial Relations

accepted when I became Minister for Industrial Relations on 16 April. I have the utmost confidence in knowing the way I have discharged those responsibilities since I have accepted this office. I know what I have had to go through since then in order to get this case to the point where it is now ready to be lodged, where the papers are ready and where I have been able, after lengthy discussions and consultations with employer groups which culminated in a meeting on Monday, to obtain their co-operation.
I will quickly indicate the kind of consultation and discussion I have had with employer groups and in meetings with counsel, quite apart from the
considerable briefings I have received from officers of my Department. On 1 May I met with counsel in Melbourne. On 23 July I met with counsel in Perth and received from them the most complete briefing on the matter at that time. On 10 August I had a meeting in Canberra and on 7 September I had one in Melbourne. I had meetings with employer groups on 11 May in Sydneywith members of the Master Builders Federation, the National Industry Executive, master builders associations and individual builders. On 2 July I met with a major individual builder. On 17 July I met in Canberra with companies that were put under devastating militant action. On 29 July I met in Melbourne with members of the National Industry Executive, the Master Builders Federation and the MBAs. On 10 and 14 August and 21 September I had meetings in Canberra. If
members of the Opposition care to look at what I said yesterday and attempt to understand it-not to approach it with a biased, prejudiced political view but to understand what is involved in a case of this kind-I think they will know that what has been attempted today by the honourable member for Wills is a poor case that would not get across the threshhold in court-an industrial court or any other court. I am quite confident as I look at my colleagues in this House that they know that what I am saying is correct. My colleagues know the way in which I have discharged my responsibilities. They know that the case which has been presented is totally unfounded, totally unsubstantiated and ought to be thrown out of the House with contempt.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (2.28)-1 assure the House that I for one would never be a party to bringing an allegation into this Parliament against any member of this Parliament which carries with it the grave and serious imputation that that member had lied to the Parliament. I listened with great care to what the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) had to say in his defence. What did it come down to? All he

was really trying to tell the Parliament was that this case was complex and difficult and that anyone who knew the complexities which he as an industrial lawyer understood would understand that when he was saying that there was a delay in bringing this case forward he was being perfectly reasonable and his action was perfectly understandable. If that was the only allegation there would be no motion in these terms. The Minister has met a case which is not the case which is being put. I refer to the Minister's statement to the Parliament on 15 September, after he had assured the Parliament that he had personally gone through these files. It was not a matter of relying upon a memorandum from an adviser. It was not a question of relying on briefing material. He had gone through the files. Let me quote his terms. This is the heart of the allegation against the Minister. He said:
. . . I think it is appropriate that I place some facts on the record so as to show the circumstances surrounding preparation of the case and the state of unpreparedness when I assumed responsibility for the portfolio.
The Minister went on to quote selectively from a document from the Attorney-General's Department. As my colleague the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) has pointed out, this is the very same document which provided the basis for a Cabinet submission. Would any honourable member, when looking at the substance of what the Minister said on 15 September, know the intention of the answer? What was its purpose? What impression was it designed to give every honourable member of this House? First of all, it was designed to malign and demean the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock). I am not greatly worried about that. That is something that honourable members opposite can look after in the party room. That problem relates to internal operations between the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and his colleagues. We are entitled to be concerned that in making the statement to the Parliament that the case was in a state of unpreparedness the implication was that it was the lack of oversight by the honourable member for Kooyong that caused the problem.
The Minister knows that when he made that statement to the Parliament he was lying. The Minister knows-this is borne out by his own memorandum to the Cabinet which has already been quoted-that he expressed his satisfaction to the Cabinet early in May that, as far as he was concerned, substantial progress had been made in gathering the necessary material to prosecute. He said that he was reassured as to the extent of the progress made and the quality of the presentation. It seems to me that the Minister cannot have it

Minister for Industrial Relations

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1671

both ways. He cannot be telling this House that when he assumed responsibility there was a state of unpreparedness, the responsibility for that belonging to the former Minister, and within a matter of days of assuming office be telling the Cabinet in a memorandum that while there were problems in the presentation of the case and getting it ready for court basically he was satisfied with the preparation of the material and the way the case was going. That is the heart of the allegation. That allegation has neither been met nor attempted to be met by the Minister. That is the issue.
How does one reconcile this position? Let me go through the public statements of the Minister in respect of this whole question. The Minister, on coming to office on 19 April, immediately received a brief. On 29 April he was asked a question in this House about the preparation of the case. What did he say? He said:
As soon as I took over the portfolio of Industrial Relations I obtained a briefing on where we stand in the preparation of this case.
He then said that he had had a more detailed briefing. He said that he would then be proceeding-the relevant date is early May-to a briefing with counsel. He states:
. . . I will go through with them the voluminous evidence which has already been obtained.
Let us turn now to the questions that were put to the Minister at the Estimates Committee. At page 44 of the Estimates Committee Hansard the honourable member for Burke (Dr Theophanous) asked a very proper question about the cost of the proceedings. He asked whether the Minister was aware of the escalation of the costs and about the problems in respect of the various delays. On 8 September, in answer to the honourable member for Burke, he stated:
There have not in fact been any delays at ali--
After being pressed by the honourable member for Burke and by the former Minister, the Minister said to the Estimates Committee: 'Look, there have been no delays at all'.
Mr Armitage-You can't believe a word he says.
Mr HOLDING-It is very difficult for liars unless they have very good memories. This Minister has in his record in the Parliament been continually prepared to be loose and free with the truth. On this occasion his lack of memory, venom and concern to rend and malign a former colleague got the better of him. That is the problem. As far as he was concerned, at the Estimates Committee on 8 September 1981, there had not been any delays at all. That coincides completely with his statement

to the House on 29 April when he had an opportunity to be briefed in respect of the matter and candidly in this House to say: 'Look, there will be delays in this matter because there is a state of unpreparedness in the case'. But on 29 April that was not the Minister's position as it was not his position at the Estimates Committee.
How is it that on 29 April and 8 September statements from this Minister completely coin-
cided with his own recommendations and his own memorandum to the Cabinet in which he said: 'Yes, there are complexities; yes, there are' problems. There is a great volume of material, but essentially the case is proceeding satisfactorily'? That is the essence of it. What then caused the Minister to change his position in respect of this matter and come into the House on 15 September with a completely different position? Having advised Cabinet that there were no real problems in the presentation of the material, having had an opportunity in the Parliament to say that there were complexities due to a lack of preparation and the mishandling of the matter by the former Minister and having had an opportunity to tell the Cabinet that, none of that occurred. Those facts did not emerge in this House until 15 September.
What emerged on the files to cause the Mini'ster to have such a very important change of position? I submit, as honourable members on both sides of the House know, that the matter was not really about delays or problems in respect of the case
against the Builders Labourers Federation. The issue and the argument were about the internal power struggles within the Liberal Party machine, the concern of the Prime Minister at his continuing and ever-mounting unpopularity and the need to rend a former colleague whom he sees as being
more popular than he is and someone who is likely to succeed him. Who does he choose to do it? I am bound to say that there are Ministers on that side of the House who, whatever differences of view I may have with them in terms of their approach to politics, I do not believe would lie to the House. If the Prime Minister has to choose someone to rend, malign, and slip the knife into a former colleague, the choice is obvious. If it is necessary to choose a Minister who in doing that is preparedthis is the heart of the allegation-to demean the institution of Parliament, and lie to the Parliament in order to pursue an internal party vendetta, the choice is obvious. There is one Minister who has the qualifications and past track record in that endeavour-he almost chose himself. He could not wait. He came in here with a full head of steam, blood in his eyes and a stiletto in his
hand. He forgot the most basic rule of all; one does not go into that sort of situation clasping a

1672 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Minister for Industrial Relations

confidential document, particularly a confidential document which involves very important undertakings to employers. Oh no! Here was an opportunity for this little Minister to get a pat on the brow from the Prime Minister. Here was an opportunity to go amongst the back benchers and to say: 'See, we will fix the Builders Labourers Federation. Peacock couldn't, but we can rely on Viner. He is the knife man'. What happened? He came into this House and got so excited and carried away with his own political motivation that he got caught in what must be the simplest of exercises. If an honourable member quotes from a document in this Parliament, unless he claims that it is privileged, then a request under the Standing Orders to lay it on the table has to be complied with. Of course, the Prime Minister thought: 'What a terrible thing that is'. It was really all our fault. The Standing Orders were there and his Minister made a mess of it. Instead of knifing the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock) he finished up castrating himself.
This ministerial eunuch and this Prime Minister now ask this House to adopt a standard which is unknown in any parliament that follows the Westminster system. It would not be a question in the House of Commons of whether this Minister would face a censure motion of this kind. The resignation would have been put in and it would have been announced; but not with this Prime Minister and not with this Minister. The Prime Minister will happily go to the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting and he will happily talk about his responsibilities under the Westminster system. But when it comes down to a matter of maintaining the integrity and the traditions of this Parliament, as far as this Prime Minister is concerned, the Whip will line up the numbers on the side of what was once a great Liberal Party and its members will be told: 'But of course you have to maintain the tradition of not lying in the Parliament, unless you are lying about the Labor Party or about the honourable member for Kooyong. That is all right'. Now that is not a tra~ dition and that is not a practice that I believe this House can countenance.
I believe it is a sad thing and a bad thing that a Minister should endeavour to lie to this Parliament in order to pursue an internal party advantage. But if that was the course the Minister chose and if that was the course that was endorsed by his Prime Minister, having been discovered in the lie, in order to maintain the integrity and the honour of this Parliament only one course is available to this Minister and to this Prime Minister. The Minister ought to resign and the Prime Minister ought to ask for his resignation. To delay it, to involve

the House in this sort of procedure, is simply to demean us as a Parliament in the eyes of the public. This Minister has behaved dishonourably and badly. That he chooses to do it in respect of a former colleague is his choice. The Minister has lied to the Parliament. Now he should take the penalty.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister) (2.43)-There has been no falsehood on the part of the Minister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner) to this Parliament. The Opposition has sought to make a very thin case indeed about the words 'substantial progress' in a document provided to Cabinet on 7 May and later published in the Press, and about a statement of the Minister concerning the state of unpreparedness of the Builders Labourers Federation case to go to court which was made by an officer of the Attorney-General's Department on 16 April. I suggest that there is no conflict whatsoever between those two statements. I think we need to understand that the March report on industrial relations to the Government, which was available to the Government very early in April, indicated that there was an expectation that the case could be filed by the end of April. In the event, that was not possible. On 16 April, the Attorney-General (Senator Durack) had available to him advice from an officer of his Department, which advice was available also to the Minister, making it quite plain that it would be some time before the case could be filed.
It is worth noting that the third paragraph of that advice stated:
Progress in the preparation of the case has been very slow. The principal reason for this has been the delay in support from the private building industry.
It stated that the progress had been slow, and quite plainly pointed out that the cause of the slowness was the private industry. That, I think, indicated a situation that would concern the Government and the Minister in charge of the portfolio, but there is no conflict between that statement, which obviously meant that the matter was unprepared and unready to go to court, and the report of 7 May to Cabinet on industrial relations matters which indicated that substantial progress had been made. 'Substantial progress' does not indicate that the matter is ready or nearly ready to go to court. It means precisely what it says: Progress has been made, but there still can be a long way down the track. In the event, and as the Minister foreshadowed in that same document, that proved to be the case.
I think anyone who had paid full and proper a~tention to the other aspects of that May document which has now been published would have

Minister for Industrial Relations

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1673

seen that the words 'substantial progress' were very heavily qualified. The Minister himself said:
But from my own experience in deregistration proceedings I should not wish to understate to the Cabinet the difficulties and complexities involved in achieving success in this kind of matter. Not the least of these difficulties is the necessity for obtaining detailed and comprehensive affidavits.
That surely was a caution indicating that there was no question of an early filing of the documents, and indeed in that document reporting on industrial relations matters for April, unlike the one for March, there was no forecast about when the case would be ready to go to court. That also is a point that has not adequately been drawn to attention.
I suggest that there is no conflict between the statements. One was made two weeks to three weeks earlier than the other and indicated the state of play at the time and simply stated that, based on advice of officers of the Attorney General's Department, it was not ready to go to court. Early in May, sure, substantial progress had been made but it still did not state that it was ready to go to court or when the papers would be ready to be filed. For the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) to try to draw out a conflict of falsehood between these statements is as absurd as the motion moved by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) yesterday on another matter. On this basis, if anyone is wasting the time of the House, it is the Opposition.
I have to say that, on any judgment and on any fair estimate of the facts, the headlines in this morning's reporting about our colleague have been grossly unfair. The story has mostly been in the fine print of the newspapers, but the headlines and the imputations in the headlines, I believe, have been grossly unfair. I think that that ought to be noted. I think it is worth noting that the Minister referred to a meeting he had .with representatives of the building industry earlier this week. I think it is also worth noting that, as a result of events over the last 10 days, the Builders Labourers Federation put additional bans on a major construction company-overtime requirements, bans on concrete pours and claims for additional wages. In addition to that, threats of a very serious kind have been made indicating that there will be very severe industrial trouble for any builders who give support to the Government in the deregistration proceedings.
I think it is worth noting that at that meeting with the Minister earlier this week greater support was given to the Government for its deregistration proceedings than at any time over the last 10 months. As a result of those conversations and

reports of them, I think again from the Attorney General-officers of the Attorney-General's De-
partment were present-I discussed this matter with the Premier of Victoria this morning. It is
expected now that we will lodge the papers for
deregistration on Friday. In addition to that, the
recent actions of the Builders Labourers Feder-
ation against Costain Australia Ltd will be added to the case that has already been prepared. The
Government will be looking for strong and con-
tinuous support from the industry in the actions
that it has taken.

I should indicate also that if, as a result of this, and if, as a result of support by companies for the
action the Government is taking, Mr Gallagher and the Builders Labourers Federation continue bans related to the case, or if they institute new bans or impose difficulties on companies as a result, the Commonwealth will not hesitate to use whatever legal processes are available to achieve respect for the courts and compliance with the
law.

Mr KEATING (Blaxland) (2.51)-The Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) leaked that Cabinet document to get Ian Sinclair off the hook.

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) put:

That the question be now put.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

65

Noes

44

Majority

21

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bradfield. J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown, N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M. A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M.
Co~an,D.B.
Dean,A.G. Dobie,J.D.M. Drummond, P. H. Fife, W.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Fraser, Malcolm Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. McD.

Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F.
Katter,R.C. Killen, D.J.
Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKenzie, A. 1. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar, P.e. Moore,J. C. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter,J.R. Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. Mce. Spender, 1. M. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S.

1674 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Minister for Industrial Relations

Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. Hodgman, W. M. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M.

AYES

Tuckey, C. W. Vinec,R.I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John
Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cross, M. D.
Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W. G. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L.

NOES

Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Innes, U. E. Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R.J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.C. McMahon, Les (Teller) Mildren, J. B. Milton, P. Morris,P.E. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Uren,T. West,S.J. Willis,R.

PAIRS

Falconer, P. D. Street, A. A. Edwards, H. R. Bourchier, J. W. Robinson, Ian MacKellar, M. J. R.

Young, M. J. Cohen, B. McLeay, Leo Johnson, Les Wallis, L. G. Klugman, R. E.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Original question put:

That the motion (Mr Hawke's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

44

Noes

64

Majority

20

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel
Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass, M. H. Charles, D. E.
Child,J. Cross,M. D. Cunningham. B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Fry,K. L. Hawke,R.J. L. Hayden, W. G. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L.

AYES

Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J. Jacobi, R.
Jenkins, H. A. Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R.J. Kent, L. Kerin, J. C.
McMahon, Les (Teller) Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L.
TheoPhanous, A. C. Uren,T. West, S. J. Willis,R.

Adermann, A. E.
Anthony, J. D. Baume, M. E. Birney, R. J. Bradfield, J. M.
Braithwaite, R. A.
Brown, N.A. Bungey, M. H. BUTT,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,O.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. Fraser, Malcolm Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall, Steele Harris, G. McD.
Hick.s, N.J.
Hodges, J. C. Hodgman, W. M. Hunt, R. J. D.

NOES

Hyde,J. M.
Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter, R.C. Killen,D.J. Lloyd, B.
Lusher,S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKenzie, A. J. (Teller)
McLean, R. M.
McMahon, Sir William
McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar,P.C. Moore, J. C. Newman, K. E. Niwn,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Porter,J.R. Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender,J. M. Tambling,G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. J. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

PAIRS

Young, M. J. Cohen,B. McLeay,Leo
Johnson, Les Wallis,L.G.
Klugman, R. E.

Falconer, P. D. Street, A. A. Edwards, H. R.
BouTchier,J. W.
Robinson, Ian MacKellar, M. J. R.

In division-

Mr Holding-Where's Andrew?

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Chifley will remain silent.

Mr Armitage-I raise a point of order. Mr Speaker, you called me to order and asked me to remain silent. I had not said a word; I was only looking around for Andrew Peacock,

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman's humour escapes me.

Question so resolved in the negative,

DISTINGUISHED VISITORS
Mr SPEAKER-I inform the House that we have present in the gallery this afternoon the Premier of Ontario, the Honourable William Davis, and Mrs Davis. On behalf of the House, I extend to the visitors a very warm welcome.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!

MINISTER FOR INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
Mr Anthony-I wish to raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. Just before the question was put in the previous debate, the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) called out-it may have

General

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1675

been recorded in Hansard-that I leaked the Cabinet document which caused the debate today. I ask that that statement be withdrawn.
Mr SPEAKER-I ask the honourable member for Blaxland to withdraw.
Mr Keating-The National Country Party leaked the document to get the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) off the hook.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Deputy Prime Minister finds the allegation offensive. I ask the honourable member for Blaxland to withdraw.
Mr Keating-Well, we do not want any displays of mock indignation~-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! Will the honourable member withdraw?
Mr Keating-But if it pleases you, I will withdraw.
Mr SPEAKER-I ask the honourable gentleman to withdraw unqualifiedly.
Mr Keating-I withdraw.
TIMBER TREATMENT AND LOG PROCESSING PLANT
Notice of Motion
Mrs KELLY (Canberra)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That, in view of the proposal by Koppers to establish a timber treatment and log processing plant at the Hume Industrial Estate in Canberra and the inability of the Minister for the Capital Territory to give an unqualified assurance that Canberra's water systems and Lake Burley Griffin will not be polluted by this industrial development, it is the opinion of this House that an environmental impact statement is required before a lease is granted to Koppers and that comprehensive legislation controlling environmental pollution of land, air, water and noise in the national capital should be implemented as a matter of urgency.
DISALLOWED NOTICE OF MOTION
Mrs Darling proceeding to give a notice of motion--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I ask the honourable lady to put the notice of motion in proposition form.
COMMUNITY YOUTH SUPPORT SCHEME
Notice of Motion
Mrs DARLING (Lilley)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House, noting that elected representatives of Community Youth Support Scheme committees and project officers from across Australia are now in Canberra in an effort to obtain justice for Australia's unemployed. young people, calls on the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs to honour the commitments of his office by agreeing to delay the closure of CYSS until evidence now being placed before him has been considered.

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
Mr SPEAKER-Are there any questions without notice?
Mr Malcolm Fraser-I suggest that questions be placed on notice.
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE DRIVERS
Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence)-For the information of honourable members and in keeping with the undertaking I gave to the honourable member for Melbourne Ports (Mr Holding) in answering Question No. 992, I table the documents relating to an incident in which two Royal Australian Air Force drivers were exposed to toxic malathion fumes. Copies of the documents have been lodged in the Parliamentary Library.
GRANTS TO LOCAL GOVERNMENT
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister in Federal Affairs)-Pursuant to section 10 of the Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976, and in accordance with the Federal Government's federalism policy to direct personal income tax assistance to local government, I present the recommendations for distribution of Commonwealth funds to individual councils of the State grants commissions for New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland, South Australia, Western Australia and Tasmania. Senators and members have already been advised of the allocation within their States. Payments to the States in respect of these recommendations were made earlier this month by the Treasury.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Debate (on motion by Mr Uren) adjourned.
TERTIARY EDUCATION COMMISSION
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)- For the information of honourable members, I present the Tertiary Education Commission's report for the 1982-84 triennium, volume 2, parts 1 and 2.
NORTHERN TERRITORY UNIVERSITY
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)- For the information of honourable members, I present a report by the Tertiary Education Commission on the proposal to establish a university in the Northern Territory.
Mr Dawkins-I raise a point of order. I think it is the normal practice for a Minister to provide

1676 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Translators and Interpreters

the Opposition spokesman with a copy of such reports, especially if he is going to give them to the Press. The Press had this report early this morning. I got my copy only about a quarter of an hour ago. I think that is a bit discourteous to say the least.
Mr FIFE-Mr Speaker, with your indulgence, there is no set practice in relation to the matter raised by the honourable member for Fremantle. I did, as he has indicated, send a copy of this report to him late this afternoon.

increased, its assessment activities. It is expected that the functions of NAATI will devolve to a successor body, representative of the profession, at the end of 1982. This development will require the involvement of State and Commonwealth departments, members of the profession and those who use interpreting and translating services. I commend to the House the 1980 annual report of the National Accreditation Authority for Translators and Interpreters.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:

COMMONWEALTH GRANTS

That the House take note of the papers.

COMMISSION
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services) - Pursuant to section 25 of the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973, I present the Commonwealth Grants Commission's forty-eighth report, 1981, on special assistance for the States.

Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (3.16)-Mr Speaker, the report presented by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) might be the swansong of the National Accreditation Authority for Translators and Interpreters. A newsletter published by NAATI in April 1981 was already talking about an eventual successor

NAnONAL ACCREDITAnON AUTHORITY FOR TRANSLATORS AND
INTERPRETERS
Mr MACPHEE (Balaclava-Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs)-For the information of honourable members, I present the annual report, 1980, of the National Accreditation Authority for Translators and Interpreters. I seek leave to make a short statement regarding that report. .

to NAATI. That would be in line with current government thinking fbr services for newly arrived migrants and refugees. The cuts in this area were started with the recommendations of the razor gang report and continued in the Budget. In the papers prepared for the Estimates Committee by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs it is emphasised that an increased testing activity is envisaged byNAATI. On the same page it is pointed out also that a fee for candidat-es will be introduced and that the De-

Leave granted.

partment expects to raise $53,000 in 1981-82 from

Mr MACPHEE-NAATI was established by the Government in-1977 in respons~ to a demand for an improvement in the quality of interpreting and translating in Australia and to answer the needs of a multicultural society as well as those of Australia's international diplomatic and trade relations. NAATI's'terms of reference are set out in Appendix 1 of the report. Briefly, they are to establish levels of competence for interpreters and translators. It was planned that NAATI's work would have the effect of increasing the availability

those charges. The Authority intends to commence charging fees to all persons sitting for a test at any of NAATI's five levels. According to a circular, the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs will administer the imposition of these fees, and the revenue gained by this measure will be used to finance the NAATI testing program. The Opposition asks: Why are newly arrived immigrants and n:fugees, who are often out of work, expected to pay fees for a test which will not even guarantee them employment?

of professional interpreting and translating services and improving their quality. NAATI was also given responsibility for encouraging the development of a professional body.

Translating and interpreting is not the only area where the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs hopes to cash in, to use a ca'tchy phrase, on immigrants. It is not a widely

One of the Authority's first achievements was publicised fact that more than half of the Depart-

the establishment of five levels of competence forment of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs budget is

interpreters. As the report indicates, 1980 was a paid by its clients. To be precise, some $57.1m will

year in which the assessment of applicants for be raised from various sources in 1981-82. This

accreditation and recognition began in earnest. compares with $45.1m raised from immigrants

During 1980, more than 1,000 candidates were and refugees in 1980-81. The source of that rev-

tested, leading to some 200 accreditations, and enue is $16.5m from migrant hostels; $34mfrom

500 applications for recognition were processed, depart ure tax; $12m from overseas student

leading, again, to some 200 recognitions. Since charges; $260,000 from the processing of various

then, NAATI has continued', and, in fact, has applications; $650,000 from assisted migrant

Translators and Interpreters

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1677

contributions; $3.3m from miscellaneous revenues; and $65,000 from English language tests. In addition to these charges,new charges will be introduced whichwill affect the whole area of interpreting and translating, including the telephone interpreter service. Is it not sufficient that many of-the immigrants and refugees arriving in Australia take up some of the most menial and dirty jobs in our community? In addition they are expected to pay for the services provided to them in the initial stages.
The Government, it seems, has embarked on a course of converting the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs into a profitable business. .obviously the Government is more preoccupied with balancing the books than with the welfare and future of newly arrived immigrants and refugees. At the sametime honourable members might like to know that $1.5m will be spent by the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs for the restoration of an historic building in Victoria. Many of our migrant community would like to know what advantages the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs in particular, or the ethnic communities in general, will derive. from the refurbishing of historical Victorian buildings. Translating and interpreting services have come under repeated criticism in the past few. years, and rightly so. Some four years after the establishment of NAATI the certification provided by the Authority still has no legal status. The result is that only a very limited number of translators and interpreters were accredited by the Authority. Those who were accredited were people such as high school students from the Casuarina High School rather than people already working in close contact with immigrants and refugees.
Honourable members must understand that learning a language is not an easy process. To perfect it takes years and years. In the last three years some 300,000 immigrants and refugees and an additional 1,000,000 tourists and visitors came to this country. Yet we must be the only country in the world where, in our airports, bus terminals and internal air services there are no interpreters or translators available to guide or inform these people.. The shortage ininterpreters and translators is not caused by lack of talent; it is caused by the callous policies of this -Government. At present only limited career opportunities are available for highly skilled and highly qualified people. The present reductions in funding for the telephone interpreter service serve only to reinforce this insecurity. Rather than expanding

these services, starting from next year, the telephone interpreter service in Brisbane and Canberra will be discontinued and the hours of operation in Sydney will be considerably reduced. This is happening at a time when there is an increasing demand for these services. In 1973 there were some 13,000 inquiries. By 1980 the level of inquiries had quadrupled to almost 50,000.
Unless urgent measures are taken to upgrade the present interpreting and translating services and, therefore, the accrediting Authority, the end result of the so-called Government savings could . well be a return to the pre-1973 years, a return to the period of the rackets where unqualified interpreters and improvised translators charged exorbitant fees for bogus services to innocent and unknowing immigrants and refugees in this country.
Debate (on motion by Mr Sainsbury) adjourned.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr NIXON-Yes, I do. Yesterday in debate-it is recorded at page 1599 of Hansardthe honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) said:
To see the people opposite get away with the sorts of things we have seen in the last couple of weeks-the Minister for Primary Industry knowing for two years that people were bringing kangaroo meat and horse meat into the Australian meat trade and doing nothing about it . . .
I categorically deny any knowledge of that. I do so knowing the scurrilous way the Australian Labor Party uses these things once they are quoted in the House.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE F
Report
Mr JARMAN (Deakin)-I have to report that Estimates Committee F has considered the following proposed expenditures:
Department of Trade and Resources Department of Industry and Commerce Department of National Development and Energy Department of Business and Consumer Affairs
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:
That consideration of the report be made an order of the day for the next day of sitting.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
Motion (by Mr Sinclair)-by leave-agreed to:

1678 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Public Inquiries into Postal Services

That the time for presentation of reports to the House by Estimates Committees be extended to 13 October 1981.
PUBLIC INQUIRIES INTO TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND POSTAL
SERVICES IN AUSTRALIA
Ministerial Statement
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications)-by leave-Honourable members will recall that in his ministerial statement of 30 April 1981 the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) announced that there would be a major review undertaken of the activities of the Australian Telecommunications Commission to determine the extent to which the services it offers might be more effectively provided by the private sector. At the same time, the Prime Minister announced that a review would be carried out into the scope for reducing or eliminating the monopoly powers of the Australian Postal Commission. I now wish to advise the House that arrangements have been made for the conduct of these major public inquiries. The Government is fortunate in having obtained the services of a number of distinguished Australians to conduct these two inquiries both of which have wideranging terms of reference. The telecommunications inquiry will be chaired by Mr J. A. Davidson, Chairman of Commonwealth Industrial Gases Ltd. Mr Davidson has had a distinguished and successful career in business in Australia. Other members of this inquiry committee are Professor A. E. Karbowiak, Professor of Electrical Engineering' at the University of New South Wales, Mr M. G. King, a retired senior executive of CSR Ltd who is now a director of a number of companies, and Mr W. A. Dick, Chairman of Pacific Carpets International Pty Ltd and a chartered accountant.
The inquiry into the Postal Commission's monopoly powers will be chaired by Mr A. E. Bradley, Chairman of Arnotts Ltd. Mr Bradley also has been a very successful and highly respected member of the Australian business community. Other members are Mr J. H. Garrett, who recently retired as Deputy Secretary of the Department of Finance, and Mr R. N. Millar, who recently retired as Managing Director of Felt and Textile Industries Ltd and currently is a director of a number of companies. The terms of reference for the telecommunications inquiry acknowledge that Australia has entered a period of rapid technological change when existing institutions and their traditional methods of operation need to be examined to ensure that the public is receiving the best possible services.

An issue to be considered is the extent to which private enterprise involvement in those areas of Telecom's activities now protected from competition could result in a more efficient and economic service to the public. It is certainly not the intention of the Government in any way to prejudice the services available to remote areas in Australia nor to the people who live in them. There have been suggestions that in some way this c.o,?pe~ition will place an undue burden on people hVIng In remote areas. That is certainly not the objective; rather, it is to identify the areas where available resources can be stretched further and provide services for the better use of the people of Australia and to see the degree to which private enterprise might complement the services that otherwise need to be provided through the functions now exercised solely by the Telecommunications Commission. The inquiry will need to examine these issues while taking into account the effects any changes might have on the cost of telecommunications services and the financial operations of Telecom Australia. Somewhat similar considerations underlie the Postal Commission inquiry. Obviously both inquiries will have important implications for the public generally, for business, and for the telecommunications industry in particular.
I must pay tribute to the work done over the years by the Telecommunications Commission and the Postal Commission and, of course, their predecessor, the Australian Post Office. Both commissions have served Australia well, and continue to do so, in providing reliable telecommunications and postal services throughout this nation.
The quality of services ranks very high indeed by world standards but there are shortfalls and problems as we move into a period when an increasing number of new technologies and equipment will be available and necessary for the provision of the services around this country. The Government is committed to the objective of ensuring that these high standards are maintained, and the terms of reference for both inquiries reflect this objective. The inquiries should begin their work shortly. The telecommunications inquiry is expected to take 12 months to complete and the postal inquiry, nine months. It is important that individuals and organisations with an interest in telecommunications and postal services make submissions setting out their opinions. It is only by obtaining the widest possible range of views from interested sections of the community that the inquiries will be in a position to give well considered advice to the Government.
The committees of inquiry will give notice of their location and working arrangements shortly,

Public Inquiries into Postal Services

23 September 198 I REPRESENTATIVES 1679

including the addresses to which submissions should be sent. In this connection honourable members will be aware that Mr Malcolm King has been acting as a consultant to my Department in the examination of certain aspects of the marketing of telephone attachments. His field of inquiry has included the relationship between Telecom Australia and suppliers of telephone attachments in the private sector and the opportunity for Australian manufacturing industries to compete in the design and manufacture of telephone equipment.
Obviously the informatiori which Mr King has been able to assemble will be directly relevant to the considerations of the major inquiry now being established. In order to avoid confusion and so that the outcome of the major inquiry is in no way pre-empted, I have asked that Mr King bring this material to the attention of the full Committee. This will permit the Committee, in the light of the wider evidence before it, to consider the possi~ bility of an early report on the attachments issue. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard the full terms of reference for the telecommunications and postal inquiries and also details of the membership of these inquiries.
Mr Dawkins-The Minister may like to make a correction or amplification. On page one of the statement Professor Karbowiak is described as Professor of Electrical Engineering at the University of New South Wales. Later he is described as the Head of the Department of Communications at the University of New South Wales. He may occupy both positions.
Mr SINCLAIR-It is my understanding that he has those two responsibilities.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
TERMSOF REFERENCE FOR PUBLIC INQUIRY INTO TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES IN AUSTRALIA
Having regard to the continuing need to provide adequate telecommunications services throughout Australia as efficiently and economically as possible and the significant technological advances which are now occurring in the telecommunications field both in Australia and overseas, the Committee is requested to examine and report to the Minister for Communications on:
(a) the extent to which the private sector could be .more widely involved in the provision of existing or proposed telecommunications services in Australia either alone, in competition with or in conjunction with the Australian Telecommunications Commission;
(b) what consequential changes may be necessary in the statutoryfunctions, duties, financial objectives and monopoly provisions of the Commission; and
(c) the effectiveness of the Commission's operational policies and organisational arrangements.

In carrying out the review, the Committee shall have regard to the effects and likely consequences of any changes that it might propose in respect to:
(i) revenues and the cost structure for telecommunications services in Australia;
(ii) the overall financial performance of the Commission; (iii) the scope for and ability of Australian industries to
compete and participate in the design, manufacture, supply and servicing of telecommunications equipment; and (iv) the possible need for any revised regulatory arrangements in the telecommunications field.
The Committee is requested to submit its final report on a date 12 months after the establishment of the inquiry. It shall be open to the Committee to make progress reports or reports on particular aspects of the inquiry if the Committee determines it is appropriate.
MEMBERSHIP OF THE PUBLIC INQUIRY INTO TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES IN AUSTRALIA
Mr James Arthur Davidson, A.O., Chairman Chairman, Commonwealth Industrial Gases Ltd Member of the Trade Practices Review Committee Councillor of the Standards Association of Australia Director of a number of companies, including BOC International, N.Z. Industrial Gases and Subsidiaries
Mr Malcolm George King Retired Senior Executive with CSR Ltd Member of the Superannuation Fund Investment Trust Director of a number of companies, including Ready Mix
Concrete Ltd, Fletcher Holdings (N.Z.), and Perpetual Trustees Ltd
Professor Antoni Emil Karbowiak Head, Department of Communications, University of New
South Wales Foundation Fellow, Australian Academy of Technological
Sciences Several publications, author of a number of patents, various
awards
Mr William Allan Dick Chairman, Pacific Carpets International Pty Ltd Chartered Accountant Deputy Chairman of the Tourist Industry Advisory
Council
TERMS OF REFERENCE FOR PUBLIC INQUIRY INTO MONOPOLY POSITION OF THE AUSTRALIAN POSTAL COMMISSION
Having regard to the continuing need to provide adequate postal services throughout Australia as efficiently and economically as possible at standards of postal services appropriate to the varied circumstances and location of the Australian p~ople, the Committee is requested to examine and report to the Minister for Communications oil:
(a) the appropriateness of the present statutory functions and duties of the Australian Postal Commission, and
(b) the scope for reducing or eliminating the exclusive power of the Commission to carry letters for reward.
In carrying out the review, the Committee shall have regard to the effects and likely consequences of any changes it might propose in respect to:
(i) .the likely benefits to users of postal services. (ii) the costs of and charges for various postal services pro-
vided by the Commission, and their effects on its overall financial performance. (iii) the capacity of the Commission to provide efficient national and international postal services with the most effective use of resources.

1680 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Public Inquiries into Postal Services

The Committee is requested to submit its final report within 9 months of the date of establishment of the inquiry. It shall be ollen to the Committee to make progress reports or reports on particular aspects of the inquiry if the Committee determines it is appropriate.
MEMBERSHIP OF THE PUBLIC INQUIRY INTO THE MONOPOLY POSITION OF THE AUSTRALIAN POSTAL COMMISSION
Mr Albert Edward Bradley, Chairman Chairman, Arnotts Limited Director of a number of companies, including Campbell's
Soups (Aust.) Pty Ltd, Commercial Banking Company of Sydney Ltd, Monier Ltd, and Commonwealth Industrial Gases Ltd.
Mr Robert Neil Millar Retired Managing Director, Felt and Textiles Industries
Ltd Chairman of the Production Board, Department of Indus-
try and Commerce Director of a number of companies, including Australian
Eagle Insurance Co. Ltd, Johns Perry Ltd, EMI (Aust.) Ltd.
Mr John Hugh Garrett, CBE, OBE Retired Deputy Secretary of the Commonwealth Depart-
ment of Finance
Mr SINCLAIR-I present the following paper:
Public Inquiries into Telecommunications and Postal Services in Australia-Ministerial Statement, 23 September 1981.
Motion (by Mr Moore) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (3.30)-The first thing I want to say about the statement that the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) has put down is that a rather ominous section in it sounds like an obituary to the Australian Telecommunications Commission and the Australian Postal Commission. I repeat what the Minister said. He stated:
I must pay tribute to the work done over the years by the Telecommunications Commission and the Postal Commission . . .
It sounds very much as though this is a prelude to the winding up of those two commissions, the liquidation of their great assets and the dispersal of the great services which they have provided to the Australian community in recent years, as their predecessor, the Australian Post Office, has done over many years. As there is absolutely no undertaking in this statement that there will be a continuing role for these two commissions, I think we have to be extremely concerned about the way in which these inquiries are being established. Of course, it is impossible to justify anything under the guise of the march of new technology and the sorts of changes which that will bring about. This is nowhere more evident than in the area of telecommunications and the new technology sweeping into that industry. One can justify these inquiries on that basis alone but I suspect there is

very much more to them. The Government is looking for a means by which it can at least commence the process of selling off vital parts of these two great commissions.
In our view there is nothing wrong with the introduction of greater competition in the area of telecommunications and postal services so long as the two commissions are given free rein to compete in that process themselves. What we desperately fear-I think our fears are well justified, not only as a result of this statement but also as a result of other things this Minister and other members of the Government have said-is that what the Government is really about is picking the eyes out of these two commissions and selling off, perhaps to their business friends, those sections which are profitable. That will have great consequences to whatever is left. It will be left to the public sector and these two commissions to pick up the unprofitable parts of the telecommunications and postal networks. Of course, the public will have to bear the increased cost of services.
I was not convinced by the Minister's interpolation during his statement in which he said that there would be no diminution of services to remote areas. Of course, one of the consequences of selling off the profitable parts of these two commissions must be that the expensive services will decline. Let us consider the difference between the cost of delivering a letter to suburban Sydney and the cost of delivering the same letter to Alice Springs. Of course, to deliver it to the more remote places costs many more times the amount it costs to deliver it to any suburban destination. Yet the cost of the stamp is exactly the same. A form of internal subsidy operates whereby the less expensive service is used to subsidise the more expensive. That is fair enough. If the Government starts flogging off that part which is profitable and cheap to run there will be massive consequences for those people who live outside metropolitan Australia. There should have been some undertaking in the statement that if this were to happen the Government would have some intention to continue to subsidise those services either directly or indirectly. No such undertaking is given in this statement and very little consideration seems to be given to that vital question in the terms of reference which were incorporated in Hansard today. What this really heralds is the beginning of a great reduction of services to people living in remote areas of Australia. It probably also heralds the winding down of services generally which have been provided by these two commissions.

Public Inquiries into Postal Services

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1681

I refer very quickly to one other aspect. The Minister, during the Estimates Committee hearing a few nights ago, was very coy when asked when he would table the McKinsey report. The McKinsey group was asked to investigate Telecom in particular and to look at its financial structure. That report reveals, as disclosed in the Australian Financial Review, that Telecom is strapped for funds. It does not have the capital in order to maintain the level of investment which is necessary to sustain its services. The Minister has refused to release that report. He continues to refuse to release it. Yet the findings of that report are fundamental to any consideration of the future of Telecom. I think the Minister ought to indicate now that he intends to make that report available both publicly and to these committees of inquiry so that they wili have the advantage of the work which was done by the McKinsey group.
Our alarm at the way in which this seems to portend the demise of Telecom is backed up by the fact that Telecom is still without a general manager and a chairman. It is a leaderless organisation; at least, it has no permanent leadership. Of course, that leads us to suggest that this is just a temporary arrangement until this report is presented in 12 months. Then the process of carving up Telecom can commence in earnest. If the Government does not intend to do that, it ought to move quickly to fill those two vital positions.
I want to refer briefly to the membership of the two committees. Both committees of inquiry seem to be very strong in terms of their representation of big business and very weak in terms of their representation of anyone else. The Minister admits in his statement that business is only one of the customers. Let me quote from what the Minister said. He stated:
Obviously both inquiries will have important implications for the public generally, for. business, and for the telecommunications industry in particular.
We can see that business is well and truly represented on these inquiries. We can even see that the telecommunications industry is represented. But I do not see where the public is represented and I do not see where the workers in the telecommunications and postal industries are represented either. That is a matter of great regret as far as we are concerned. I do not see how one can have inquiries which will be in any way balanced or can in any way have the interests of the general public in mind when they are overweighted to the extent that they are by representatives of big business. I do not deny that big business has a role to play in these sorts of inquiries. But I do not see why, in the inquiry into the telecommunications services, three of the four

members come from very large companies in Australia and, in relation to the postal inquiry, two of the three members come from this sort of background.
It seems to me that the Government has already made up its mind about what it will do about Telecom and the Postal Commission. It will begin the process of carving them up and selling them off-probably to its friends-probably in return for favours either given or forthcoming which the Government parties will enjoy from the receivers of this great gift. I think we are entitled to be extraordinarily alarmed about the statement which the Minister has made in relation to these inquiries, the inquiries themselves, the terms of reference and the membership of the inquiries.
Debate (on motion by Mr Sainsbury) adjourned.

ABORIGINAL AND ISLANDER LAND RIGHTS IN QUEENSLAND AND
WESTERN AUSTRALIA

Discussion of Matter of Public Importance

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. J. D. M. Dobie)-Mr Speaker has received a letter from the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for dis-
cussion, namely:

The threat to Australia's international reputation arising from the Prime Minister's failure to protect and extend the rights of Aboriginal and Islander people in Queensland and Western Australia.

I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places..

More than the number o/members required by the Standing Orders having risen in their
places-

Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (3.40)-Mr Deputy Speaker, in seven days' time-

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) put:

That the business of the day be called on.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Hon. 1. D. M. Dobie)

Ayes

61

Noes

44

Majority

17

Adermann, A. E. Baume. M. E. Dirney. R. 1. Bradfield. 1. M. Braithwaite, R. A.
Brown, N. A. Bungey. M. H.

AYES

lull.D.F. Kalter, R. C. Killen. D.l. Lloyd. B. Lusher, S. A. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M.

1682 REPRESENTATIYES 23 September 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill

AYES
Burr, M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron. Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Drummond, P. H. Fife, W.e. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles,G.O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. e. Hodgman, W. M. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde,J. M. Jarman, A. W.

McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee,I. M.
Millar,P.C. Moore,J.e.
Ncwman,K.E.
Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter,J.R. Rocher,A.C.
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair,I. McC. Spender, J. M. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, e. W. Viner,R.1. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Beazley, K. e. Blewett, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cross, M. B.
Cunningham,B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. e. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Hurford, e. J.

Innes, U. E. Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R. J. Kent, L.
Kerin,J. C.
Klugman, R. E. McMahon, les (Teller) Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren,T. West,S.J. Willis,R.

Falconer, P. D.
Street, A. A. Edwards, H. R. Bourchier, J. W. Robinson, Ian

PAIRS

Young,M.J.
Cohen, B. Meleay, leo Johnson, Les Wallis, L. G.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.
INCOME TAX LAWS AMENDMENT BILL (No.3) 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time,
Second Reading
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (3.46)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill will amend the income tax law in a number of respects. It will give effect to proposals announced in detail on 16 July 1980 to deal with the threat to company tax revenues posed by the

growing practice of public company groups reorganising their affairs so as to eliminate company tax on some of their income. The practice involves the transfer of profitable assets, particularly investment in property, to unit trusts. The Bill also will implement two Budget announcements, one to change the basis on which friendly society dispensaries are taxed and the other to reduce the rate at which capital expenditures on the development of a mine or oil field may be written off for tax purposes, Some extension of the gift provisions of the income tax law is also to be made by the Bill and, finally, it will also provide the method for calculating provisional tax for the 1981-82 income year.
Public Unit Trusts The main concern of the Government in this respect is to prevent ad hoc erosion of the so-called classical system of company taxation through the use of unit trusts by public companies. Accordingly, the broad thrust of the amendments is to remove the taxation advantage sought by companies from placing income producing property in the hands of unit trusts. This is to be achieved basically by treating unit trusts evolving from the practice as if they were companies for tax purposes.
Broadly, the taxable income of a public unit trust to which the amendments apply is to be subject to tax at the rate applicable to compqnies generally, now 46 per cent, and distributions to uhit holders out of income and profits of such trusts are to be taxed in the same way as they would be if they were dividends paid to shareholders of a company. These rules will apply to unit trusts formed as part of a reorganisation of a company or group of companies where, as part of the reorganisation, a business or other property of a company is transferred to the trust and shareholders in the company are given preference as regards taking up units in the trust. To confine the scope of the amendments closely to thekinds of practices referred to in the statement of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) on the matter, the amendments will apply only if it is part of the reorganisation arrangement for the unit trust to be a public unit trust as defined in the Bill.
In broad terms a public unit trust is defined as one in which the units are listed on a stock exchange, are held by 50 or more persons, or are available for investment by the public. For this purpose, a person and his or her relatives or nominees will be counted as one person. In harmony with the broad objective of equating public unit trusts with public companies it is proposed by the

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1683

Bill that, where the income of such a trust includes dividends from companies, a rebate of tax is to be allowed in the same way as would be the case for dividend income received by a company. Unit trust distributions made by a public unit ttust to a unit holder that is a company will qualify for rebate on a comparable basis in the unit holder's hands.
A number of safe guarding measures are contained in the Bill to support the objectives of these proposals. The new basis for taxing public unit trusts and their unit holders will first apply in relation to the 1980-81 income year where the trust is established after 11 July 1980. In recognition of special problems presented for unit trusts established, in some cases, out of company reorganisations a number of years ago, the amendments will apply from the commencement of the 1983-84 income year for trusts established on or before II July 1980.
Friendly Society Dispensaries As announced in the Budget Speech, the Government had decided to remove the present special basis of taxing the dispensaries. In future they are to be taxed in the same way as other nonprofit companies. The effect of this decision as implemented by the Bill is that normal company tax rates will apply to the net income of dispensaries arising from investment income, from receipts from the Commonwealth for the supply of any pharmaceutical benefits and from charges paid by non-members for the supply of pharmaceutical goods and other products and services. These changes will first apply to income derived by dispensaries in the 1982-83 income year. This wiIl allow the dispensaries time to adapt their accounting methods to the change.
Gifts Amendments proposed by the Bill will further extend the existing gift provisions of the income tax law which confer deductions for gifts of the value of $2 or more to specified funds authorities or institutions. One extension will authorise deductions for gifts made after 30 June 1981 to the Victorian Arts Centre Trust. The second will authorise deductions for gifts made during the current financial year to a public fund established for the purpose of observance of the International Year of Disabled Persons by a committee appointed by the Commonwealth, a State or the Northern Territory for that purpose.
Capital Expenditure on the Development of a Mine or Oil Field
The Bill contains the amendments necessary to give effect to the proposal announced in the Budget Speech to increase from six years to ten

years the maximum statutory life by reference to which deductions allowable for capital expenditure on the development of a mine or oil field are determined. The new basis of deduction will apply generally to expenditure incurred after 18 August 1981. However, where the expenditure is incurred after 18 August 1981 under a contract entered into on or before that day, or in respect of
work carried out by the taxpayer which was commenced on or before that day, it will continue to be deductible by reference to a maximum statutory life of six years as at present.
Provisional Tax As I think is generally understood, provisional tax is that part of the pay-as-you-earn system designed to collect tax on income other than salary or wages within the year in which it is derived. That being so it is only reasonable that the amount charged should closely approximate the amount of tax actually imposed for the year. In this way, the provisional tax arrangements are able to achieve a desirable measure of consistency between the treatment of salary and wage earners and of persons who derive income from a business or from property. In the absence of provisions to the contrary, provisional tax for 1981-82 would be calculated by applying 1980-81 rates of tax to 1980-81 taxable income and taking into account rebates at their 1980-81 levels. It is, however, expected that incomes for 1981-82 will generally be higher than for 1980-81.
As against this, due to the application of halfindexation the effective rates of tax for 1981-82 are lower than for the last year and, of course, dependant rebates for 1981-82 are greater than those for 1980-81. In the circumstances, it is appropriate that a varied basis be applied in calculating provisional tax for 1981-82 where tax-
payers do not exercise the right to have the tax calculated on the basis of their own estimates of taxable income for the year. The Bill provides that provisional tax for 1981-82 is to be calculated on the basis of taxable income for 1980-81 increased by 10 per cent and applying to this adjusted income the lower effective rates of tax applying for 1981-82. Dependant rebates are to be allowed for in the calculations at the higher values set for 1981-82.
I add that the notional increase of 10 per cent for 1981-82 incomes over 1980-81 is less than the estimated average rise betwen the two years in
taxable incomes of people subject to provisional tax. This will provide a buffer against any excessive provisional tax. And, of course, taxpayers who consider .their taxable income for 1981-82 will increase by less than the notional 10 per cent have the option of self-assessing and thus having the

1684 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Income Tax (IndiViduals) Bill

provisional tax for 1981-82 recalculated on the basis of their own estimates of taxable income for the year. Mr Deputy Speaker, a memorandum containing more detailed explanations of technical aspects of the Bill is being made available to honourable members and, at this stage, 1 think there is no need for me to address further the matters covered by the Bill. 1 commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Willis) adjourned.
INCOME TAX (INDIVIDUALS) BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (3.56)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This is an annual measure which formally imposes personal income tax for 1981-82 at the rates declared in the Income Tax (Rates) Act 1976. Honourable members will recall that, following an announcement in the House on 29 April 1981, the Income Tax (Rates) Act 1976 was amended in the autumn sittings to declare rates of tax payable by individuals and trustees generally for 1981-82. These rates reflect the decision that there is to be half indexation of the personal tax rates scale for the 1981-82 income year.
It is worth recalling the effects of that earlier legislation. Application of the half indexation factor has meant that for 1981-82 the standard rate of 32 per cent will not apply until taxable income exceeds $4,195. It was $4,041 last year. The other steps in the scale have been correspondingly increased so that the 46 per centrate will apply after $17,894 and not $17,239 as previously. The maximum individual rate of 60 per cent will not apply until the taxable income exceeds $35,788. It was $34,478 for 1980-81.
The resulting tax reductions benefit all individual taxpayers and, together with associated increases in rebates for dependants, have been reflected in lower pay-as-you-earn deductions since 1 July last. They will be reflected in provisional tax payable for 1981-82. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mi' Willis) adjourned.
INCOME TAX (COMPANIES, CORPORATE UNIT TRUSTS AND SUPERANNUATION FUNDS) BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.

Second Reading
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (3.59)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill will formally impose income tax for 1981-82 on the 1980-81 incomes of companies and the income of superannuation funds of the current year. The rates of tax are also declared by the Bill and are the same as for 1980-81. In line with measures contained in the Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.3) 1981, about which I have just spoken, the net income of some unit trusts is to be taxed at the public company rate of tax, 46 per cent. Measures to impose this tax are also in the Bill. Provisions of the Bill otherwise follow the same lines as in other years and details of the various rates are set out in the explanatory memorandum that is being made available to honourable members. 1 commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Willis) adjourned.
COMPANIES AND SECURITIES LEGISLATION (MISCELLANEOUS
AMENDMENTS) BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 22 September, on motion byMrMoore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Upon which Mr John Brown had moved by way of amendment:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not opposing this Bill, the House(I) expresses its concern(a) at the Government's abdication of its responsibility to make national laws for companies and securities pursuant to the Commonwealth's own constitutional powers, and in accordance with the recommendations of the Senate Select Committee on Securities and Exchange in 1974 (the Rae Report); (b) at the lack of effective accountability of the National Companies and Securities Commission to either the Government or Parliament of the Commonwealth, or to any other single elected Government or Parliament; and (c) that the Parliament of the Commonwealth is not given an opportunity to effectively scrutinise Bills introduced under the Cooperative Companies and Securities Scheme and will not be able effectively to determine company law in the future under this scheme; (2) calls upon the Government in the event of the breakdown for any reason of the scheme, of which this Bill is a part, immediately to proceed to the introduction of Commonwealth legislation for the national regulation of companies;

Companies and Securities Bill

23 Septem ber 198 I REPRESENTATIVES 1685

(3) calls upon the government to expedite the establishment of an Accounting Standards Review Board, and
(4) calls upon the government immediately to pursue a fundamental reform of company law and, as the first stage in such reform, to institute the Companies and Securities Law Revision Committee without delay'.
(Quorum formed).
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (4.3)-1 think it might be pertinent if, at this continuing stage of my remarks, I were to read once again the amendment I moved yesterday so that you, Mr Deputy Speaker, might be well aware of the wide ranging nature of this debate. I moved:
That all words after That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not opposing this Bill, the House- (I) expresses its concern-
(a) at the Government's abdication of its responsibility to make national laws for companies and securities pursuant to the Commonwealth's own constitutional powers, and in accordance with the recommendations of the Senate Select Committee on Securities and Exchange in 1974 (the Rae Report);
(b) at the lack of effective accountability of the National Companies and Securities Commission to either the Government or Parliament of the Commonwealth, or to any other single elected Government or Parliament; and
(c) that the Parliament of the Commonwealth is not given an opportunity to effectively scrutinise Bills introduced under the Cooperative Companies and Securities Scheme and will not be able effectively to determine company law in the future under this scheme;
(2) calls upon the Government in the event of the breakdown for any reason of the scheme, of which this Bill is a part, immediately to proceed to the introduction of Commonwealth legislation for the national regulation of companies;
(3) calls upon the government to expedite the establishment of an Accounting Standards Review Board, and
(4) calls upon the government immediately to pursue a fundamental reform of company law and, as the first stage in such reform, to institute the Companies and Securities Law Revision Committee without delay'.
When I was so rudely interrupted in my prime at 10 o'clock last night I was referring to a couple of takeovers which have occurred recently, one by the affiliate of Bond Corporation Holdings LtdEndeavour Resources Ltd-of Northern Mining Corporation NL in Western Australia and the other the proposed takeover of Huttons Ltd by Industrial Equity Ltd organised by Mr Ron Brierley. I was speaking of a test that the National Companies and Securities Commission will be put to in the courts of Australia in order to implement what scant powers it has. I would like to get back to those takeover operations.

In the Huttons and Northern Mining bids the problems essentially arose when it became clear to both acquisitors that they would be paying too much for their respective targets. In both cases the bids were made under the new rules and under the purview of the NCSC. In both cases the acquisitors apparently committed technical breaches of the listing requirements of the relevant stock exchanges. Initially these apparent breaches were ignored. In both cases the acquisitors are well known takeover experts. Surely, there can be no excuse for ignorance of the law in their case. A refusal on the part of the National Companies and Securities Commission and the Sydney and Melbourne stock exchanges to take strong action would have seriously prejudiced the rights of minority shareholders. In the case of the Northern Mining episode the NCSC changed its approach on at least two occasions. The matter is now before the courts. I hesitate to comment further except to concur with some of the rather apt sentiments of Mr Ian Perkin writing in the Financial Australian of I I September who said of the episode:
It certainly does nothing to clarify the role of the NCSC in the situation and could hardly be regarded as an example of action worthy of the supreme companies and securities body.
The apparent dithering by the NCSC with respect to the acceptability of Endeavour's Part A statement underlines not only the difficulties posed by this confused and confusing code but also the lack of thought as to the administrative requirements of the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act before the Act came into effect. For that reason, if for no other, the Government stands condemned for this rather poor co-operative scheme.
Similarly, the Huttons case illustrates the vagueness and untidiness of section 52 of the Act. The Huttons case poses two problems. Mr Brierley had to establish that Huttons announced losses constituted sufficient reason to call off the bid and, more particularly, that the announcement itself, rather than the loss, was the changed circumstance. The loss was for the year 1980-8 I to June. Mr Brierley unveiled his bid in July. Section 52 requires quite clearly that the changed circumstances take place after the announcement of a bid. It is very obvious that in that case Mr Brierly is on fairly tricky ground. If the experience of the London Takeover Panel is any guide it would appear that the announcement of a loss, albeit bigger than was expected, would not be sufficient reason to allow a bid to be called off. I hope that the NCSC will be able to make use of those circumstances in determining what will happen with this bid for Huttons. In any event, even if IEL and Endeavour were to establish sufficient grounds

1686 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Companies and Securities Bill

under section 52 of the new Act to call off their bids that would not answer the earlier matter of the breaches of the Australian Associated Stock Exchange's listing rules and the clear obligation, before 1 July, to make takeover offers.
Ironically, the two companies and their boards have only themselves to blame for the predicament they are in. In both cases if they had been prepared to play by the rules that the AASE set down under itslisting requirements they would both have announced their takeover bids before I July under the previous Companies Act. Under that Act they would have been able to withdraw
their bids for whatever reason-material or otherwise-but they chose not to proceed. Both Endeavour and IEL acquired the shareholdings which triggered the need for full bids, IEL in fact, going to 27 per cent of Huttons and Endeavour to 40 per cent of Northern Mining before 1 July. Under the transition arrangements for the new system which became effective on that date both could have bid under the old rules. The old rules which allow withdrawal of takeovers without stringent qualifications would have applied throughout the life of their bids. However, that is not what happened.
Episodes such as these underline the uncertainty that has been created in the business community because of the way these Acts have been introduced and subsequently administered. The current approach of the Government in this area, bound as it is to a nineteenth century view of trade and commerce and corporations powers under the Constitution, is piecemeal and haphazard. I think that is the gentlest and most charitable way I can put it. We need something better. By supporting my amendments I suggest that we will move somewhat down that path to a clear, uniform and workable companies code.
I just go over a couple of the things I have mentioned in the amendment which I have moved. The Opposition called upon the Government to expedite the establishment of an Accounting Standards Review Board. It has been a recommendation of the Law Reform Commission for a long time that we should have a standard set of rules which govern accounting and auditing within Australia. As of now the rules of the game are fairly haphazard. The ordinary lay person reading the public accounts of all sorts of public companies would have awful difficulty in understanding them. The way in which all of these companies present their annual accounts and balance sheets almost always varies one from the other. The Opposition is quite keen for the Government to expedite the establishment of an Accounting Standards Review Board. This has

long been the desire, long before I became a member of parliament, of my colleague, the
honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) who is now getting himself a drink. It is a drink of water, I should say, with all due respect to Mr Oakes and the honourable member for Dundas (Mr Ruddock). The honourable member for Hawker has been calling for the implementation of this Accounting Standards Review Board for a long time. He has put cogent, compelling and strong arguments to the Government for this case on many occasions. It seems to me to be quite odd that the Government seems to want to ignore them. That is one matter.
The other thing I mention in closing is our call for the Government to pursue immediately a fundamental reform of company law and, as a first stage in that reform, the need to institute the Companies and Securities Law Revision Committee without delay. As of now, any amendments to this group of national companies and securities commission Bills and/or companies bills, have to be passed by the Ministerial Council on Companies and Securities. The Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) has made it quite clear that he intends that there will be no principal amendments or serious amendments to those Bills for the two years from when the Bill was introduced into the House. That seems to us to allow the corporate thieves, the smarties, the corporate crooks, two years in which to find the loopholes and exploit them. We do not want that to happen. The process of going through the Ministerial Council with all the States' Attorneys General having to sit down in council and agree to these amendments before they can be implemented and introduced in this Parliament and mirrored in other parliaments seems to us to be a very involved and unnecessarily intricate system. That is the reason we are calling upon the Government to institute a Companies and Securities Law Revision Committee. We think that under those terms, without the need for all the Ministers to sit down and look at these things, there could be a simple way of reforming this law,
This is a very important body of law. I repeat
what the Opposition has consistently said: We think that this law is a national obligation upon this Government to have a standard law introduced here and organised and administered from Canberra, not relying on the compliance of the States. I repeat the call to the Ministerthat he think very seriously about this thing. i know he has philosophical impediments to it in his mind. But I think, from the point of view of the country's economy, the need to organise our stock exchanges on a uniform basis to allow for the

Companies and Securities Bill

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1687

proper aggregation of finance within Australia to finance the resources boom, or whatever euphemism one would like to use to describe this resources possibility, we should have a body of law which is administered from here. This would allow a much simpler process to take its part. My colleague, the honourable member for Hawker, in a subsequent contribution to this debate, particularly at the Committee stage, will be suggesting a number of reforms we want the Government to look at. To wind up, we are not happy about the whole philosophy of company law being administered as a co-operative, rather than a uniform system. I hope that the Minister will take note of some of the things I have mentioned in this speech and perhaps expedite reforms and amendments to this legislation much earlier than in the two year period he has mentioned.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)-Is the amendment seconded?
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (4.15)-It is with pleasure that I second the amendment. It is an appalling indictment that not one Government member is going to speak on this measure.
Mr Moore-It is left to me.
Mr JACOBI-It is an appalling indictment really and shows the lack of interest the Government has in corporate law. If I were the responsible Minister, I would be more concerned about it. As I said, it is with pleasure that I support the amendment so ably moved by the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown). But frankly, what are the changes in this Bill and why are the changes in this Bill? In my view, they are merely consequential and they are merely to eliminate errors. They are merely to eliminate drafting errors and straight sloppy drafting. They contain not one jot of substantial progressive legislation. The package of amendments does little to give the corporate law the strength, the effectiveness and the efficiency that it deserves. It is a farce.
The Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) says quite bluntly that there will be no significant amendments to the Act throughout 1982. The Minister and the Ministerial Council have declared in effect a moratorium throughout the remainder of this year and throughout 1982. What does this mean? What does this confession translate to? It has been seven whole tortuous years since the scheme was first floated and five years-believe it or not-since it was initially signed. It contains not one jot of much needed corporate law reform. The legislation does nothing more than give the force of law to the status quo. In effect it has taken the Minister and the Ministerial Council at least three years

to legislate for the status quo. Quite obviously, the Minister and the Ministerial Council will certainly not be charged with sending shock waves through the corporate sector by initiating any legislation. I see that the Minister agrees.
The reason for this moratorium for two years, believe it or not, is to give the corporate sector time to absorb the status quo. What utter nonsense! This Parliament, if it is the lowest common denominator, should at least have the courage to indicate clearly those areas, those amendments and those reforms that are needed if corporate laws are to be efficient and effective. Given the past track record on reform, we can hardly envisage anything that resembles precipitate legislation, particularly as the modus operandi will be on the principle of the lowest common denominator. In April 1979 Mr Ryan of the New South Wales Corporate Affairs Commission, when talking about the co-operative scheme, had this to say in the publication Australian Director:
The scheme must, I think, be regarded as a final opportunity for the States to preserve their legislative and administrative presence in the regulation of companies and the securities industry. There is a not inconsiderable body of opinion which holds that the only satisfactory solution is Commonwealth legislation and administration as in the related fields of taxation, bankruptcy and trade practices. The failure of the co-operative scheme, coupled with the encouragement given to the Commonwealth by the High Court in the Concrete Pipes case would lead, inevitably, to that result.
Let me return to this package of amendments and make a pertinent observation, as I did when the initial legislation was debated, particularly with reference to the co-operative scheme. I said that it is unlikely that the scheme will allow the laws affecting companies and securities to be changed with sufficient speed to respond to market developments. The Minister, as a former broker, surely would agree with that. The danger of attaching too much importance to uniformity is that it will lead to the adoption of what I might call the lowest common denominator of any particular proposal. The scheme may well be in fact conducive to public confusion and a sloth-like reaction to market developments. The Americans, 50 years ago, realised what was necessary to deal with the securities market in a federation of states. The United States Government made full use of its constitutional powers to set up its own administrative agency-the Securities and Exchange Commission. The SEC was vested with wide enforcement and law making powers. The Australian body has no chance of emulating the success of the SEC. Its lack of independence and power will see to that. I ask honourable members

1688 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Companies and Securities Bill

to contrast the positions of the proposed commission and the SEC in regard to rule and regulation making powers. Section 19 (a) of the United States Security Act of 1933 provides:
The Commission shall have authority from time to time to make, amend, and rescind such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act, including rules and regulations governing registration statements and prospectuses for various classes of securities and issuers, and defining accounting, technical and trade sums used in this title. Among other things, the Commission-
Let us note this~
. . . shall have authority to prescribe the form or forms in which required information shall be set forth, the items or details to be shown in the balance sheet and earning statements, and the methods to be followed in the preparation of accounts, in the appraisal or valuation of assets and liabilities, in the determination of depreciation and depletion, in the differentiation of investment and operating income . . .
I will be delighted for the Minister to follow me in the debate and to show me where in our legislation we encompass that necessary provision because it is on that that the credibility of corporate law stands or falls. I continue to quote the Act:
. . . no provision of this title imposing any liability shall apply to any act done or omitted in good faith in conformity with any rule or regulation of the Commission. Notwithstanding that such rule or regulation may, after such act or omission, be amended or rescinded or be determined by judicial or other authority to be invalid for any reason.
In short the proposed co-operative scheme is incompatible with strong legislation and with the need to respond quickly and effectively to any unforeseen developments in the market place. It is a recipe for lowest common denominator or weak legislation for which no individual government will be politically accountable. It is the very opposite of what the Rae Senate Select Committee on Securities and Exchange rightly urged was necessary for the regulation of Australia's securities markets. There is a profound weakness in our legislation and in the very structure set up to enforce it. Let me give an example. I refer to a question which I have directed to the Minister and which appears on the Notice Paper. I suggest to the Minister that the legislation referred to in the question is not radical but is certainly progressive. The question is simply this:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the Second Directive 68/151 on Co-ordination of Safeguards of the Council of the European Communities which has recently been implemented and has the force of law in the United Kingdom: . . .
(2) Will he have the articles relating to the matters indicated included in his reply so that they may be available for the information of members and interested persons and organisations.
After a long and exhaustive examination in the European Economic Community and in the United Kingdom, it was found that if the proposed embodiment of the law in the EEC were

to be given the strength and credibility it deserved the following articles were found to be necessary: Minimum capital, non-cash consideration, noncash consideration-valuing of assets, promoters, payment of dividends, serious loss of capital, authorisation of new share issues, non-cash consideration, pre-emptive rights to new share issues,
and the maintenance of capital. The Minister would have to concede in all fairness that there is very little in our legislation which could even remotely compare with the legislation in the EEC and in the United Kingdom.
Today I have placed one or two questions on the Notice Paper. I confess in honesty to the Minister that they are are nothing more than a reassessment of the list of questions that were raised in the previous debate on the Companies Act to which the Minister was good enough to reply in detail. I placed these questions dealing with pro-
posals to amend the Companies Act on the Notice Paper because I thought they ought to be a public document. I thought they ought to indicate to people just how ineffective and inefficient company law is in this country and how disastrous it is that the Minister should be hamstrung by conservative States like Queensland and Western Australia which have no initiative at all to implement progressive and much needed law. I ask the Minister: Does he, in fact, agree that these amendments to the Companies Act are much needed to strengthen our corporate law? For instance, is it needed to have subsidiaries and holding companies properly registered? Should we have proper prospectus provisions? Should we have power to make certain payments for explanatory memoranda? Should we permit the alteration of rights of holders of classes of shares? The amendments to sections 129 and 130 deal with company financing dealing in shares and the consequences of company finance dealing in its shares. Should we have power over that? Of course we should. Share transfers made to avoid liability for future calls are extremely defective. I will come back to that later. Our suggested amendment to section 237 of the Companies Act deals with the provisions indemnifying officers and auditors. Our amendment to section 247 deals with the circulation of members' resolutions. This is quite common throughout the EEC and in Sweden. Our amendment to section 261 deals with the power of a company to obtain information as to beneficial ownership of its shares. The Minister agrees that we have gone part of the way. But we ought to go a lot further with this matter. I hope that he presses this matter at the next ministerial council meeting for no other reason than to strengthen our Foreign Investment

Companies and Securities Bill

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1689

Review Board criteria. Section 270 deals with directors' reports. This is critically important. Section 565 is my favourite. It deals with dividends payable from profits being specified. The appointment of two-way proxies is critically important for shareholders as is the section relating to trading trusts. Last but not least, we will have to face up to the issue of corporate and white collar crime. We cannot put that matter off.
I now give the Minister the classic example. I hoped sincerely that in the intervening period between these debates the Minister and officers in the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs would have impressed on the ministerial council the urgency for amendments, at least, to be made in the area of share transfers made to avoid liability for future calls. I have tremendous respect for the Minister; I say that publicly. But, on this issue, I think it is deplorable that we had an opportunity since we last debated the legislation to make the appropriate amendment and did nothing.
In relation to this matter I ask the questions as they appear in the Notice Paper. Does the Minister agree that there should be inserted in the Act a provision similar to section 391 of the South Australian Companies Act 1962-1979 to provide that any transfer of shares made within a period of two years before the commencement of the winding up of the company to any person known to the transferor to be unable to pay the liability on those shares shall not relieve the transfer or of that liability? Does the Minister contend that a provision similar in effect to section 391 of the South Australian Companies Act was included in the April 1980 exposure draft of the Companies Bill, clause 218A? The only substantive difference between the two provisions was that, for the purposes of section 391, the relevant period is two years, whereas for clause 218A it was one year. Clause 218A was, however, deleted from subsequent drafts of the Companies Bill on the basis that it did not add anything to what is now clause 360 of the Bill-section 218 in the ICAC Companies Act.
Clause 360 provides that, subject to certain qualifications, every past and present member of a company will be liable to contribute to the company's assets as it is being wound up. The proposal to include section 391 of the South Australian Companies Act could, however, be reconsidered in the context of the overall review of the winding up provisions and, in particular, those provisions dealing with the liabilities and contributories. However, does the Minister agree that the statement that the only substantive difference between section 391 of the old South Australian

Act and section 360 of the National Act is that the relevant period is two years under section 391 whereas it is one year under section 360 is false? The point is well illustrated by the transfer of shares in an unlimited liability company to a $2 limited liability company during the one or two years prior to winding up. I think that we should have considered that aspect in the intervening period. Shareholders in an unlimited liability company, at the time the company commences to be wound up, are jointly and severally liable, without limit, for the debts of the company.
I now come back to this matter because it concerns me. I ask the Minister again to ask his Department to examine this matter and give it priority at the next ministerial council. Is it a fact that it is only if those members are unable to contribute enough funds to satisfy those debts that past members may be liable under section 360. Under the old section 391, if the transfer was made to avoid liability the transferor remained liable, jointly and severally, on the shares. If section 391 had applied in Victoria when the Garretty Group of unlimited liability investment companies collapsed, the Garrettys could not have avoided personal liability for the companies' debts merely by setting up $2 companies and transferring their shares to those companies. Section 391 clearly served a useful purpose and should have been retained.
In short, I am saying that, if ever there were a corporate scandal amongst many aged people in Victoria because of deficiencies in Victorian corporate law, the new Bill does nothing to block that deficiency. I plead with the Minister on this occasion to consider what I say. I will talk on a number of other amendments which will shortly come before the House. I am not satisfied with the reply that he was kind enough to send me subsequent to the last debate. I do not believe that the legislation will protect those people in the future. I sincerely believe that he ought to make this provision the priority when the ministerial council next meets.
I come back to the point that was raised so ably by my good friend, the honourable member for Parramatta. I think the amendment should be supported by both sides of the chamber. In conclusion-I do not wish to raise the matter again in the Committee stages-I ask the Minister to give some information about how far along the track we have gone with the much needed accounts standards review committee. I support with pleasure the Opposition's amendments.
Mr DEAN (Herbert) (4.35)-The honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) and

1690 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Companies and Securities Bill

the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) have alleged that no Government member is interested either in this amendment or in the co-
operative companies and securities scheme generally. I have come in here, firstly, to put that allegation to rest. I hope that the honourable members for Parramatta and Hawker, both of whom have spoken in earlier debates on this subject on, I think, at least two occasions this year, will remember and acknowledge that I too spoke in those debates at the second reading stage. I hope that they recall that the speeches were not
insubstantial, if I might describe them as such. So to say that there was no interest is, of course, quite wrong. I also put it on the record, to correct the view of the honourable members for Parramatta and Hawker that there is no interest in this subject on this side of the House, that we have a Government members securities and companies committee. There are 15 members of that committee. That committee has quite actively followed the course of this co-operative scheme from the beginning. It still exists and it is still meeting. It is still being kept up to date on what the Government is proposing and it still has the opportunity to make a contribution to what the Government is considering. I am a member of that committee and I
intend to continue to be a member.
It seemed that two main complaints were brought forward by, particularly, the honourable member for Hawker. They are not new complaints. The first is that the honourable member
for Hawker is appalled at the lack of real reform in the Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendment) Bill. I remember that the last time we had some amending Bills the honourable member expressed the same sorts of concerns. However, because of the co-operative nature of the scheme, it has been felt necessary that the first and foremost task is to set the scheme in place. Once we have that effective cooperative scheme in place, the whole nation will be in a position in which to consider carefully, thoughtfully and effectively the future reforms which I have no doubt will be required. Indeed, today and at other times during the whole of this saga the honourable member for Hawker has ex-
pressed a number of concerns that I agree are very real concerns. I hope that his concerns will be put to the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities as quickly as possible and will be effectively dealt with. But that does not alter the proposition that the main aim at the present time is and ought to be to set the co-operative scheme in place. We would then be in a position effectively, thoughtfully and carefully to enact the reforms which in future will be required.

The other major concern that the honourable members for Parramatta and Hawker have expressed deals with the whole co-operative nature of the scheme itself. It seems hardly appropriate, in discussing this somewhat machinery Bill, to re-run that at any great length. Suffice it to say that it seems to me that the Government had three options before it. The first one was to do as the Opposition would have liked it to do, and that is simply to use whatever constitutional powers the Commonwealth has and do it all itself; in other words, ride over the interests of the States
and just do it at the national level. Nevertheless, the Opposition still willl).ot concede what appear to be a couple of problems in that regard. First of all it is not, much as it alleges to the contrary, totally free from constitutional doubt. Secondly, it is not necessarily practical considering the enormous amount of administrative machinery that is already in place around the States. The second option might have been for the Commonwealth to
legislate on an interstate basis. But that would certainly have been very much a third best option and I am sure that nobody in this House would have liked to have seen that course followed.
I come to the final option and the one chosen by the Government; that is, to seek to do it on a cooperative basis. By doing so we at least make sure that we will not face any constitutional or practical difficulties and at the same time we do at least pay heed to the various interests of the States, the
concerns of the States and the expertise that the States have built up. We certainly do not upset the States by unnecessarily riding roughshod over them and we do set in place what now ought to be an effective, uniform companies legislation structure for the whole nation. I therefore support the Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill which is before the House.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.41)-1 thank the honourable member for Herbert (Mr Dean), the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) and the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) for participating in this debate. The matters taised and the amendments proposed are not new. They have been around for some considerable time. If one accepts the basis of the argument that the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities has been set up on a co-operative basis for all the States and the Commonwealth to participate, quite naturally one must dismiss the first point. As a consequence, I will not go into that except to reiterate to those who may not quite understand the procedures of the Ministerial Council and how the National Companies

Companies and Securities Bill

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1691

and Securities Commission of Australia works. Certain administrative powers have been ceded to the Commission by Acts which have been passed by this Parliament and all the States. The Ministerial Council, which consists of the State Attorneys-General and the relevant Commonwealth Minister, are directly responsible for the management and overview of the workings of that Commission. As a result, it is unique, in the Australian legal context, in the way it operates. It is based entirely on co-operation with the States. The Commission has a limited staff structure. It is required to work through the State corporate affairs commissions. That, in itself, requires certain degrees of good will and common sense to prevail to enable it to deal with the sensitivities of the States in its new role.
I come to the point of the moment. This House has passed a companies code. To this point, not one State has passed such a companies code. The target date for implementation is I January next, but I do not hold great hopes for that target being met, along with the need to promulgate certain regulations under the companies code. That will require further understandings to be reached as we proceed down the track. As I said in my second reading speech, amendments will come forward, but it is the Commonwealth's desire to ensure that the business community of Australia is accustomed to the new corporate law and the way in which it is administered before any further changes take place. One thing that people in the business world do like is to have a certain amount of predictability and time to get used to the new phases. At the same time, if we were to be talking at this point in a public sense about amendments to the Companies Act, what genuine chance would we have of getting the various State parliaments in Australia to pass the current Bills? I urge the honourable member for Hawker to give some consideration to that argument. Until such time as these Bills are passed by the State parliaments, we wiIIhave no companies code in Australia on a national basis. I take on board the honourable member's views and understand what he means, but I urge him to show a little patience and cooperation regarding the operation of this unique Ministerial Council and the co-operative companies and securities scheme.
The other points in the amendment moved relate to a law reform body's recommendation that an accounting standards board be established. I do not object to this at all. There is no doubt in my mind that accounting standards vary enormously. The last time we debated these matters, I think I produced in this House a company report which I indicated was of very high quality. At the same

time, I think I mentioned a report which was of very poor quality. In recent weeks I have spoken to various accounting bodies with a view to getting them into line on this subject. The last thing we want is lawyers setting standards. If we have an accounting organisation run by lawyers we are bound to get nowhere. I strongly recommend to the accounting association that its bodies get together and make recommendations which recognise public interest. It is not possible for the accountants to keep it to themselves. They have to recognise the importance of public interest. I am hoping through these representations, that the next ministerial council will-be able to make some progress in that area.
As for a continuing law review committee, I could think of nothing worse than to have a group of people sitting continually to think up new ways to amend the Companies Act and associated matters. If one sits down and creates a job for someone that person is bound to think up something. I would far rather see practitioners in the game of law in the accounting world, in the brokerage fraternity and in the banking areas-all the areas of the capital market in Australia-putting forward their views to the ministerial council for consideration for inclusion in the next round of amendments. This will be not only more practically oriented but also far cheaper. It is interesting to know that at the last ministerial council meeting when this matter was raised a price figure was thrown around of something just short of $400,000 a year for running costs. It is incomprehensible to me, a simple country lad, to understand why we need such things.
I want to make one or two other points on the matter raised by the honourable member for Hawker. He was referring to the shock waves that we were not creating. In relation to some of the propositions put forward, he attempted to draw a comparison between the United States Securities and Exchange Commission and the Australian National Companies and Securities Commission. I think he overlooked the fact that the American Commission is purely a national commission and relates only to companies that operate in the national interest. Any company that purely operates within a State is not subject to the scrutiny or oversight of the national securities commission. Given those circumstances and considering what has been said in relation to some of the propositions put forward with which I do not disagree, in the longer term, those things may have some relevance to Australia.
Finally, I thank those who have contributed to the debate. I have no doubt that the next round of amendments wiII embrace some of the matters

1692 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Companies and Securities Bill

which have been mentioned. I indicated in my second reading speech that the amendments will be around for public scrutiny at the end of 1982. We hope they will be introduced here at the beginning of 1983. It is not possible, in a co-operative Act, to get all the amendments one would like. One must anticipate and understand a lot of the State sensitivities that will occur. We hope that, with the experience gained over the years in the co-operative scheme, the workings of the Ministerial Council will allow for greater change. In the short term, we will be working in those directions and embracing a lot of the realistic and more commercial decisions that might be required in the companies code of Australia.
Amendment negatived.
Original question resolved in the affirmative. '
Bill read a second time.
In Committee
Clauses I to 34-by leave-taken together,
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (4.50)-1 did not raise the matter of pre-incorporation contracts earlier in the debate. I regret that I did not. I ask the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) whether he and his staff can ascertain to which contracts section 81 applies. I understand that section 81 applies where a non-existent company purports to enter into a contract. According to section 81 (1) (a), a non-existent company will be taken as having purported to enter into a contract where: A person executes a contract in the name of a company, where no such company exists, or where a person purports to enter into a contract as agent or trustee for a proposed company.
The distinction between executing a contract for a non-existent company and acting as an agent or trustee for a non-existent company was established in a couple of cases-Newborne v. Sensolid and Black v. Smallwood. Those cases clearly show that a person who signs his name alongside a company name or seal without using the words such as 'as agent for' or'for and on behalf of' will not be considered as having acted as an agent of the company in executing a contract. Instead the person will be taken to have acted as a company with the person's signature being considered as a mere authentification of the company's signature. Section 81 (1) (a) placitum (i) is clearly intended to cover this type of. case, whilst placitum (ii) catches the agency or trustee cases. Briefly, the problem is that section 81 (I) (a) placitum (ii), as presently worded, does not seem to catch all of the agency or trustee cases.

It is quite common for promoters to jump the gun and begin to make a company a party to contracts before incorporation because they wrongly believe that the company is, in fact, incorporated. The Minister knows that that is not uncommon. If, in making the contract, they purport to act as the company and not as agents, or trustees to it, section 81 (1) (a) placitum (i) would catch the contract. If, however, they purported to act as an agent or trustee for the company which they then believed to exist, placitum (ii) would not catch the contract because the promoters had clearly not, in either their own minds or in the mind of the other party, purported to act for a proposed company. Rather, they had purported to act for an existing company. Consequently, this common type of pre-incorporation contract would appear to be outside the scope of section 81. I am suggest-
ing that we ought to have a look at that. I suggest
that the problem could be overcome by amending placitum (ii) to read: 'a person purporting to enter into a contract as an agent or trustee for a company, where no such company exists'. I am suggesting to the Minister that he put that issue beyond doubt by putting in an addendum to placitum (ii). I inform the Minister that I will put the matter on the Notice Paper tomorrow so that he and his Department can examine it in some detail.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.55)-It is true, as the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) says, that a number of contracts are entered into in anticipation of incorporation. Many of those contracts are held either through a nominee company or through nominees in persons. Very infrequently are those sorts of contracts entered into in any bogus way. They are entered into purely in a genuine way to establish the objectives and the potential assets in a company. When a person moves to float a company, especially via a public issue, pre-incorporation contracts are established quite frequently. I will ask the Department for legal advice on what the honourable member for Hawker said. I suspect that the Bill would have taken these contracts into account because they are fairly common but I will make in" quiries and let him know.
Clauses agreed to.
Clauses 35 to 37-by leave-taken together.
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (4.56)-1 wish to raise two matters. For simplicity I will deal with section 129 before sections 125 and 127 for the Minister's benefit. Will the Minister ask his advisers-I asked him to do this before but regrettably it has not been done-to be kind enough to look at section 129 (10) (h) Oi)? It has not been amended

Companies and Securities Bill

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1693

so as to refer to sub-section (12) rather than subsection (9). It is quite clearly a drafting error. Regrettably, the Minister has frequently rejected my persistent pleas but at least he has acknowledged my constructive pleadings for either a change or amendments. I refer to what I consider to be an obvious error, that is, the alteration of class rights clauses in a company memoranda. I refer to sections 125 and 127 of the principal Act and clause 35 of the amending Bill. I have put questions on the Notice Paper but let me repeat them. Bearing in mind that under section 72 (1) of the Act class rights provision in a company memorandum can be altered in accordance with section 125 (2), section 126 (2) and section 127 (2), one notes that nothing in this section expressly says that the memorandum may be absurd although a variation procedure may be added. If the company can alter a class rights clause in a memorandum how can that be done? Can it be done by special or ordinary resolution? One ought to note that the proposed new section 125 (9) negates section 73(2) which indicates that a special resolution would be required except for section 73 (5). Section 73 (5) should be amendt;d to permit such alterations provided that sections 125, 126 and 127 are complied with. I think this is a drafting error. I ask the Minister to look at it.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.59)-The point raised by the honourable member is basically correct. I will make endeavours to have the clause redrafted.
Clauses agreed to.
Clauses 38 to 50-by leave-taken together.
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (5.0)-To save the time of the House, I have put questions relating to sections 129 and 130 on the Notice Paper and therefore I will not weary the House with them. The sections that worry me are section 315 of the Companies Act and section 12 of the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act. Again, I think there have been some drafting problems. Is it true that what in substance amounts to one company's taking over another-this is a matter to which the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown) referred-so as to become the sole shareholder in what we term a target company may be achieved,we have to think of this, without compliance with the company's acquisition of shares code? Is it true that it is still possible to achieve what is in substance a takeover by using the less vigorous arrangement under the companies code? We ought to have thought about this before. One critical deficiency lies in the fact that under the scheme of arrangement provisions up to 25 per

cent of the shares in the target may be cancelled against the will of the shareholders, whereas if tbe
takeover code is used no shares can be compui-
sorily acquired unless the shareholders holding at least 90 per cent of the shares bid for or accept the bid. Surely the words 'for the purpose of' in
proposed new section 315 (21) (a) of the companies code will be interpreted to mean 'for
the sole or substantial purpose of'? If it does not mean that perhaps we can get some explanation from the departmental officers. The Minister will
have to concede that it is rather odd that there is a
dichotomy between the Companies (Acquisition
of Shares) Act and the Companies Act.

Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (5.3)-The points raised by the honourable member relate to two Acts, one of which is under consideration and one of which is not. The point that relates to the Act which we are not considering is right. I will have to check the one that relates to the Act we are considering.

Mr Jacobi-There is a difference between the two and you can get over the problem by using one against the other.

Mr MOORE-I seem to remember that acase

took place in the early 1970s. I would like to re-

fresh my memory on it. I think the honourable

member's interpretation is wrong.

.

Clauses agreed to.

Remainder of Bill-by leave-taken as a whole.

Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (5.4)-1 wish to raise two matters. I exercised the courtesy of notifying the Minister's office yesterday. I do not know whether he has been notified. These matters have not been raised before. I think they are extremely
important. The Minister will recall the case cif Peruss in 1980 which appears on page 443 of the New South Wales Law Report. It relied on the operation of section 294 of the. New South Wales Companies Act. That compares with section 452 of the Commonwealth Act which is now before
the Parliament. The court held that the supply of goods on credit to a company did not amount to paying cash to the company, that the supply of goods on credit, therefore, could not fall within the exemption of section 294 and that the floflting charge over the assets of the company was inJact, invalid. I wish to incorporate in Hansard a copy of an amendment to section 25 of the New Zealand Companies Act which deals with voidable securities. Section 25 is replaced by a ne?, section 311. I will just explain this. section briefly to the Minister. The New Zealand new section 311 makes a charge, or a security over a property, in our situation, voidable against the liquidator.

1694 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Companies and Securities Bill

However, this does not apply to the value of properties sold or supplied or any other valuable consideration given in good faith. In effect, the New Zealand exemption is in wider terms than our section 452 which covers only moneys paid to the company.
The CHAIRMAN-Is the honourable member seeking leave to incorporate that document in Hansard?
MrJACOBI-Yes.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
25. Voidable securities-The principal Act is hereby amended by repealing section J II, and substituting the following section:
"J II. (I) Subject to subsections (2) and (J) of this section, every security or charge over any property or undertaking of a company that is being wound up shall, so far as any security on the property or undertaking is conferred thereby, be voidable as against the liquidator of the company ,if it was executed or given by the company within the period ofl2 months immediately preceding the commencement of the winding up of the company,
"(2) Subsection (I) of this sectiori shall not apply to a security or charge-
"(a) If it is proved that the company immediately after the creation of the security or charge was solvent; or
"(b) That was given in substitution for an existing security or charge executed or given before the commencement of the period specified in that subsection: "Provided that, unless the existing security or charge is one to which subsection (J) of this section related, the said subsection (I) shall affect any such substituted security or charge to the extent that the amount secured by the substituted security or charge exceeds the amount secured by the existing security or charge, and to the extent that the value of the property subject to the substituted security or. charge at the date of the substitution exceeds the value of the property subject to the existing security or charge at that date.
"(J) Subsection (I) of this section shall not affect any security or charge insofar as it relates to-
"(a) Money actually advanced or paid, or the actual price or value of property sold or, supplied, or any other valuable consideration given in good faith, by the grantee of the security or charge to the company at the time of, or at any time after, the execution thereof; or
"(b) The securing by the company of any unpaid purchase money owing by it to the graniee of the security or charge, whether for that property or not, if the instrument for securing the same is executed not later than JO days after the date of the sale of the property. For the purposes of this paragraph, the expression 'the date of sale' means, in respect of any estate or interest in land, the date of final settlement of the sale.
"(4) For the purposes of subsection (J) of this section, where any security or charge was given by the company within the period specified in subsection (I) of this section, all payments received by the grantee of the security or charge after it was given shall be deemed to have been appropriated so far as may be necessary towards repayment of money actually advanced or paid by the grantee to the company on or after the giving of the security or charge, or towards payment of the

actual price or value of property sold by the grantee to the company on or after the giving of the security or charge, or
towards payment of any other liability of the company to the grantee in respect of any other valuable consideration given in good faith on or after the giving of the security or charge.
Mr JACOBI-In effect the exemptions in section 452 are slightly wider than those to be found in section 294 in the New South Wales legislation since section 452 uses the term 'money paid' rather than 'cash paid', The Minister will note that the New Zealand section appears to cover the situation which applied in New South Wales, thus giving valid operation to the charge at least in that case. If we had incorporated the New Zealand provision it would have provided relief for people in New South Wales. Ths matter should commend itself to the Minister and it ought to be looked at by the Ministerial Council.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (5.07)-1 wish to reiterate what the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) has brought up in all of these amendments--
Mr Jacobi-I have another one.
Mr JOHN BROWN-The honourable member says that he has another matter to bring up. The Opposition supports the honourable member for Hawker entirely in the suggestions that he had made to the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore). His knowledge, not only of Australian companies law, .but also companies law all around the world-in the United Kindgom, the United States of America, Sweden, New Zealand, South Africa, South America and other great municipalities and principalities-is profound. I hope that the Department and the Minister take note of what the honourable member for Hawker has had to say in all of these things. The reforms that he has suggested are really reforms that would do a great deal to improve this rather inadequate companies law that we are presently debating. I reiterate that the Opposition supports fully the suggestions made by the honourable member for Hawker.
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (5.8)-1 do not want to weary the Committee. I ask the Minister to look at section 453 of the Companies Act which deals with the acquisition of property, the real and contract values of property and the purchase of sales transactions. I ask the Minister to look also at section 230-it is my hobby horse-which deals with the question of exempt proprietary companies. To shorten the matter, I ask the Minister to look at both provisions. If we look at section 230 (1) (iv) we ought to add a corresponding paragraph to section 453 (I) and (2) by incorporating sub-paragraph (iv) of section 230. We ought to add a new sub-section (I) (e) and

Companies-and Securities Bill

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1695

(2) (e) to section 453. If the Minister were to look at both of these sections he would understand the reason for this. It is something at which the Department could well look.
I have one further matter with which I would like to deal and then I will bless the Committee by resuming my seat. In the new section 555 (1) it seems that a director who is unaware of a company's financial position has a watertight defence to a prosecution. The Ministerial Council might have done this unintentionally, or it might have been unaware of the implications. The defence for this is found in proposed new section 555 (2). The equivalent provision in the old Act is to be found in section 374 (c). Under the existing provision a company director may be guilty if he is unaware of the company's financial' position. A director must have a reasonable basis for believing that a company can meet its debts. If he has no such reasonable belief at the time that a debt occurs then he may be guilty. If the Minister were to look at this section, with all due deference to him, I think he will see that the position seems to have changed. Any creditor protection measure which encourages directors to take little or no interest in a company's financial position I frankly believe has nothing to commend it. It is my view that that section badly needs to be strengthened.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (5.1O)-In these unusual debates that we have on the Companies Act it is very refreshing to be able to turn over the provisions of the Act. I will deal with the first point that the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) raised concerning Peruss Pty Ltd in the New South Wales law report. The matter is under some consideration and I will chase it through for the honourable member. In relation to the matter he has just raised concerning the role of directors under the new section 555, and also under section 230 (1), I can state that this matter was looked at. It caused a considerable amount of consternation in the original proposals. One of the difficulties there is that it is required of directors as of now to be satisfiedthat all reasonable care has been taken. The onus is placed on the director. If there were fraudulent activity the director would be absolved as it is not reasonable for one to go beyond the advice stage. Once we get to the next stepwhich is what I think the honourable member is suggesting-in my view a very substantial hurdle is placed in the road of anyone who wishes to become a public company director.
Mr Jacobi-The sooner we do that the better. They should not just plead unawareness.

The CHAIRMAN. Order! The honourable member has exhausted his options in respect of the question.
Remainder of Bill agreed to.
Bill reported without amendment; report adopted.
Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr Moore)-by leaveread a third time.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1981-82
Second Reading
(Budget Debate)
Debate resumed from 17 September, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Upon which Mr Willis had moved by way of amendment:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not opposing the Bill, the House rejects the budget strategy because:
(I) it deliberately reduces the rate of economic growth;
(2) it increases unemployment; (3) it adds substantially to the rate of inflation;
(4) it relies on a massive private capital inflow;
(5) it fails to tackle the real causes of rising interest rates, and
(6) it increases the burden of taxation to the highest level in our history,
and, in addition, deplores the Government's callous disregard of the millions of Australians living in poverty and its continued attempt to reduce the living standards of the great majority of Australians'.
Mr CHARLES (Isaacs) (5.14)-Before I was interrupted when I was making my speech on the Budget nearly a week ago I was saying that this Government really did not care about people and the hardship that will be forced upon the vast majority of Australians through the Budget. That is a disgrace. This Budget serves only the cynical political purposes of this Government. The aged, the youth and the families of our country have all been hit in the usual uncaring way for which the Federal Government is well known. The Federal Government is in disarray. It is totally incompetent and corrupt; and at last the people are waking up to it. Let us look at the Liberal parties in New South Wales and Victoria where they lurch from scandal to scandal week iifter week. The people of New South Wales were the first to pull the rug from under the Liberal Party last Saturday when the Wran Government swept back with a record majority. We find the Liberals in total disarray and in a complete shambles.

1696 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Make no mistake, the same will happen in Victoria shortly and in South Australia. Then, probably more importantly for Australia's sake, the next Federal election in 1983 will see this incompetent and corrupt Federal Government swept from office by people who care not only about themselves and their families but also about others and Australia.
No longer will we have to suffer not only the bungling administration Of this Government, the totally uncaring attitude towards people who need assistance and the attempted destruction of our young people's ambitions and endeavours to create a life for themselves but also the blatant divisive policies aimed directly at the family. The family unit, the backbone of our society, is slowly being pushed into a corner where the mere struggle for survival is the most important matter. This will all be behind us after the 1983 Federal election.
Let us look at the Budget more closely. What have the aged gained from this Budget? Virtually nothing! In fact the vast majority of elderly people or pensioners will be worse off. The $3 a week rent allowance is the only positive move for pensioners. However, how many will it benefit, and is it enough? The answer to the first question is that it will benefit very few. The answer to the second question is no. A pittance of $3 a week extra will not assist many people at all and, with rents rocketing because of the Government's disastrous housing policy, the figure pales into obscurity. Why will the vast majority be worse off? I refer not only to pensioners but to all Australians. One of the main reasons is the sales tax introduced in this Budget. It might be an opportune moment to look at the sales tax measures introduced with this Budget. I say at this point that the Australian Labor Party stands opposed to any extension of broadly based consumer taxes. That is quite clear. Of course the main reason is that it taxes people at exactly the same level right down the line.
Mr John Brown-The Democrats have backed off.
Mr CHARLES-The poor and middle income earners alike are slugged as much as wealthy persons. As the honourable member for Parramatta said, the Democrats have backed off. Where do they stand in regard to this very important issue? The extension of sales taxes in this Budget is an attempt to hoodwink the people of Australia. In other words, before they know it the new taxes will be in place and they will think that this is just another price rise. That is the thinking of this Government. Dishonesty is its keynote. I will refer to some of these new taxes. Firstly, I refer to

the one the Government has passed under the headline 'anomalies'. I think it is important to read a few of these because most people do not know how these sales taxes will affect them. Let us look at some of these ones I have mentioned. For instance, there is instant-type photographic
films and photographs manufactured by chemists selling only by retail. The first item was taxed at 15 per cent and now it is taxed at 30 per cent. The latter item was exempt but that is now taxed at 30 per cent. Non-returnable containers, for example, bottles and cartons used in soft drinks-everyone buys soft drinks from time to time-were exempt but now they are taxed at 17+ per cent. Manufactured pet foods and dog soaps for household pets-again hitting people such as pensioners with fixed incomes who have pets to keep them company-were exempt but now are taxed at 17+ per cent.
Mr Robert Brown-Shameful!
Mr CHARLES-It is disgraceful. Let us look
at the motor vehicle industry. Motor vehicle safety belts, oil and greases for road vehicles, car windscreens and windows-all connected with motor vehicles and repairs of motor vehicles-all were exempt but now are taxed at 17+ per cent. Chocolate coated goods and confectionary, once exempt, are now taxed at 17+ per cent. With the summer approaching one cannot even go out into the garden without being taxed now because
household insecticides and repellants that were exempt are now taxed at 17+ per cent. There are two more items to mention: Goods of a kind used exclusively or principally in sport or games, presently taxed as household goods at 2+ per cent, will be taxed at 17+ per cent. Now sporting clubs, if they buy goods that they principally use in sport or games, will be taxed at 17+ per cent. Certain vessels and boats used in connection with pleasure, sport or recreation-this is probably very apt for my electorate which borders Port Phillip Bay-were exempt but now are taxed at 17+ per cent. As we can see, there are massive rises in sales tax in many areas.
Let us look at some of the 2+ per cent sales tax items that have been introduced. There would have to be at least one thousand items in this category~hardly anything has escaped the Government's sales tax bite. I shall mention just a few. Books, pamphlets, leaflets, magazines, printed music, newspapers-just about anything you wish to read-all have incurred a tax of 2+
per cent. Maps, including tourist maps and navigators' charts, which of course affects my electorate, are. taxed at 2+ per cent. Most wrapping
materials and paper bags-just about everything-including rubber. bands, are to be

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1697

taxed at 2t per cent. Hand tools also are listed. There are some exceptions, but most tools, including ones used for gardening, are covered. That is very important. Again, fixed income people such as pensioners who do a lot of gardening and keep some very lovely gardens will find that all their gardening tools are now taxed. Building materials also are mentioned. You name it and it more than likely has been covered by this tax. I shall name just a few: Bricks, plaster, clay, marble, cement, stone, wallpaper, roofing materials, bitumen, glass, timber, including weather boards, plyboards, window fittings, cooking stoveswould honourable members believe that? Also listed are electrical fittings and accessories, electrical materials, sanitary ware, including baths and toilet seats-would honourable members believe that?
Mr Robert Brown-A great rip-off!
Mr CHARLES-it is Ii great rip-off. The list also includes septic tanks, chemical sanitary units, bath heaters, sink heaters and other water heating and hot water storage equipment. let us refer to clothing. Just about every conceivable piece of clothing has been taxed. These include clothing, footwear, drapery, piece goods, soft furnishings and yarn-clothes for human wear made of any material whatsoever, including cloth, glass fibre, leather, rubber or plastic material. The list is too long to mention here; however it includes just about everything from babies' napkins, ties, hair nets, bedsheets, pillow cases, most yarns and materials right down to nails and tacks used for shoe repairs.
The Government says it is not a broadly based tax and that it is really nothing milch at all. I do not know how it can say that when one considers that these measures will net the Government nearly $900m in a year. The massive extension of sales taxes is a direct attack on living standards. Once again those on fixed incomes-mainly pensioners and families who are least able to cope with these rises in taxes-will be the hardest hit. I honestly do not know how some families survive under the weight of the anti-family policies the Government is pursuing. Those policies include rising interest rates. We have the highest interest rates in Australia's history at present, and housing policies ha've caused the net Federal payment to the States to drop drastically. In fact, in my own State of Victoria, net Federal payments for public housing have fallen, using 1981-82 prices, from $140.1m in 1974-75 to $3.3m in 1981-82. That is unbelieveable. The figure dropped from $140m to $3m No wonder we have a housing crisis and no wonder over a quarter of a million people live in caravans throughout Australia. Several thousand

people in my own electorate of Isaacs live in caravans.
I now refer to family allowances. Over 70 per cent of families have not had a rise in family allowances since they were introduced in 1976. We have soaring health costs, Most people are considerably worse off under the latest ridiculous or, should I say, scandalous scheme put forward by the Federal Government. This will continue until Australia has a universal health scheme, as it will under a Federal Labor government.
Let us look quickly at the income tax situation. We may find ourselves better off, but no, we do not. If we look at page 230 of Budget Paper No.1, we find that gross pay-as-you-earn receipts are estimated to increase by 21.9 per cent. Other individual's income tax is estimated to rise by 5.3 per cent, and company tax collections are estimated to increase by 10.1 per cent. The Government also estimates that average weekly earnings will rise by 13.5 per cent. If someone is lucky enough to have his or her wage rise like that-many thousands will not-he or she will still be worse off because the average wage earner's pay-as-you-earn tax will rise by just on 22 per cent. In other words, people will be worse off because this Government has decided that the vast majority of Australians who fall into the middle and lower income groups will shoulder the burden of this Government's draculan monetary policies.
As I -have said already, the family is being hit from all angles by this Government. The family looking for some assistance from the family allowance scheme has been badly disappointed. What has this Government done to erode the family income? Let us take a look. When the family allowance commenced as a follow-on from child endowment in May 1976, the monthly payment for one child was $15.20. It is the same now. For two children it was $36.90, as it is now. For three children it was $62.90. It was the same until this Budget, which sees that figure go to $75.90. For four children it was $88.90. Now, with this Budget, it has risen to $114.90. Let us compare those figures from May 1976 until now, indexing the family allowance as we go. Under this Federal Government, the last five years have seen the following changes for families, that is, considering family allowances only: A family with one child is $10.60 a month worse off; a family with two children is $25.75 a month worse off; a family with three children is $30.75 a month worse off; a family with four children is $35.75 a month worse off; and a family with five children is $41.80 a month worse off. A bigger family with six children is

1698 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

$47.85 a month worse off. It is absolutely scandal-

ous. As we can see, there has been no encourage-

ment to people who have large families. Added to

this is the effect of interest rates. I would estimate

that the average family is paying around $70 to

$80 a month more than it was paying three years

ago in loan repayments. In fact, that figure varies

from $50 to $150, depending on the size of the

mortgage. When we put family allowances,

interest rates and soaring health costs together,

the average family is battling to make ends meet.

The rich are becoming richer at the expense of the

vast majority of Australians today.

.

I turn quickly to sport and recreation, another area of the Budget. Sport, recreation and leisure are extremely important. The Federal Government has made great play of the $20m to be made available under the heading of youth, sport and
recreation. Let us break down that figure. There is $3.3m for the Commonwealth Games in Brisbane next year, $4.6m for the Australian Institute of Sport in Canberra and $6.6m for the building or upgrading of international sporting facilities. We have already got to $14.5m. There is $2.9m for the
sports development program, mainly for international competition. Then there is a whole host of small grants, including $110,000 for life saving clubs. There is no money-I repeat, no moneyfor community sport or recreation. Life saving clubs-they are just that-will receive the same amount as they received last year, or a drop in real terms of lOt per cent, using the Government's own figures. Further, the Federal Government will receive around $70m this year from sales tax on sporting goods and equipment. Yet only a pittance is put back into the same area. While I appreciate the provision of $6m for international sporting facilities in this country, I hope that money will be extended to sports that did not boycott the Moscow Olympic Games last year as the money this year has gone in the main to sports that coincidentally did boycott last year's Olym-
pic Games. How childish can this Government get? The funding for sport, recreation and leisure in general is pathetic. And that includes tourism. The Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) quite often attempts to sell the idea that the Government is doing a great job in the tourism field. Yet this year's allocation to the Australian Tourist Commission is only 3.3 per cent above last year's-a drop in real terms of nearly 7t per cent.

I turn back to the area of recreation and leisure. This area is important for a number of reasons. In the hustle and bustle of today's society, more than ever we need good leisure opportunities. I do not mean just going to watch the football, although I

like doing that myself. I am talking about active involvement in leisure activities. This will become increasingly important as we approach the twenty-first century and we have fewer hours of work which we will, and more time for recreation and leisure. The health bill in Australia amounts to several thousand million dollars a year. We should be trying to prevent illness through the extension of sport and recreation in our community rather than spending billions of dollars a year in order to patch up people after they have become chronically ill. Of course, we will always have a reasonable size health bill to cover people who have disease of one form or another and who do need medical treatment and care. Sport, recreation and leisure are an industry-I use that word deliberately-that will develop. The employment opportunities in those fields are immense. There should be more involvement, funding and leadership from the Commonwealth Government. At present there is absolutely none.
As I mentioned earlier, this Budget is purely a cynical political. document. The Federal Government is deliberately tightening the screws on the vast majority of Australians for the benefit of a few and to enable it to bring down what one would call a lollies and chocolates Budget prior to the next general election. It will not work. The youth of our country, together with our pensioners and our families, will react in a gigantic fashion against this Government and its reactionary policies. The gigantic shift in the taxation burden from the very wealthy to the middle and lower income earners is a perversion of everything that is good and decent in our society and at the 1983 Federal election the Federal Government will pay heavily for its non-caring, anti-people and anti-family policies. There can be no doubt that this anti-people government must fall, for the sake of this country. I implore the Australian Democrats and people in other places to look at this Budget very closely, especially the sales tax provisions of it, and to turn them back to make sure that the people who can least afford to live a decent and respectable life are able to do so. This Government is corrupt and incompetent and, make no mistake about it, will fall at the next Federal election and we will have a Federal Labor government.
Mr COLEMAN (Wentworth) (5.32)-In supporting this motion I will concentrate ori the proposed education outlays-something which the honourable member for Isaacs (Mr Charles) did not mention-because I do believe that they have not had sufficient attention in this debate. I point out that these outlays total $3,255m-a rise of over 11 per cent. However, before doing so, I

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1699

want to comment briefly on two matters in the Budget Speech of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) that have been widely canvassed. I join my colleagues-I am glad that the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown) is now in the chamber-in expressing concern about the sudden termination of the Community Youth Support Scheme in favour of other excellent training schemes for unemployed youth. Outlays are to go up by more than $24m to $65m to assist young unemployed people to obtain work experience and practical job skills. These moneys are welcome, but in my opinion they do not justify the termination of CYSS. I will not go into details because most of the relevant details have already been put to the House and to the Minister, but I simply say that from my experience of the CYSS centres in my electorate-in Darlinghurst and in the Bondi-Waverley area-I have formed a good opinion of their work. Along with other members, I hope that the Minister rapidly reaches a decision on the alternative schemes to be introduced to fill the vacuum left by the termination of CYSS. The new job-oriented training and pre-training schemes that the Minister has announced are excellent but they leave the problem of unemployed boys and girls who are not yet motivated to enrol in training schemes. This is the area in which CYSS has achieved its best success and it is an area requiring continuing attention.
The second matter I want to touch on briefly before turning to education is the Industries Assistance Commission reference. I refer to the Treasurer's remarks on page 20 of his speech where he stated:
The Government has decided to ask the Industries Assistance Commission to report on certain budgetary forms of assistance currently provided to industry and on possible changes or redirections which would be more cost-effective.
Like most members. I favour a gradual winding down of levels of protection so far as this is com~ patible with the public interest. I rely also on the Crawford report of the Study Group on Structural Adjustment which stressed that a package of incentives be in place before further desirable moves in the direction of freer trade be taken, such as the upgrading of export incentives or a review of depreciation schedules for plant and equipment. The Crawford report envisaged also unemployment easing to 5 per cent or below-a level which has not yet been achieved. While welcoming any moves which make Australia's manufacturing industry more interriationally competitive and which relieve the subsidy burden carried by consumers, I believe there are conditions such as those mentioned which should

be met before we can confidently move in the desired direction.
I turn now to education. I make two basic points. The first is to support the balance of appropriations made-the $3.25 billion outlay-and to welcome the 11.1 per cent increase in education financing throughout Australia. The second point is to stress that there are major problems in the field of education which will simply not be solved by funding or by increasing funding. The crisis in
education-I do not believe that anyone can deny that there is a crisis in education-is not fundamentally a matter of money but of educational
philosophy and values. I turn first to funding and, in particular, to the balance of financial assistance given to both government and to non-government schools. I note that the recent minority report of the Australian Schools Commission for 1982 critised the guide-lines provided to the Schools Commission for what it saw as indicating a further reduction in the Commonwealth commitment to government schools.
The question of what used to be called state aid is plainly a touchy area. It is unhappily a fact that
in recent times we have seen some renewal of the bitter public debates of 10 or more years ago. The basic fact remains that, in terms of the investment of taxpayers' money, government schools receive a vastly greater share. It simply does not make sense to refer to the Commonwealth contribution in isolation from State governments' funding because the State schools' principal source of taxpayers' funds is the State governments. The Commonwealth's role is, as it says, to top that up. The principal source of funds for non-government schools is the Commonwealth. The result of both sources of funding is that in 1979-80 each student in a government school had about $1,790 of taxpayers' funds spent on his or her education whereas each student in a non-government school had about $770 of taxpayers' funds spent on his or her education. That is an enormous difference. It represents an enormous financial priority given to government schools. It is foolish and misleading to isolate the two channels of taxpayers' funds-the State government and Commonwealth Government. The important thing is the amount of taxpayers' funds going to both sets of schools. The plain fact is that the government schools receive overwhelmingly the bulk of taxpayers' or governmentmoney.
If one wanted to play around with the figures one could easily classify a huge percentage of State government moneys, that is, the income tax reimbursements passed back to the States by the Commonwealth as Commonwealth money, and then go on to say that the Commonwealth spends

1700 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

far more money on government schools than State governments do from their independent sources of revenue. That would be, in some sense, true but it would also be misleading since the income tax reimbursements are funds which the State governments are entitled to and which they spend as they see fit. I make the point only to stress the folly of
not approaching this subject of funding in terms of taxpayers' money in general-not in terms of Commonwealth or State moneys-and the folly of too rigidly dividing the so-called State share as against the so-called Commonwealth share. We see this misleading approach, in my view, in the minority statement of the Schools Commission which I mentioned. The report refers to a 13.3 per cent reduction in government school funding by the Commonwealth in the five years preceding 1979. It seems plain that that figure of 13.3 per cent is taken from table 10.4 on page 261 of the School Commission's report for the triennium 1982-84. Of course, the minority statement does not mention that in the same period funding from State governments to government schools has gone up by 14.3 per cent. Clearly, when discussing the taxpayers' contribution to education one has to take into account both figures. As well as the 13.3 per cent reduction in Commonwealth funding there has been a 14.3 per cent increase inState governments' funding.
If one wanted to look at it from another point of view one could pick out another figure in relation to non-government schools. In the same
period referred to there has been, as far as capital funding is concerned, a drop in Commonwealth funding of 32.1 per cent. If one can pick out a figure of 13.3 per cent and say that that represents a fall of Commonwealth spending on State schools one can refer also to the 32.1 per cent fall in Commonwealth spending, as far as capital spending is concerned, on non-government schools. I think it is of no help in the public discussion of these matters to pick out these figures in isolation. One has to take the whole picture.
I refer also to school resources. It is a simple fact that, as a whole, it is the non-government schools which are the comparatively disadvantaged schools. Using the Karmel target set in 1973 all State schools in the country, in every State, have passed those targets; that is, for equipment and the staff recommended, but 80 per cent of non-government schools continue with resources
some 30 per cent below the average resources of government schools. Clearly these nongovernment schools need assistance if there is to be authentic freedom of choice for parents in the selection of schools for their children. It is a fairly hollow freedom to be free to select a school but to

know that the school one conscientiously wants one's child to attend is unable to deliver an education that is as good as the nearby government school which, for conscientious reasons, one does not want to send one's child to. It would be a great pity if the old so-called State aid arguments which we thought had been buried were to revive. It is necessary to stress these facts about funding and about school resources as well as the basic principle of freedom of choice to put an end to those debates. I regret that two respected members of the Schools Commission saw fit to encourage the divisiveness which one hoped belonged to past decades.
There are a number of other programs to be funded in this Budget which deserve commendation-the migrant education program to teach English as a second language, the Aboriginal Secondary Grants Scheme, the special education program for handicapped children, the School to Work Transition Program and the various programs listed as special projects, such as the Education of Girls project aimed at improving educational opportunities for girls, and the Gifted and Talented Childrens project to develop education policies relating to the particular needs of
gifted and talented children.
Having noted and welcomed these initiatives in the Budget. I return to the point that there are problems in education which will not be solved by funding, however judiciously or generously done. In the past 10 years education funding has gone up by some 500 per cent, taking into account taxpayers' money from all sources-State and Commonwealth. Who would be so foolish as to say that the education system as a whole is 500 per cent better than it was 10 years ago? It is true that class sizes have never been smaller and teacherpupil ratios have never been better. It is true that libraries have never been better stocked, that teachers in primary schools have never had better formal qualifications and that secondary teachers have never had greater independence. It is true that buildings have never been as adequately or as well equipped and that teachers have never enjoyed so much assistance from ancillary or support staff. All this has happened in recent years. At the same time it is fair to say that there has never been less public confidence in the school system and unhappily in the government, school system from which increasingly parents are taking their children to transfer them to non-government schools. No one can take any satisfaction from this development, but the fact is there and the crisis of confidence in education is there.
It may well be that the solutions are beyond the reach of the Schools Commission or any of the

AppropriaOon Bill (No.1)

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1701

State education departments. They involve wider questions such as the crisis in family life. I say that because it seems to me that one of the problems is that increasingly schools are being asked to abandon their educational role, as traditionally understood, in favour of a custodial role. Teachers are expected to do for children what parents once did and schools are expected to carry out a set of duties ranging from driver education to sex education-anything at all except traditional subjects. Nevertheless, a basic fact is the abandoning of the teaching of subjects or teaching the child to reason in favour of unstructured, waffiy, so-called personal development. Recently Professor Lauchlan Chipman of Wollongong University delivered a paper which was inadequately reported in the Press to the extent that the media mainly reported his critical comments on the new wave of leftist and anti-educational school teachers. His paper was, however, far more far-reaching than that. I would like to quote a paragraph from it because I think it is relevant to the theme 1 am trying to present. It deals with the profound devaluation of education, despite increased funding, that is at the heart of the crisis in the schools. Professor Chipman, referring to this devaluation, said:
. . . it is shown in the fact that 'fact', 'discipline', 'academic', 'structure', 'form', and even 'learn' are negative words, while 'approach', 'discover', 'feel', 'experience', 'impression', and 'change' are words of approbation. The very idea that there are any facts worth knowing (other than facts about the rape of our resources by multinationals and greedy businessmen, and the dependence of our corrupt economy upon the exploitation of working class women, Aborigines, and migrants)-
That, I interpolate, is obviously ironical-
is regarded with scorn. Indeed the muddled denials that there are any facts or that there is any knowledge, and the contemptuous denial that anybody really knows what truth, is or how to discover it, are not uncommon. Infantile philosophical nihilism . . . spreads like wildfire in the bureaucratically frustrated and classically alienated giant state teaching services. Whatever the historical intellectual basis for the personal development orientation in educational objectives, its common contemporary perceived rationale within the teaching services is intellectual nihilism; the worst possible philosophical framework within which structured learning can take place.
The result is that the current generation of our school children are the innocent victims of this nihilism and cynicism which have changed the role and function of public education; cynicism and nihilism about obligation and values in general; cynicism and nihilism about the relevance or even the possibility of factual knowledge; cynicism and nihilism about the role of education in preparing people for employment; cynicism and nihilism about the capacity of the disadvantaged to benefit from an academically directed education; and cynicism and nihilism about the objectivity of

standards of achievement and their measurement. All these are reflected in the schools in a way that the founders of our public education system would have found incomprehensible.
The solution to this cynicism and this nihilism is, as 1 see it, not something that can be summarised in a short speech, even if I knew the solution. Nevertheless, while welcoming the increased taxpayers' investment in schools and welcoming the Commonwealth's balance of education appropriations in the Budget, it seems plain to me that real progress will be made only by some shift in public emphasis away from the financial aspects of education towards the philosophic aspects. The money is obviously essential but in education, as in every department of life, it is values that count in the end.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (5.50)-ln this debate on the sixth annual Budget of the Fraser Government, 1 want to consider the impact that the Budget has on small business in Australia. Small business has been ignored in this Budget, and the Government has been virtually silent on the small business sector since the last election. This is despite the vital importance of the small business sector to the Australian economy, and to the task of increasing employment opportunities for our growing work-force. The vast majority of enterprises in Australia, indeed over 95 per cent of them, are small businesses. Collectively, they employ about 40 per cent of the private sector work-force. The total number of people employed by small business is thus almost two million. Clearly, any full employment strategy requires that such an important sector of the economy be given appropriate encouragement and an economic climate in which it can prosper.
This Budget, and the overall strategy of the Fraser Government for the past six years, completely fails to provide this encouragement or this economic climate. Not surprisingly, ever increasing numbers of small business people are joining the swelling ranks of those totally disillusioned with the philosophy behind this Budget; indeed, with the Fraser philosophy generally. Many businesses in Australia have now faced the longest period of sustained recession since the Great Depression. The lacklustre sales performances which have resulted from the blunt instruments of fiscal and monetary restraint have been experienced at the same time as a severe increase in costs in the form of higher federal taxes, higher state charges and dramatically increased interest rates.
This two way pressure on business-slow sales and increased costs-has affected virtually all

1702 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

small business. Pressures such as these have contributed greatly to the dramatic increase in the frequency of bankruptcies in Australia. In the decade to 1976, there were about 2,000 bankruptcies per year in Australia. Over the past five years, this has increased to an annual rate which has been sustained in excess of 5,000-an increase of about 250 per cent over that period. The responsibility' for this massive and tragic increase rests squarely on the shoulders of the Fraser Government and the six years of its miserable failures in economic policy making.
Of course, bankruptcy is just the extreme tip of the iceberg that the Government's budgetary policies bring to small business in Australia. The other effects include lower incomes for those small business people who manage to keep going, lower employment offered by small business and reduced investment. After so many years of this deliberate government action, small business had a right to expect that some improvement would come in the 1980s. But there can be no fruit from unwatered tree. The Government has no policy for the control of inflation under conditions of economic growth, and so it has again put the brakes on the economy, after just one year of very modest 3 per cent growth. It is an absolute tragedy for our country that we are at the moment experiencing a retreat from a modest 3 per cent growth rate. The absence of an anti-inflation policy that works under circumstances of economic growth is the fundamental failure of this Government. It has been able to arrest inflation only by retarding economic growth itself. This is inevitable under the so-called 'fight inflation first' strategy; what it really means is that the Government must fight inflation forever by retarding recovery. This is doubly tragic because even when the economy is recessed inflation is maintained in the 9 per cent to 11 per cent range by the cost pressures of taxes, charges and interest rates.
The 'fight inflation first' strategy has become a sick joke made at the expense of the Australian community. Particularly affected is the small business sector, with its reliance on loan finance, its relative inability to shift from one market or product to another, and its lack of power compared to rival big businesses. In the Budget, the Government has again reduced the allocation to small business programs. There are more public servants administering bankruptcies than assisting small business. Compared with the efforts of other countries, this Government provides small business with only token support. Similarly, the small business sector is left to the mercy of big business which supplies it, or provides its premises. Laws against predatory practices, price discrimination

and other unfair trade practices have been watered down, and funds for their administration by the Trade Practices Commission have been cut.
Despite grand promises from the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lyhch), small business in Australia remains particularly underserviced by specialist small business finance agencies. The Commonwealth development Bank of Australia has lent very little extra to small business over recent months. It has received no increase in its capital base to enable such an increase to occur. At the same time, the Government has used the excuse of the impending report of the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System to avoid making a decision on a new, specialist lending agency for small business. This delay is inexcusable, particularly given the failure to provide additional funds through the Commonwealth Development Bank as an interim measure.
Another source of small business finance was abolished altogether in the razor gang report. Fourteen small business ventures were left high and dry when the Regional Development Program was abolished. There was no waiting for the Campbell report in that case. The Government insists on waiting for an inquiry when essential new services are called for, buy hypocritically awaits no such inquiry when cuts are to be made. These comments relate only to specific government programs. Just as significant are the overall effects of the Government's monetary policies. There is great concern that the Government has gone too far. The latest issue of the ANZ Bank Business Indicators-No. 147-notes:
This year, the risk appears to be that M3 growth could be below 10 per cent and this underlines the danger inherent in the practice of a tight monetary policy: while it may prevent wage leaps from being accommodated, it may also prevent reasonable, growth orientated loan proposals from being met.
There can be no more reasonable and conservative message than that. The fact is that interest rates are at their highest in history, and the availability of loan fi nance for small business is very restrained. This is the tragedy of the Government's strategy. No one should be fooled by the Government's rhetoric about making room for the private sector. Everyone is being squeezed, including the private sector. The only reason is that the Government itself is bankrupt of ideas and bankrupt of ideals insofar as controlling inflation and managing the economy are concerned. The fact that it has reduced its own borrowing requirement is of no account, because it has done so by increasing the tax take. Either way the money is withdrawn from the private sector. A larger deficit

Defence Acts Amendment Bill

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1703

probably would have been better. At least interest is paid on Government borrowings, but the new sales taxes provide no benefit for anyone. These taxes must also be seen in terms of another major failing of this Government. The taxes are collected by businesses. That imposes a further cost on business, particularly on small volume business. In the current economic climate, many businesses will have to absorb some of the tax costs themselves.
There are other pressures of this kind. Income taxes continue to rise. Unincorporated small businesses now face the highest tax schedules in history in real terms and have to pay provisional tax as well at these rates. For those growing small businesses utilising private companies which seek heavy reinvestment, there is no relief from divided withholding tax, despite the promise of relief in the last election campaign. All of these taxes are a major cost burden on small business. They are borne, not as an alternative to high interest rates as the Government rhetoric claims, but in addition to high interest rates. I seek leave to continue my remarks later today.
Leave granted; debate adjourned.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
DEFENCE ACTS AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 17 September, on motion by Mr Killen:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (8.Q)-The Defence Acts Amendment Bill is an omnibus Bill which covers a considerable range of subjects which are mostly unrelated. For instance, it covers changes to the workers compensation provisions for Defence Force reservists and the incorporation in the Defence Act of the Defence (Visiting Forces) Act as it concerns command powers, joint force operations and a number of related matters. It provides enabling legislation for the control of defence lands which are utilised for recreation purposes. It gives power to make regulations for the forfeiture of the salaries and allowances of members of the Defence Force who have been discharged for being absent without leave. It also covers the handing over of deserters from a designated foreign country, the provision of regulations to apply State taxes or Territory taxes to Defence Force establishments, such as canteens, and the provision of protection for witnesses who give evidence before boards of inquiry in relation to the use of that evidence to convict the person giving

the evidence. It is a very diverse Bill. It has significant consequences, some of which will streamline proceedings, some of which will advantage the person concerned and some of which present some concern to the Opposition.
Firstly, I will comment on the provisions relating to compensation for members of the Defence Force Reserve. Most members of this House will be aware that there was considerable debate in this chamber last year relating to the situation of members of the Defence Force Reserve who were injured or incapacitated during periods when they served with the Reserve. Under the existing provisions, such a person is paid at a rate related to his civilian salary for 26 weeks, after which he falls back on the provisions of the Compensation (Australian Government Employees) Act. This created severe hardship for some members of the reserve, especially young people who have very high commitments and who have reasonable
levels of salaries in the community with related home purchase commitments and other types of long term commitments.
A person in the eastern suburbs of Melbourne reached a situation in Which the members of his unit and other persons regularly took up collections in order to enable him to survive. I think this is a poor reward for a person who volunteers to serve in the Australian Defence Force. A provision was arrived at in Victoria through an insurance company whereby members of the Reserve were paying an amount for insurance against injury in the Reserve because of the total inadequacy of the cover provided by the Government. To some extent this provision relieves that situation. It is certainly less than most members of the Defence Force would expect, but it is significantly better than that which previously applied. It does equate substantially to the provisions which are in force in respect of members of the regular forces.
As a result of this change the Minister for Defence will be able to make a declaration that a person who is disabled or injured will be paid at a rate not less than 76.5 per cent of his civilian salary. I have one complaint to make about that and I will raise it in a moment. That declaration will involve a person who is not in receipt of a salary-is unemployed, is in receipt of some form of social security benefit or is a student-receiving 76.5 per cent of his military salary at the rank which he occupies in the Reserve. The complaint I have against this legislation concerns the equation or the provision of compensation to a reservist who is less than adult age, who is a receipt of a civilian salary which is below the adult rate and who becomes permanently disabled and thus

1704 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Defence Acts Amendment Bill

unable to work for the remainder of his life. I repeat for the Minister that the equation for a person who is the subject of a declaration under the new compensation provisions and who is in receipt of remuneration in civilian life which is age based-for instance, an 18-year-old who in normal circumstances would be receiving a full salary in the Services but who in his civilian occupation could well be employed at a junior rate which may exceed the workers compensation rate-is extraordinarily low. As far as the Commonwealth is concerned, this is the least beneficial workers compensation Act in Australia. I think it is a disgrace to this Parliament and the Government which administers it.
But that is not in question here. What is in question is that a person in this age group will not have the normal increments which his civilian employment would allow as he reached adulthood. He will in fact receive 76.5 per cent of his salary as an 18-year-old for the rest of his life, as adjusted by the formula involved in the Bill. He will never have recognition as an adult under this Bill, as I understand the changes which are being made. I recommend to the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) that he gives consideration to the situation of a person who may be seriously and permanently injured. He could be involved in an explosion which removed his legs or otherwise rendered him incapable of future work. Under this Bill that person's compensation rate-obviously there would be other physical compensationswould be 76.5 per cent of an 18-year-old's pay for life. I think it is not unreasonable for him to be entitled to greater expectations. The Government should change this provision in such a way as is necessary to enable that person, to have his workers compensation rate in respect of that injury paid at what would have been his substantive rate as an adult when he would have moved to that rate.
Mr Killen-I hope my honourable friend will forgive me for interrupting but we could take the case of a young doctor who on graduation held the expectation that he would become a specialist. I do not dismiss what my friend has said. I will most certainly put it to study.
Mr SCHOLES-I am suggesting that he is at least entitled to be considered as an adult in respect of compensation. He would be as a serviceman. I ask that that be examined. I am not seeking to move an amendment. I understand from the explanations I have been given of the Bill that that is the case. Some people will be disappointed with this provision but it is certainly better than the one that existed before and is more beneficial than the Commonwealth compensation

Act which previously applied after 26 weeks and which, as I described before, is a disgrace to both this Parliament and the Government.
There are a number of other provisions in this Bill. For the time being, I will move over the visiting forces provision. The Opposition does not oppose or seek to alter the provisions relating to recreational lands. There are some provisions which do not conform with the provisions which have been set down by the Law Reform Commission for the making of law. They involve the seizure of vehicles or other equipment and the holding without court order or warrant for 60 days. That provision is contained in the national parks legislation. It is difficult to know why it has to be in this particular Act, but we are not seeking to alter it at this stage. Forfeiture of salary in respect of a person who is absent without leave seems to be a normal provision. I am assured that appeal mechanisms are available to the serviceman concerned if his forfeiture is seen to be less than satisfactory in respect of his own situation.
There are provisions in the Bill for the payment of taxes in respect of Defence Force canteens. I am not sure whether this applies to such operations as sergeants, officers or other messes in regard to liquor taxes or whether it applies to such State taxes as may be applied on transfers of foodstuffs. It is a provision which will not make members of the defence forces happy and it removes one of the small advantages for those who have lived in and been dependent on camp or base facilities. It will create some agitation in that area. I am not sure that the amount of taxes concerned are worth the complaints that will come out of the Services and the let down feeling. It is the type of legislation which we have come to expect whereby the maximum .levying or access to tax is being made available. These areas which previously enjoyed an exemption are now subject to taxation.
There are a number of provisions under section 8 of the Bill which are of concern to the Opposition. I will first deal with the sections of the Bill which relate to the arrest and the handing over of persons who are deserters, or persons for whom a request has been made for them to be arrested and handed over as deserters from other forces. The Bill protects the rights of a person who is an Australian citizen in another force. There is a provision in the Bill which also protects persons who are reservists or are not actually called into service by a foreign country. A situation which concerns me in the Bill relates to those countries with which at some time we may have agreements and which have compulsory national service and do

Defence Acts Amendment Bill

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1705

not recognise long term absences from their country as a reason not to serve. There have been many instances-the most publicised in Yugoslavia, which is not likely to be a declared country under this Bill-where European countries have detained Australian residents who, without knowing the risk they were taking, had gone to a European country and been inducted into national service.
Let me take the case of a fictitious person 16 years of age who is the son or daughter of a family which has resided in Australia since the child was two years of age. Let us assume that the parents had not taken out Australian citizenship which, unfortunately, is not unusual. If that person visited a country where national service was applied and was called up into the services of the foreign country and subsequently deserted and returned to Australia-which I would have thought would have been expected as a right; certainly there would have been a re-entry rightthat person could be called on to be arrested and handed over to the authorities of that country for punishment if an agreement were in force. Whilst it may not be reasonable to encourage desertion or to act in any way to protect a deserter, I think all reasonable people would think that person in that situation would be, in fact, a permanent resident of Australia. I hope that provisions exist whereby Australian permanent residents will not be handed over. The discretion is with the Minister. He may well choose to exercise it in favour of such a person. I think he would.
There is another provision in the Act which has some doubts about it and which I would like to raise. I refer to the provision for the authority, once having obtained custody of a person, to take such actions as it sees fit. I am informed that the Defence (Visiting Forces) Act covers a person who is, in fact, part of a visiting force. It does not necessarily apply to a deserter but it is in fact, possible to do so. I will use a hypothetical case as an illustration. This is an open-ended Act and declarations can be made at any time in respect of any country. I refer to a person who has deserted from a force, say, in New Zealand or, as I mentioned before, in a European country where he has been inducted into the forces and returned to Australia, under provisions which may involve illegal migration. Where he is not subject to the Defence (Visiting Forces) Act and is not part of a visiting force or any force designated in the Act, it would appear that there are no provisions to protect that person after he is handed over to the authority of the country concerned in the Act. That is a matter which could and should be dealt with.

One other relative matter is the time factor. The Opposition believes that an open-ended period whereby such a request can be made is, in fact, not reasonable. The Australian forces certainly would discharge a person who was absent without leave from service for any extended period. Later tonight we intend to move an amendment which will provide a limit on the period during which the procedures for a request and handing over to another country will apply. The period we are suggesting as reasonable is two years. Some countries would insist on returning irrespective of the time the person had been in the country. Substantive disruption could be involved after a period such as that to the person concerned and probably to his family if, in fact, he had-as many have and has~taken up permanent residence in Australia and moved into a situation of family life.
I hope that if the amendment is not accepted it will be adopted in principle. Under such circumstances, unless some reason is advanced other than desertion, it is hoped that a request would not be entertained where a person had had a substantive period of residence in Australia. We will be moving to limit that period to two years. We are not wedded to the period, but we think it is a reasonable period.
The other provision of the Act to which we will be moving amendments is in respect of joint force ' operations and the attachment of Australian forces to the operation of Australian forces within the forces of declared countries. The first amendment we will be dealing with will be in respect of the declaration which, under the Bill, will be made as a proclamation by the Governor-General and, therefore, will be completely outside any scutiny or any cQnsideration of this Parliament. We will be seeking to have the proclamation dealt with, as has occurred in other Acts, whereby the declaration will, in fact, be presented to the Parliament. The Parliament will then have the power to move for its disallowance. In the amendments we have provided that a period of five sitting days will elapse before the motion for disallowance will have effect. At any time, during that period, it will be possible to move a motion to approve the declaration. We feel that that is not an unreasonable safeguard, given that the Parliament is in fact responsible for the policies and activities of the armed forces even though, constitutionally, the Governor-General is their Commander-in-Chief. We also seek to amend the provisoins so that where a reciprocal agreement is not available, no such arrangement for joint forces or integrated forces should be entered into. We believe it is not reasonable that Australian forces should accept

1706 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Defence Acts Amendment Bill

that they become part of the forces of a country or operate in concert as an integrated force with a country where a reciprocal right is not available to them.
Mr Killen-I hope my honourable friend will forgive my interrupting. Can he explain his argument a little better?
Mr SCHOLES-This Bill provides that members of an integrated force will operate under the command of a senior officer, even a very low ranking one. If the country with which we are operating does not acknowledge by a reciprocal Act that its officers and men will agree to act in exactly the same manner, I do not believe that the Australian forces should be placed in a disadvantaged situation. We are seeking in the amendment that where an agreement is entered into it should be binding on both sides. If the forces of one of the countries concerned do not accept reciprocity the Australian forces should not be obliged to accept conditions which are disadvantageous to them. In the Bill as it stands that is not necessarily so.
The other amendments are machinery matters which deal with the right of appeal of a person who is arrested and whom the Minister has made a decision to hand over to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. There is at least a suggestion that that already exists but we believe it should be spelled out. We believe that the other amendments which we will present in the Committee stage do not in any way detract from the ability of the defence forces to carry out their functions. They enhance the rights of persons to a defence when they are subjected or could be subjected to harrassment or an unreasonable request for their detention. During the period when amnesty was granted recently to illegal immigrants in Australia. I had occasion to deal with a person who had deserted from the forces of a very friendly nation-not the United States. He was married with a family and had been in Australia for many
years. He wished to apply for amnesty but this would have required him to disclose that he was a deserter from another force. That force probably no longer even remembered his name but on inquiry to the country concerned I was informed by its Embassy that if the matter came to its attention it would require the repatriation of that person to face charges for desertion in his country of origin. Under the Bill as it stands that request could be made even though the person concerned had been in Australia for 20 years. I think that area should be qualified. When no other activity which could be deemed to be of a criminal or unlawful nature, other than desertion, is involved I believe that two years is not an unreasonable period during which a request for apprehension of

a person could be made and the person apprehended and handed over. The Opposition does not oppose the Bill but it will seek in the Committee stage to move a series of amendments.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (8.25)-1 will not detain the House for any great length of time but 1 wish to speak on one or two aspects of this Bill in a somewhat broader way than normally would be suitable for the Committee stage of discussion. One of the aspects 1 will deal with, .the Opposition will seek to amend in the Committee stage. The other aspect I wish to comment on is not one which the Opposition will seek to amend in the Committee stage so this will be the only opportunity I will get to comment upon it. The amendments in this Bill are quite complex and not unimportant. The Opposition would probably have appreciated a little more time to go through all of them at least before the Committee stage was reached. Particularly for those of us who are newer members of this Parliament these last few days have been exciting ones and we have not necessarily applied ourselves diligently to the details of legislation which is before the House. The clauses of this Bill that 1 specifically want to deal with are, firstly, those that relate to proposed new sections 116A, 116B and 116c and, secondly, those which relate to the control of the defence forces over the management of defence land. As I said, we do not oppose in generality these amendments but we would like to see alterations to them to protect positions that we believe are quite important.
The Government's amendment dealing with the command arrangements of multinational forces requires the closest consideration. The Government will, I believe, need to justify its intentions in detail as we believe its current proposals are bad in principle and may lead to some considerable difficulties. Australian armed forces have now had 80 years experience of working with foreign forces and they have managed to do it without requiring this legislation. They have had something similar to it but this Bill goes beyond the provisions of the current Act. They have not however done so without problems. The heart of the problem has always been our difficulty in establishing clearly our identity and asserting the national sovereignty of our forces against what allies have frequently seen as the convenience of their operational arrangements. In its current form this legislation risks a jealously guarded position and does so Without insisting on reciprocity in the arrangement on behalf of the armed forces of those countries with whom agreement is reached.

Defence Acts Amendment Bill

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1707

If proposed new section 116c (I) is taken literally it could mean that individual Australian servicemen and sub-units within a multinational force will be put in the position of receiving unacceptable orders from comparatively junior officers and people, which may be illegal and contrary to Australian purposes. The explanatory memorandum argues that this section is really very limited and that it permits only the exercise of command and not powers of discipline. This interpretation underestimates the meaning of command as understood within the armed forces. A person who commands must expect to be obeyed and to have the capacity to ensure that his authority is accepted.
Australians rarely have been involved in any conflict when they have not had to work out complex command arrangements with our allies. At least since World War II, however, these arrangements have retained exclusive Australian control in the case of the Army in all ranks up to battalion level, in the Navy to the captain of a particular ship and in the Air Force certainly up to squadron level. Even at this level there have been problems with allies, but these have been on the whole reasonably amicably resolved. In Korea we were part of the British Commonwealth division. The division had a British commander but one of its brigades had an Australian commander. In that brigade, of the three battalions that made it up, two were under the command of Australian officers. They were, in fact, Australian battalions. A similar situation was maintained for naval units; but in the case of the Air Force there was only a fighter squadron and this was placed under the Fifth United States Air Force.
In Malaysia, Australians were in command of Australian forces up to battalion level. In Vietnam, a substantial Australian task force was under Australian command and assigned its own area. Combined operations were conducted, but again there was never a suggestion that down at a company or platoon level an Australian officer or other ranks should be placed under the command of South Korea, America, New Zealand or other allies. What this amendment entails is a situation in which we should never permit Australians to be placed. If ever we have to do that, I think this matter should come before the Australian Parliament for special consideration. For those reasons we will be moving appropriate amendments later in the debate.
This amendment to the Act permits an arrangement to go unreported to parliament. From the very earliest struggle for an independent Australian Defence Force, the question of command

arrangements at the level considered in this legislation was central. It was the intention of the Royal Navy, which first examined the possibility of the creation of a Royal Australian Navy, that Australians should not be officers in Australian ships. The idea put forward by the Royal Navy advisers to the Australian Government was that it would be quite a good thing if Australians were to pay for a number of ships and make sure that those ships were crewed by Australians. It was regarded as an extraordinarily bad idea that those ships ought to be officered by Australians. At that time those advisers even had the hide to argue that Australians were of a moral character as to make such positions of command inappropriate. When the Labor Government set up the Royal Australian Navy it made it quite clear that it would not accept that position.
To some degree, to the discredit of the then conservative forces-the Liberal Party in this instance has a history only since 1944 so I suppose it can claim exemption from the strictures that ought to have been levelled against the conservatives at this stage-it was their intention to oppose this legislation in the Australian Parliament. They opposed it and their argument was very similar to that of the Royal Navy advisers who suggested that Australians were not fit for command. I suggest that our experience in the Boer War in our attempts to establish our defence forces and our experience in the early stages of World War I emphasise the considerable difficulty that Australians could get into when they are associated with officers whose priorities are the intentions and purposes of allied armies not Australia's. There was a tendency to regard Australians as inferior and a tendency to use them expediently. I think to some degree, and on a disciplinary question, this entered into the famous case of Breaker Morant but how far we shall never know. To my knowledge the circumstances and the detail of his trial have never been released to the Australian public.
But at the level of command which is now being implemented here, not only in our relationships with Britain but also, if I understand the purposes of this amendment, it could conceivably apply to any North Korean officer who might be involved in a peacekeeping force in Namibia or certainly to any American offict;r, Norwegian officer or officer of another country sent to the Sinai, our experience has been that we have not done very well. This situation was, to some degree; mitigated, certainly after World War II and during the course of World War II when, in the main, Australians established quite clearly that at least up to a very

1708 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Defence Acts Amendment Bill

high level of authority in the organisation of the armed services Australians would be in control.
If this legislation were to have been in operation during the course of the Vietnam warfortunately, it was not-it would have been conceivable that an Australian platoon could have been involved in operations with or even have had as its commander Lieutenant Calley. It could have found itself involved in a My Lai type situation where it was obliged to follow orders which, to my understanding, were never given to any Australian unit by Australian officers operating in Vietnam-to wipe out a village; in fact, to commit an act of murder. During the Vietnam war the terms on which our association with the United States were conducted made such an event unlikely. The terms of this Act remove a legal inhibition to that possibility taking place. At least where the level of command is assigned at above brigade level-where it is recognised that Australians operate only in the context of a task force under an Australian commander at the level of a general! albeit necessarily in combined operations under American command-decisions of considerable political importance are being taken at a very high level of the Army and it is possible for appropriate consultation to take place.
That level of sophistication .does not necessarily exist lower down in the ranks. I ask honourable members to think of what would occur-I very strongly oppose this-if, for example, Australia . were to be employed in the Sinai peacekeeping force. Let us say that Australians happened to be there in platoon strength because of the nature of the integrated force, and that at that platoon level they happened to find themselves commanded by American, Fijian or any other nation's officers. Suppose they came across-as they undoubtedly would if they got involved in the Sinai force-a Palestine Liberation Organisation Commando unit, crossing the Sinai into the Gaza Strip. It may well be, for example, for reasons of Australian foreign policy, that were an Australian unit to discover such an operation it would not report it to the relevant Egyptian and Israeli authorities. It would omit to do this on the grounds that the Sinai peacekeeping forces, in the terms in which we would wish to enter into that agreement, were there solely to monitor the possible clash of arms or incursions by Egyptians on the one hand or Israelis on the other. This would be an extraneous but, nevertheless, highly likely military involvement of a third party in this arrangement in which, in the case of the United States, given its level of intelligence, co-operation and military coordination with the Israeli and Egyptian authorities-a level at which we do not operate

with those two powers-it would be the intention of the United States or the intention of an American commander so discovering such an event to report it to Israeli and Egyptian officials. I suggest that this would involve Australia in a situation in which-certainly if we got into the Sinai peacekeeping force-we would not wish to be involved. Yet this legislation will permit that situation to arise.
The Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) is shaking his head in disagreement. He has the right of reply in this debate. I will be very interested to hear his reply. But our concern is that-again, I put it in terms of general principle-it has been a very considerable struggle by the Australian people, against our historical background and the prejudices of our allies, to establish clearly Australian sovereignty and independence over the operations of our armed forces at every stage. There have been compromises of this but that has been our objective. I think these amendments, opening as they do a wider variety of possible countries involved with Australia, integrated command arrangements, are an offence against the principles for which we have been striving. That is my main objection to the Bill.
I wish briefly to mention one other matter in the legislation relating to the management of land. I am not atall unhappy that this legislation is being introduced. In fact, I think it will create opportunities for more generous access to defence land than currently exists at the moment. There might be one or two aspects of it that I do not particularly like-for instance, the right to keep a vehicle without trial of its owner, for example, for 60 days. But we are not moving any substantial amendments to this aspect of it. As a Western Australian I would like to take the opportunity to put to the Minister a position which concerns a number of Western Australians. Nobody in Western Australia challenges the absolute right of the Royal Australian Navy to be confident in its security and in the safety of its operations on Garden Island. Clearly, it is very important that it should have the capacity to secure Garden Island under whatever terms and conditions are necessary. I hope that the Royal Australian Navy and the Department of Defence acknowledge that GardenIsland is historically a very important island to Western Australians. That was where a substantial number of the first fleet, if you like, to Western Australia was washed up. There are some interesting historical sites at Garden Island. On its landward side-the side facing the coast-it has some verylovely beaches.
As I understand it, the present arrangements for access to the island are entirely reasonable, in

Defence Acts Amendment Bill

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1709

terms of hours, but unfortunately the areas which may be visited are rather limited. The most ready access is to the seaward side of the island-at least that is the access that is permitted-and it is
almost impossible for a small craft to be used because it has to go through a large number of reefs. One has to be a very good sailor and be very familiar indeed with the waters to get one's small craft through there. I would hope that the Navy would see fit, perhaps at certain times of the yearholiday times, for example-to make a broader area of the safe beach on the eastern side open to the Western Australian public for visits. I hope too that the Navy might start, along with the rest of the defence forces, to adopt a slightly more generous attitude to across the board access not
only to Garden Island but also to other installations.
I was impressed, when I was in the United States, at the extent to which the public is permit-
ted free access to American defence installations. When I raised this matter on the odd occasion with American officers, they said that they get their security by other means. For example, at San Diego naval base it is quite possible for the average American citizen to wander around the wharf and the general environment and take pleasure in it. As it happens, a number of defence areas are in very enjoyable environments. Certainly limited access will be permitted under this legislation. I hope also that there will be a degree of access to the installations themselves and not just the unused land. I think public support for the defence efforts is important. There is no better way of obtaining public support for defence efforts than to permit the public to see what is being done and what is available. As it happens, the base at Cockburn Sound is an extremely attractive facility. I hope that the Navy, for example at weekends or one or two days a week or in particular seasons, would make it possible for Western Australians to have a reasonably unlimited access across the causeway to the base to see what is going on there, particularly when Australian ships are in port. We hope that at some time the Minister might get around to ensuring that home porting takes place there. We have had promises in that regard for five or six years now. We hope that when that comes about Western Australians will be able to .see the Australian hardware as well.
For those reasons, which do not require amendments to the Act, I hope that the Minister will see his way clear to instruct his departmental officials accordingly. I did not want to raise these matters in the Committee stage because I wanted to look at somewhat more broadly, in an historical setting

and in somewhat more unrestricted circumstances than consideration of the amendments that we will move would necessarily permit. I wanted to raise those matters. We require an assurance on them. They are not unimportant. We do not want to see Australian soldiers involved in situations in which they could compromise Australian political interests and compromise general modes of behaviour that are insisted upon in the Australian defence forces but which may not be insisted upon by the relevant officials and defence departments of other countries. They are important and substantial matters, and I hope this chamber will see fit to carry the amendments that we will move to the legislation.
Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence) (8.46)-in reply-I take but one moment to thank the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley) for the robust and elegant way in which he has expressed his view. I trust the honourable gentleman will not be disturbed if I say that it was redolent of his very distinguished father who for 30 years was the honourable member for Fremantle in this place and with whom I shared, and I trust I will continue to share, many years of community of view, albeit we disagree. In regard to the general matters that my honourable friend has referred to, I give him an assurance that I will require my Department to put to study in particular the very elegant appeal he made on behalf of those who go to Garden Island. I will seek to communicate to the honourable gentleman a proper response.
As for the other matters to which my honourable friend, the honourable member for Swan, and my distinguished friend the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) referred, I think they will be better considered in Committee. I thank both honourable gentlemen for their interest in the Defence Acts Amendment Bill. It is not a Bill that would shake those who live at Woolloongabba or at St Kilda; nevertheless it remains an important Bill. It is a Bill which touches and concerns those who serve in the Services of this country and, beyond that, those who may be brought into contact with it. I thank both honourable gentlemen for the manner in which they have spoken during this second reading debate.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
In Committee
Clauses 1 to 7-by leave-taken together, and agreed to.
Clause 8.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (8.48)-1 move:

1710 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Defence Acts Amendment Bill

(I) Clause 8, page 3, at the end of sub-section (2) of proposed section 116A add 'being a country which has before the making of such declaration enacted legislative provisions having equivalent effect to the provisions of this Part in respect of members of the Defence Force'.
This amendment to proposed section 116A in effect would provide that an agreement could be made only with countries which have existing reciprocallaws.
Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence) (8.49)-1 hope that my friend from Corio would understand the sense in which this amendment cannot be agreed to, There are countries in this world to whom or to which, depending upon which school of English commands one's attention, our servicemen and women go, with whom or with which we have no status of forces agreements, The classic case is the United States of America. It would take a very great deal of time and effort, 1 suspect, for this country to persuade the United States to meet what my honourable friend suggested. 1 offer this as no affront to the peculiarities of the United States Constitution or to its Congressional attitudes; but, as the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) understands, we do a very great deal of business with the United States. We have, at any given time, some thousands of servicemen in that country,
Two or three years ago, a young sailor found himself in some difficulty. 1 speak off the top of my head but, in countries such as the United States, the municipal law of that country has control of servicemen, that country being the host receiver, or indeed control of my friend-not that 1 would ever suspect that he would indulge in any form of behaviour which would incur the wrath of any civil authority anywhere in the world, But, on the assumption that it did, it would be a matter for the municipal law of that country. 1 think that that is modified and controlled in some respect by an arrangement, the precise nature of which 1 do not know. But there is no status of forces agreement existing between, say, the United States and Australia. To adopt my friend's amendment would mean that we could not send anybody to the United States. Mr Chairman, as you know, 1 am given over a long period to indulge in charity, but 1 would never for one moment take the view that my distinguished friend the honourable member for Corio would seek to impose on this country a defence arrangement whereby we could not send Australians to the United States.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (8,51)-Without this amendment and without the necessity for this amendment, we have been able for at least the last 40 years to operate successfully with the forces of other countries. Under provisions which exist,

Australian forces have been able to be attached to the forces of other countries and the forces of other countries have been able to be attached to Australian forces. We have operated under hostile and peace time conditions without the necessity for Australia to make provisions which will in effect by an agreement of this Parliament-an agreement entered into on behalf of those forces-place Australian forces in an inferior position to the forces with which they serve. I do not subscribe to or accept the view of the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) that it would not be possible for Australian forces to serve in the United States without this provision in the amendment or that it would deny that service if in fact a declaration for joint force operations under this Bill could not be made.
Mr Killen-Combined.
Mr SCHOLES-Yes, combined force operations. We have not to this stage needed that type of provision. We have been able to enter into amicable arrangements. This provision can only place Australian forces in a disadvantageous position and in an inferior position in respect of equal ranks and equal positions of authority whereby we have agreed that we will accept or that we will enter into agreements which accept a subservient role for the Australian forces and we acknowledge, in the Minister's words, that the Australian forces do not require that a similar undertaking be given by the other forces. 1 do not intend to press the matter but we believe that the position as put by the Minister is unacceptable.
Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence) (8.53)-1 am wondering whether it might cheer up my honourable friend from Corio if 1 were to recite to him the views of Professor J. G. Starke, writing in An Introduction to International Law. On this point this very great professor and very wonderful person wrote:
Armed forces admitted on foreign territory enjoy a limited, but not an absolute, immunity from the territorial jurisdiction.
The extent of the immunity depends upon the circumstances in which the forces were admitted by the territorial Sovereign, and in particular upon the absence or presence of any express agreement between the host and the sending State regulating the terms and conditions governing the entry of the forces in the territory.
That makes immense good sense to me, Professor Starke continues:
In the absence-
And this is our position-
of such an express agreement, the bare fact of admission of the forces produces certain generally recognised consequences of international law. The principle here applying was stated in classical terms by Marshall C.J., of the United States Supreme

Defence Acts Amendment Bill

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1711

Court in Schooner Exchange v. M'Faddon and were condensed by a very learned Judge into the following general doctrine:-
, 'A State which admits to its territory an armed force of a friendly Power impliedly undertakes not to exercise any jurisdiction over the force collectively or its members individually which would be inconsistent with its continuing to exist as an efficient force available for the service of its sovereign '.
Professor Starke continues:
In other words, the principle is that the territorial or host State'impliedly undertakes not to exercise any jurisdiction over members of the visiting force in such a way as to impair the integrity and efficiency of the force.
My honourable friend, I am sure, reflecting on that, would agree, I take the matter no further.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (8,56)-The amendment we have moved does not imply in any way that we do not believe that when Australian soldiers are in trainingor are in some way visitors in another country they ought not, if it is appropriate, to be in a situation whereby they are obliged to obey the laws of that country, That is not what the amendment says, What it says is that, if the soldiers of the particular country in which Australian forces are involved, 'operate in Australia in similar sorts of circumstances to those, of the Australian armed forces, that country should be obliged to surrender the same degree of sovereignty or control over those soldiers as we are obliged to surrender in that country or agreement will not be entered into,
The reason why the United States takes this matter seriously is that the United States is a country which takes its national sovereignty eXtremely seriously, I wish that we would take our national sdvereignty as seriously as the United States. Perhaps over the years we have got a little too used to surrendering that. Perhaps over the years we have been obliged to whether we have particularly wanted to or not. However, we are now in the position where we are no longer obliged to surrender this aspect of our national sovereignty unless it'is on a reciprocal basis. If, as the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) pointed out earlier, the situation that has operated to this point ,had not prevented agreements being entered into with the United States of America or any other country in which control is necessary, there is nothing, therefore, in existing practice which has. prevented us from entering into appropriate agreements. What we want to make sure is that what is currently being done by administrative arrangement is actually put on to Australian statute books. In those circumstances when we are making, as Australian statutes do, a declaration of how we feel about ourselves and, in the case of this aspect of the Defence Act, how we feel about the significance we attach to questions

of national sovereignty in relation to Australian defence forces, we should insist on precisely the same rights to defend our national interests, our national sovereignty, as the United States or any other country that has similar provisions quite rightly insists on.
Amendment negatived.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (9.0)-by leave-I move:
(2) Clause 8, page 5, line 18, after 'section' insert 'and subject to sub-section (SA)'.
(3) Clause 8, page 5, proposed section 116c, after subsection (5) insert the following sub-section:
'''(SA) (a) Where the Governor-General or an authorized person makes a declaration under sub-section (5), a copy of the declaration shall be laid before each House of the Parliament within 5 sitting days of that House after the making of the declaration;
(b) Any declaration which is not laid before each House of the Parliament in accordance with paragraph (a) shall be void and of no effect; and
(c) A declaration laid before each House of the Parliament in accordance with paragraph (a) shall be deemed to have been revoked at the expiration of 5 sitting days after the declaration has been laid before both Houses of the Parliament unless each House of the Parliament has by resolution declared that the declaration is approved. ".'
Amendment No. (2) is consequential on amendment No. (3). The amendments would make it mandatory for a declaration to be made under this provision in the Defence Acts Amendment Bill, which is fairly embracing, It covers a number of contingencies. A copy of the declaration would have to be laid on the table of the Parliament within five sitting days after the making of the declaration. A motion could be moved within five sitting days for the disallowance of the declaration. This is a machinery provision similar to regulation making powers which provide for automatic disallowance if a matter is not dealt with by the Parliament within a certain period. We believe there are some fairly extensive consequences as a result of making such a declaration. At some future stage there may be objection within the Parliament to countries on whose behalf such a declaration may be made. At this stage we are nQt making laws for today. It is quite unusual for this type of Act to be amended in any short period. The Opposition believes that in such circumstances it is incumbent on the Parliament to have the right to express an ,opinion, as it would under any normal regul<;ltion making power.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (9.3)-1 support the remarks of the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes). Before the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) makes his comments on this proposal, 1 say that this would certainly be an amendment after the Minister's heart. He has made a considerable reputation in this place over a number of

1712 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Defence Acts Amendment Bill

years as a person who defends the prerogatives of Parliament and who insists that any position that Australia takes internationally, any matter of considerable importance, ought to be presented to the Parliament for consideration. Clause 8 which these amendments seek to amend is, I think, the most important area for the changes that we are making here today. This clause of the Bill which we seek to amend, when put into operation, will give the right of command over Australian forces to an officer of the Army-or whatever Service-of another power.
These situations will create matters of substantial political importance which will affect the national interests of this country. It is in relation to these sorts of agreements that the Australian Parliament will want to be thoroughly assured that it understands the full implications of what is being entered into. I do not believe there is any occasion on which Australian defence forces operate overseas, as these provisions provide, in coalition with the forces of another country which can conceivably involve circumstances which are not unimportant.
We have had a situation for many years in the Parliament when quite frequently we have been presented with a fait accompli on key defence and foreign policy decisions. We have not had an opportunity to debate them until some considerable time later. These amendments will ensure that when these agreements of importance in relation to the co-operation of the Australian defence forces are entered into with other countries, this Parliament must give them consideration. We are not suggesting that in the case of a disallowance of a normal regulation there should be 15 sitting days of Parliament. As that system operates it is quite conceivable that what needs to be done on a fairly emergent sort of basis will drag out for a considerable period. We have suggested, therefore, in our amendment No. (3) that the declaration made before Parliament should lie on the table of both Houses for five sitting days-in effect, a little under two weeks. In these circumstances we cannot believe that the situation will be so emergent that we cannot do this. In fact, if it is too emergent for this perhaps that is precisely the sort of situation to which we would want to give very serious consideration.
We have not moved blanket opposition to new section 116C even though a number of us find a considerable degree of objection to it. We have moved amendment No. (3) to ensure that when these sorts of agreements are entered into there is a proper parliamentary examination of them. As I said at the outset, I think over a considerable period the Minister has expressed a high regard

for and has, indeed, defended the prerogatives of Parliament. I think in those circumstances this amendment would naturally commend itself to him.
Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence) (9.6)-1 simply say that I am persuaded by the argument which has been advanced by the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) and the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley) to examine further the amendments that have been moved. I ask my honourable friends whether they would refrain from pressing the amendments. I give this Committee an undertaking that between this chamber and another place I will arrange for the full implications of the amendments to be considered. I do that without commitment one way or the other. But I am bound to say that I am persuaded immensely by the moderation and the persuasiveness of the arguments put by both honourable gentlemen.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (9.7)-Given the undertaking of the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) I think it is appropriate that I withdraw the amendments.
Amendments-by leave-withdrawn.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (9.8)-by leave-I move:
(4) Clause 8, page 6, at the end or proposed section 116F add the following sub-section:
.. '(2) No warrant shall be issued under sub-seclion (I) unless the authorized officer is satisfied on reasonable grounds that the person the subject of the warrant became an absentee without leave within the period of 2 years preceeding the receipt of the request for assistance. ".
(5) Clause 8, page 7, after sub-section (3) of proposed section 116H insert the following sub-section:
.. '(3A) An application may be made to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal for a review of a decision by the Minister under paragraph 3(b) to issue a warrant, and upon the making of an application the operation of the warrant shall be suspended until the application has been heard and determined. ".
Amendment No. (4) deals with the arrest and handing over of a person who is a deserter from the armed forces of a declared country. The provisions here provide for a period of two years during which this procedure would operate. I say to the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) that we are not wedded to two years. If a more appropriate period were involved we would not mind, but we do not believe that it should be open-ended. After a period, such as two years, I believe that a more substantive charge or request would be necessary which would involve evidence and, I think, proof at least to the extent of extradition of a person for some other offence committed by the person concerned. The Australian forces certainly would not be seeking to pursue a person in peacetime-in

Defence Acts Amendment Bill

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1713

wartime it would be a different situation-after that period in another country, unless he had committed an offence much more serious than going absent without leave. The practice, I think, is practically uniform now. After three months AWOL a person would be discharged from the Australian armed services. We see two years as not an unreasonable period.
The second amendment applies to a situation which we understand may, in fact, already apply, but we would like it spelt out in the Defence Acts Amendment Bill. Where the Minister determines to issue a warrant for the handover of that person to the authority of another country, that person shall have the right to appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal without prejudice. If it were an administrative decision, as it would be under the existing law, that appeal right would exist.
Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence) (9.10)-1 cannot accept the amendments. I understand the humanitarian views of my friend, the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes), but there could be an infinite sweep of occasions when the outrageousness or heinousness of the behaviour was such that two years would not simply fit the bill, and the fact that a person was absent without leave for two years would be completely unacceptable. My friend the honourable member for Corio is an identifiable humanitarian. Be that as it may, I am sorry that I am not persuaded to accept his amendments.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (9.1 I)-Although it is beyond a two day examination to draft such an amendment, the Opposition has indicated that it feels, when a matter is more substantive than pure desertion, the presentation and acceptance of the evidence would constitute something more than going absent without leave. This is an open-ended situation. It can in fact apply to a person who has been in Australia for 25 years or more. In fact, I could cite a case of a person who has been in Australia for nearly that long and who was advised that another country would expect his repatriation as a deserter. There is one other matter which protects the Commonwealth in this situation. For a person under such circumstances to be allowed into the Commonwealth, he has to be accepted as a permanent resident. He is certainly an illegal immigrant. So, whilst we may be changing the law in respect of his being handed over to the authority of another country, we are not changing the law in respect of his rights to stay in Australia. If the person was a person such as described by the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen), I am certain he would not be allowed to stay.
Amendments negatived.

Clause agreed to.
Remainder of Bill-by leave-taken as a whole.
Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence) (9.13)-1 move:
Clause 13, page 15, lines 34 to 36, omit the clause, substitute the following clause:
Interpretation "13. Section 5 of the principal Act is amended-
(a) by omitting from sub-section (I) the definition of'Australian service law';
(b) by omitting 'by arrangement with the Minister' from the definition of 'visiting force' in subsection (I); and
(c) by omitting from paragraph (3) (b)"', with the approval of the Minister,".
This amendment seeks to amend the Defence (Visiting Forces) Act 1963. It goes to section 13 of the principal Act. It is a machinery amendment. The language which would reside in the Act after this Bill and consequential amendments are agreed to would be otiose, to use a word used by a very great former member of this place, Professor Armand Bland. I can still remember him sitting here some 30 years ago. That word means that it is thoroughly unnecessary. The language which would remain in the Defence (Visiting Forces) Act 1963 would be thoroughly otiose without this amendment. It is not going to set St Kilda or Wooloongabba on fire, nor for that matter the heart of Fremantle.
Mr Beazley~You H~ve very aggressive attitudes towards those two places.
Mr KILLEN-After my time in this place I have become phlegmatic, according to the bestinformed characters, or bovine, according to sharper terms. But whichever view is used, I only hope that my persuasion has commended itself to my honourable friends opposite.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (9.15)-There are two amendments. I do not intend to speak to both. I have seen the amendments for the first time tonight. If we find that they are not as we understand them, we will certainly raise the matter in another place. My understanding is that the first amendment removes the purpose provisions from the Act. We have no objection to this or the subsequent amendment that the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) will move.
Amendment agreed to.
Amendment (by Mr Killen) agreed to:
After clause 15, page 16, insert the following new clause. Proof of facts by certificate "15A. Section 27 of the Principal Act is amended by omitting sub-section (2). ".
Remainder of Bill, as amended, agreed to.

1714 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Bill reported with amendments; report-by leave-adopted.
Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr KilIen)-by leave-read a third time.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1981-82
Second Reading
(Budget Debate)
Debate resumed.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (9.17)-Prior to the dinner suspension when this second reading debate on the Budget was interrupted I was saying that among the many victims of this Government's 1981-82 Budget in particular and among the victims of the Fraser Government's economic strategy in general was the small business community. That community, more than anything else, wants a growing economy. It wants a more expansionary economic policy. Indeed, the small business people of the Australian community want customers. In addition to that, as I said in that earlier part of this contribution to the Budget debate, the small business community wants its own problems dealt with by the Government. It needs loan funds. It needs working capital. It needs the price of money-interest rates-to be reduced. The policy of the Labor Party, the alternative government-a more expansionary budgetary and monetary policy-would mean not only that more funds were available but also that the price of those funds, the interest rates, would be reduced.
But I must not at this stage repeat the arguments that I made prior to the dinner suspension. I must move on and talk about the fact that among the many imposts there are State government charges. These must be seen in the same way as those other imposts I mentioned earlier of high interest rates, of the additional charges on the Australian community through the new health scheme which means that average Australians have to pay more for their health cover, and so on. The States have been starved of funds by this Fraser Government and, while they have added responsibilities transferred to them, they are in an even worse position. The result is an inevitable increase in State charges of all kinds, such as water charges, electricity rates, stamp duties and the various business fees. Everywhere there is a responsibility on the States. They have been obliged to increase their charges because of the deterioration in the Commonwealth-States financial arrangements. This has been a deliberate policy of the Fraser Government. It is another example of keeping the lid on the economy and another

example of this strategy which can be best summed up sadly as being a retreat from the miserable 3 per cent growth rate.
The origin of these increases is the economic imcompetence of this Government. The outcome' is major new cost pressures on business, pressures whose incidence is most severe on that small business community to which I was devoting my attention prior to the suspension of the sitting for dinner. It is essential that Australia adopt a new economic strategy to overcome these failures. The key is an anti-inflation strategy that works when the economy grows rather than working only when there is no growth. Growth is essential for full employment because there is a need to increase the number of jobs that we have in this country and, indeed, to create at least 2t million jobs over the 1980 decade to employ those presently unemployed, half a million of them, plus those entering the work force for the first time-with the present rate of immigration that is 1.3 million in the I980s-plus those displaced by technological and structural change. At the best estimate there would be at least half a million to a million new jobs required to replace those displaced as technology means machines taking over from people.
Many of the jobs come in small business. That requires this new strategy to which I have referred. If agreement .on a prices and incomes policy can be reached-it will be reached under a Labor Government-this new growth-oriented strategy becomes possible. Clearly, only the Labor Party is advocating such a policy. Only the Labor Party can deliver such a policy because of our special relationship with the trade union movement. Our political opponents in this Government have exhausted all reserves of trust that the community may ever have held for that Government. It is a government which is both callous and incompetent. Before the suspension of the sitting, I mentioned its callousness when it came to the compassion that is required if we are to build a consensus in this country instead of having the confrontation that we have with all the strikes and other actions that are resulting in less investment and less new jobs. This Government began by abusing the Australian Constitution. Now it refuses to reform it to achieve greater stability and fairness in Australian political life. Not surprisingly, it has followed this action by abusing the Australian economy with the sorts of ideologies which I have outlined. They are ideologies which, I repeat, summed up mean a retreat from a miserable 3 per cent growth rate at a time when, in order to create those 2!- million to 3 million new jobs we require in this decade, we

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1715

need a growth rate of at least 5 per cent. So much for that part of my speech which relates to small business.
Small businesses are not the only group sorely disadvantaged by this Budget. Another group of disadvantaged is in the welfare field. This is because of the lack of compassion that I referred to earlier by this Government. Let me illustrate this. I believe that my illustration is appropriate in this International Year of Disabled Persons. I believe it is apt that, in this year, I should read from a letter that I recently received from the chairman of a group known as the International Year for Disabled Persons National Committee of NonGovernment Organisations. It is a reasonably long letter but I think it deserves to be read into the record of this Parliament in the dying stages of this Budget debate. Mr McCredie, the Chairman, wrote:
On behalF of the IYDP National Committee of NonGovernment Orgdnisations I wish to draw to your attention the considerable gap between the Government's rhetoric and action in relation to disabled people as expressed in the recent budget. The budget clearly underlines the Government's lack of concern For mentally and physically disabled people in this, the International Year of Disabled Persons.
The IYDP National Committee welcomes the limited steps taken to provide greater options For disabled people with its - provision of greater access to Commonwealth buildings and its support For the Australian Caption Centre, Radio for the Print Handicapped and the production of braille and audio materials. These initiatives are an essential part of the Government's responsibility to integrate disabled people Fully into society.
It is clear, however, that For the majority of disabled people, the Federal budget provides no extra support or assistance. Many of the allowances and benefits and services for disabled people including means tests on pensions, fringe benefits, handicapped children's allowances, handicapped children's benefit remain virtually unchanged. The increase in rehabilitation provision to organisations or individuals through the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act or the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service hardly even keeps pace with inflation.
The IYDP National Committee thought at least during I YDP some greater attempt would be made to provide financial support For those disabled people who sought the option of living independently in the community. Currently, this is financially impossible for many people, largely as a result of the extra non-optional costs incurred in their daily lives.
Coupled with the lack of extra financial support for the majority of disabled people, the proposed sales tax legislation--
Which is so much, as honourable members know, a part of this Budget-
will make liFe particularly difficult for those people existing on a pension. Any attempt by disabled people in these circumstances to augment their limited pension is very quickly eroded away by the means test provisions which have not been altered significantly over the past decade.
The IYDP National Committee hopes that you may be prepared to raise with the Government the need For greater attention to the extra costs that disabled people are forced to

bear and the recognition that this is clearly the responsibility of the Commonwealth Government.
He added that, if I required any further information, he would be willing to give it. I am very happy, in the dying moments of this speech on the 1981-82 Budget, to read that letter into the record. Although I have concentrated mainly on the area of the business community, particularly on the small business community and the way it has been hit in this Budget, we must not forget, at the same time, the need for compassion in the administration of this country. Not only have we had in this Budget a retreat from growth and a Budget which further shows the strategy of this Government to keep a lid on the economy at a time when we want expansion and growth but also have we had a lack of compassion as displayed in that letter in this International Year of Disabled Persons.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr COWAN (Lyne) (9.28)-I rise to support the Budget and to say from the beginning that I believe that it is an integral part of the economic policy of the Government. It is certainly designed to provide the groundwork for the future prosperity of Australia. Throughout this debate, there has been, from the Opposition, a lot of criticism relating to the Budget strategy of the Government. But, whilst there are a number of what I term smaller matters that have been spoken about relating to the Budget, the fact remains that, if we want to look at Australia's economy, we need to consider the period from 1975 until now. If the average Australian looks at the Budget in that context, I am sure that he will accept that there has been very sound economic management of our economy. The fact that we are regarded by the rest of the free world as a country with a very sound economy, a country in which other nations wish to invest and in which other people want to live is an indication of the great respect in which we are held throughout the world. Other countries would not respect us unless they liked our people and the country. They certainly think that there are opportunities here because of the sound management of the Government.
Only the other day the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) said that in 1981-82 162,000 jobs were created in Australia. In the three-year period up to now 378,000 jobs have been created in Australia. The fact remains that business investment generally in the country has grown by 21 per cent, the largest growth in 30 years. After this year our national debt will be reduced almost to nil. We all know there was a great national debt in

1716 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No. 1)

1975. In fact, we were very quickly heading towards bankruptcy. In the context of the Budget we are debating at present we have the knowledge that over the last five years this Government has made Australia work. It has made Australia grow, it has created more work and it has created confidence in the Australian people. lam delighted to be able to be involved in a Budget debate in which I can say these things knowing that the average Australian supports what I say.
I know that there has been criticism of the direction that taxation should take. I did not want to see any increase occur in direct taxation, but taxation increases were necessary to build up the Budget from over $36,000m to over $40,000m simply to meet the commitments of day to day requirements. Taxation had to increase somewhere along the line. It is peculiar to hear Opposition members say that we are not paying enough in social security or that we have failed in other fields of government. We have not failed. We are building a nation through balanced development. We are trying to give a fair deal in health and education to our people. We are trying to build up our defences. We are also trying to support the manufacturing and primary industries of Australia. It is important that we have confidence in the manner in which we spend money. I am sure that this Budget speIls that out.
Only yesterday we heard in this chamber that about $35.5 billion worth of investment from overseas and Australiain the development of our natural resources is in the course of negotiation or about to be placed in the pipeline. We have people who condemn the overseas capital coming into Australia. It is like the opposition to people from overseas coming to Australia. Unless we have the population or the money, we will not be able to develop the natural resources of Australia and to have the standard of living that we want in this country. The guidelines that have been set down by the Government show that there must be 50 per cent investment in Australia by Australians in the development of our natural resources. This Budget holds inflation down. It is a Budget that will ease interest rates generaIly. It is a Budget of solid growth for private enterprise and it will create more jobs.
Mr McVeigh-It is a good Budget.
Mr COWAN-It is a sound Budget. This country is arriving at the stage at which it must consider whether it is going to be socialistic or whether it will support free enterprise. Can any honourable member in this chamber point to any country, free or otherwise, that has profited under

socialism? The standard of living of socialist countries is lower, they have high unemployment and
their economies are in a very bad state. This is a
point that we must face up to today in the context of this Budget. If, as the Opposition says, there is poverty in this land, the poverty was created by
the socialistic attitude from 1972 to 1975 and by
the Labor governments in the various States of Australia. There is no doubt about that. If there is poverty in this country, it has been brought about by the policies of the militant unions of this
country, and Opposition members know it.

Only the other day we heard of an alliance be-

tween the Australian Labor Party and the Aus-

tralian Council of Trade Unions whereby they

would overcome the problems of industrial unrest

within Australia. Certainly wages would be what

they would like them to be. This marriage be-

tween the Labor Party and that trade union group

means that that party, which claims to be the

people's party, wiIl be dictated to and run by the

left wing unions of this nation. Honourable

members opposite do not like to be told these

things. They speak of people buying houses, land

and goods which they want to buy. The trade

unions wiIl not let them have them. The unions

have fed unemployment within Australia. They

will not let people go to work. Only last week my

friend the honourable member for Paterson (Mr

O'Keefe) spoke in this House of all the boats tied

up off the New South Wales coast because a little

union will not let people work. Consequently, no

work is being done.

.

Within the last couple of days there has been
discussion about the New South Wales election result. There is a reason for the result achieved by Mr Wran. I take nothing away from Mr Wran. I sat in the New South Wales Parliament for 14 years and I appreciate, as we all do, that he has a very good image as a Premier, otherwise he would not receive the vote that he did. I remind honourable members opposite ofthree things which have been spoken about in this House. I refer, firstly, to
public funding of election campaigns. He had the money to spend-

Mr McVeigh-How much?

Mr COWAN-He had over $1.lm of the tax-
payers' money to spend. He had the advantage of
a recent redistribution of electorates and, under
the Electoral Act, preferential voting was made optional. These three factors influenced the re-
turn of the Wran Labor Government in New
South Wales the other day. It will be interesting to note what happens now. It is mentioned in the Press today that one of his Ministers is already
being challenged for endorsement for his seat.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1717

Who is he being challenged by? He is being challenged by the left wing of the Labor Party. Mr Wran will have trouble in keeping his left wing down. If I want to look at left wing members. I have only to look at the honourable members opposite who have been interjecting tonight. They are assembled before us and they do not like what I am saying. They do not like to be told what may occur in New South Wales.
I will give an instance of what happened in the redistribution. The population of the area between Newcastle and the Queensland border, which was represented by seven State electorates, may be the fastest growing population in Australia. The population of the area is increasing at 10 per cent a year, yet it has been cut back to six
electorates. At the first election after the redistribution each of those six electorates was on the average over 2,000 people above the average quota within the State. One electorate was over 3,000 electors above the 10 per cent quota. It will be seven years before we see another redistribution in New South Wales. This is an example of the say the country people will have in the New South Wales Government. If there is ever a change in the Government of Australia similar amendments will occur.
This is a Budget for the sound economy of Australia. It is a Budget for business. It is a Budget for industry. It is a Budget for the primary pro-
ducer. It is a Budget for the average Australian. I have always strongly supported the Constitution. I have served in the three tiers of government within Australia. The second and third tiers-the States and local government-are very important parts of Australia's constitution. It is essential that
the States are able to carry out their work without the guidance and control of the Commonwealth. In turn the councils should also be able to do their work without the control of either the States or the Commonwealth. This is the only way, outside of the economy and outside of the common sense administration of this country of ours, that the three tiers of government will succeed. The foundations under the Constitution must be good.
The Budget shows that expenditure on social security, health and education represents 42 per cent of the Budget. The States receive about 24 per cent of the Budget. I am concerned over the fact that today the Government-I criticise myself here-has a tendency to divert its finances and energy away from the important developments of the resources of Australia. When I speak of the resources, I speak of the water resources and the roads of Australia. We tend to talk about
social security. Let me remind honourable members that the greatest friends the pensioners

and the disadvantaged have are the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Government of this country. In 1975 when the present Opposition lost office social security received 21 per cent of the Budget. Social security receives 27 per cent of the present Budget. The Opposition talks about compassion, but it does not know what compassion is.
The Budget allocates $23.1 m in assistance to primary industry. I welcome this. Nothing has been taken away from agriculture or those involved in agriculture. Expenditure has been increased by 35 per cent. Without the rural and mineral wealth of Australia the economy and the standard of living would not be good. This is important because the gross value of primary industry in 1980-81 was $11,450m; the estimate for 1981-82 is $12,370m. The value of our exports in 1975-76 was $4,360m. In 1980-81 it was estimated at $8,540m.
In 1974-75 primary industry accounted for 48 per cent of the exports of Australia and in 1979-80 the figure was 47 per cent. It is expected to be about the same during the 1980-81 year. In 1974-75 primary industry employed 367,000 people. In 1980-81 365,000 were involved within the primary industries of Australia. The primary producer does not ask for much. He asks for assistance when it is needed because of seasonal conditions. He asks for commodity boards which he wishes to command. At all times he appreciates the responsibility he has.
I remind honourable members-this was said only the other day-that every year over 12 billion acres of land go out of production throughout the world. I point out that there are people who want to be fed. We have the soil, the farmers and the people who are prepared to feed not only our own people but also the rest of the world. It is essential to look at the properties in Australia that are being purchased by overseas investors. We have to look seriously at this situation with the States. I believe they are the instrumentalities to deal with the matter. We can help in the provision of some scheme where young men and women within Australia are able to purchase properties of their own. We do not want to see our farming communities move away from the family unit on the farm. We do not want to see farms taken over by corporations. We want to see them managed by the family. I am sure that this is experienced throughout the world.
I spoke about water resources earlier. This country must have an overall program for water resource development. How often do people come to us and talk about the millions of gallons

I 718 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

of water that flow hourly into the sea? It is important, if we are to keep our costs down on the farm, that we accept our water resources program as a sound investment for the Australian people. The National Country Party knows the value of water resources to Australia. It is a way of keeping our costs down and it is a way of producing from our acres of soil. We want to support the program and we will support it.
I would like briefly to say something about the road situation. There is a disquiet, particularly in country areas, about the funds going into roads. The Australian Automobile Association has made it very clear in its submission to the Prime Minister of January 1981 that a lesser percentage of overall revenue is going to the financing of roads than in the past. I am particularly concerned about our trunk and local roads within Australia. These are the important roads for the people living in country towns and on farms. I will not elaborate on this, but I make that point very clear.
I will conclude with a few words on defence. The honourable member for Kennedy (Mr Katter)- only the other evening in this chamber drew our attention to a very important factor concerning the defence of this nation. He is chairman of a parliamentary defence committee. He has been to America and discussed the situation in Australia relating to strategy with the American folk. I support the honourable member for Kennedy. The other night he asked: Why is it that we oppose B52s coming into this country holding armaments when there are Soviet submarines every hour of the day within the Pacific and Indian oceans fully armed? We have to be aware of this fact. This country must be prepared to defend itself and spend a reasonable proportion of the Budget on defence.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh) (9.49)-1 am pleased to follow my National Country Party comrade, the honourable member for Lyne (Mr Cowan). I find that members of the National Country Party, in fact, are some of the greatest socialists going. Let me quote from their own magazine. It states:
Mr Balcomb said the Government has ignored the recommendations made by NFF and furthermore 1981-82 Budget assistance to the rural sector of $226m represented a decline of 10 per cent in real terms.
As I said, they are comrades because we are all socialists together. I am not opposed to assistance to the rural industry. The sooner people get off their favourite hobbyhorses and start to work for the betterment of this country the better it will be

for the people we are supposed to be representing. The opportunity to speak in this debate on the Budget comes six weeks after the Treasurer (Mr Howard) announced what the Government has in store for the people of Australia. The Leader of the Australian Labor Party, the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden), effectively exposed the Budget in his reply on 25 August. He said:
For six years now, this Government has used the Budget to distort persistently and grossly the distribution of people's taxes . . . Privileged minority interests, specifically big business, have been the major beneficiaries. The Australian people, as individuals and as a nation, have been the losers. And the greatest losers have been the disadvantaged, the needy, and the less well-off.
Three million Australians are living in poverty. This Government is callous and indifferent.ltjust does not care. The Budget gave the Government the opportunity to redress the gross imbalance in the distribution of the national cake but what did it do? It set a course that will increase unemployment, alienate the youth of Australia, cause even greater hardship for pensioners and destroy the great Australian dream to own one's own home. Young couples are positively reeling under the endlesses increases in interest rates. Today I handed in many thousands of signatures on petitions about this matter. These signatures were collected by the people in Hindmarsh. There are thousands of people in the streets protesting about interest rates. These protests are springing up from those who are self-confessed Liberal Party supporters. But they will not be supporters again because they anticipate further increases in interest rates. With this Government all we can see are further constant increases in interest rates.
The Australian people would like to be able to budget their own incomes but what have they got to cope with? These issues do not necessarily come from the Budget; they were sneaked in prior to it. Some of them we have been carrying for some time. Examples are petrol tax, health insurance, sales tax, interest rates, income tax and postal and telephone increases. Petrol tax will bring in the Government another $3,440m. Income tax will bring in an increase of $3,349m. Sales tax will bring in this Government an extra $550m. The Australian people will have to pay up because they have to take out additional health insurance. Those who were not insured previously will have to insure. That is estimated to cost $1,200m. Interest rates, postal charges and telephone charges have increased. Many of these increases were brought in through the back door. The Budget predicts more unemployment. Over the months Minister after Minister in this House has repeated almost in parrot fashion the statement that the Government has created 300,000

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1719

new jobs. I want to nail that lie, and the distortion of the truth that has gone on in this House. In an appraisal of the Budget, Professor Perkins from the Faculty of Economics and Commerce at the University of Melbourne said:
Internally, unemployment remains undesirably high. If allowance is made for 'hidden' unemployment, as well as that which is officially recorded, something like 10 per cent of the potential labour force probably remains unemployed-due account being taken of those who have withdrawn from the labour force, or not entered it in recent years, but who would like to have jobs if they could obtain them. [n addition, a substantial number of people have part-time jobs who would prefer to have full-time ones. A reasonable allowance for those would take the total figure for under-utilisation of the potentiallabour force to above 10 per cent.
I emphasise that this was said by an independent source, Professor J. O. N. Perkins. The supposed 300,000 jobs which the Government claims have been created are, in fact, part time jobs. The Australian worker has been asked to carry the burden of the disastrous economic policy of this Government. While on this appraisal of the Budget. I will quote further from what Professor Perkins had to say on tax rates and wage demands. He said:
Moreover, the stimulus to wage demands will be especially great in that PA YE income tax receipts are projected to rise by much more than total tax receipts, or even total income tax receipts alone. The sense of inequity felt by PA YE taxpayers when they see that other income-earners are paying a continually falling share of total revenue from income tax is especially likely to elicit understandable discontent with the existing levels of money wages and salaries.
It is important to stop here and look at the attacks we have seen in this House on workers and their wage demands. I refer to the Adelaide News of 18 September. It stated that the shareholders of the agricultural implement firm, John Shearer (Holdings) Ltd, will hold their annual general meeting in October. There are six items for-discussion. One of them is a proposal that directors' fees be increased from $42,750 to $52,250 a year. I point out that many directors carry numerous directorships. This is an area into which there is never an inquiry because these are the friends of the Liberal Party and the people who sit opposite.
This Government's policies will clearly increase unemployment and destroy the standards of living of the Australian people. This Government is also about to bring down a decision on the Industries Assistance Commission report on the motor vehicle industry. A wrong decision by this Government would cost thousands of jobs and threaten the very future of South Australia in particular. This House should be made aware of the problems facing the whole of South Australia should the lAC report be adopted. On Tuesday 22 September 10,000 vehicle industry workers took to the streets to let South Australia, and indeed Australia, know that they would not stand by idly

and let their jobs be destroyed, as they would be if the lAC report were adopted. A report in the Adelaide Advertiser of 23 September carried a banner headline: 'Car unions demand action. "Save Our Jobs Call By 10,000 At city protest rally".' The report stated:
More than 10,000 workers from South Australia's car manufacturing and allied industries crammed into Adelaide's main thoroughfares yesterday to demand action to save their jobs.
Police stopped or diverted city traffic while a solid phalanx of protestors, after a rally in Victoria Square, marched down the western side of King William Street to Parliament House to present their demands to politicians.
Hailing the march as a 'hug~ success', the secretary of the United Trades and Labor Council of South Australia, Mr R. J. Gregory, estimated the number who took part at almost 15,000 and said it was the biggest demonstration in Adelaide since the Vietnam moratorium protest march in May, 1970.
. . . The protestors adopted a resolution rejecting an Industries Assistance Commission report which proposes a 10 per cent reduction in tariffs after 1984 and increased quotas for imported vehicles.
The resolution said it was essential that Australia continue to restrict imports of motor vehicles to a maximum of 10 per cent of the domestic market and that an 85 per cent localcontent requirement be set on local manufacturers of motor vehicles.
Fourteen special trains and dozens of busses carried workers to and from the major work places in the Adelaide metropolitan area, including GMH's Woodville and Elizabeth plants and Mitsubishi's Tonsley Park and Lonsdale factories.
The march was peaceful and orderly, with the protesters in a happy mood chanting the familiar 'What do we want?-we want jobs' slogan on their way to Parliament House.
But their mood changed when the Minister for Industrial Affairs, Mr Brown, was invited to the microphone on the steps of Parliament House to address them.
Debate interrupted.
ADJOURNMENT
Sydney Rugby League Grand Final-Commonwealth Heads of Government
Meeting-Trade-The Fraser Government-Motor Vehicle Industry-Health
Care Services-Shipping Dispute-The Parliament-Australian Council for Rehabilitation oCthe Disabled
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10 p.m. I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parrama tta) (1O.0)-Next Sunday millions of eyes and ears in eastern Australia will be concentrated on what has become an annual ritual in Sydney since 1908. I refer, of course, to the grand final of the Sydney rugby league competition-a very big political matter. As the shadow Minister for sport, of course, I am very interested in all forms of athletic endeavour, particularly as I have been a sports nut all my life. As an old league player, I have

1720 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Adjournment

more than a passing interest in Sunday's event. MyoId friend and colleague, the redoubtable and inimitable Fred Daly, is the patron, long time supporter and guiding light of one of the protagonists, the Newtown Jets, who have not won a premiership since 1942. They have a worse record than some political parties. Good luck to you Fred! Strange to relate, the other team is-wait for itParramatta, about to annex its first premiership since entering the league in 1947. What a year it has been for the Parramatta Eels. For the record sixth year in succession they have won the club championship and then they managed to make the grand final in all three grades. I propose that they will probably win all three.
This year marks also the successful culmination of a long struggle for the Parramatta Rugby League Club to obtain permission to build a new Cumberland oval-a $15m venture which will supply Sydney with one of the most sophisticated and modern sporting and entertainment centres in the world. I am very proud to be associated with the Parramatta Rugby League Club. Fair play, good sportsmanship and gentlemanly behaviour both on and off the field are the hallmark of Parramatta's representatives. Not one Parramatta player has been sent off the field this season. Any form of violent or unfair play is frowned upon by our club under the guardianship of Jack Gibson, Parramatta's coach, Svengali and godfather figure.
The emphasis in Parramatta's play is on speed, skill and athleticism, backed up by resolute toughness and a firm adherence to the rules of the game. For this reason, I am always pleased to take my kids to see Parramatta play. Thuggery and brutish play are discouraged and open, free-flowing skilful football is the overriding theme. The people of the Parramatta area are as proud of their team as I am. The hopes of the people in the west of Sydney ride with them on Sunday.
Mr Deputy Speaker, I would like to go through the players and give a fingernail sketch of them all. In the front row we have Ronny Hilditch who is known as 'Captain Courageous'. He would run through a brick wall if Gibson commanded him to do so. Next we have Steven Edge, the captain and hooker, one of the toughest little men who ever played the game, but a very sensitive character who has a fascination with C. J. Dennis's poetry. The other front rower is big Bob O'Reilly, known familiarly as 'the Bear'-the personality player of Sydney rugby league. In the second row we have John Muggleton in his first season in first-grade rugby league; a fine young man who will make a great debut in the grand final on Sunday. Alongside him is little Stumpy Stevens, only 5 foot 9

inches and as tough as goats' knees. Next we have Ray Price, the lock and winner of the Rothman's medal in Sydney for the best and fairest player on two occasions. Then we have half back Peter Sterling, undoubtedly Australia's next rugby league half back. The five-eighth is Brett Kenny, a young man who is skilful, speedy and resolute-a great little player. In the centre is 'Gentleman' Mick Cronin from Gerringong who does not drink, smoke or swear. He is one of the greatest footballers ever to pull on a boot and an adornment to rugby league. Alongside him is Steve Ella, cousin to the redoubtable Ellas of Randwick rugby union fame. He is a wonderfully adept and smart footballer. On one wing we have Eric Grothe known as the Viking giant; a giant of a man who broke 10 seconds for 100 yards. On the other wing we have Graeme Atkins, a fine, determined and resolute player. The full back is Steve McKenzie, a young man in his first season of rugby league but he is already making the grand final.
Rugby league is almost a religion in New South Wales. To win the premiership in Sydney is the highlight'of the whole sporting year in New South Wales. This Sunday Parramatta Rugby League Club, for the first time since 1947, will be the premier club of Australian rugby league. I am terribly proud to be associated with the Eels. Parramatta Rugby League Club has 29,000 members, almost all of whom support my party. I am sure that the hopes of all honourable members ride with them on Sunday. This is the epitome of success for the working class of Sydney. The boys from the fibro houses are about to win the rugby league competition. I feel terribly sorry for Fred Daly. He has been in the wilderness since 1942 and he is doomed to stay there. But Fred had plenty of feeling for the wilderness. He was here in the wilderness for a long time. Eventually he had his success. Maybe it will come next year again. But 1981 is the year of the Eeis. I am sure that when all honourable members pick up the newspapers on Monday and see that Parramatta has won they will know that there is one happy shadow Minister for Sport.
Mr HYDE (Moore) (10.5)-1 wish to discuss a quite different spectator sport. The Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting to be held in Melbourne is significant for very many reasons. It is significantly relevant to the understanding of member nations of each other's aspirations and, in some cases, very pressing needs. It is relevant to understand all of those issues which are included within the North-South dialogue. One of those issues-trade barriers-is of particular relevance to the host nation, Australia. Not only are the

Adjournment

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1721

visiting nations exercised about it but also this is the element of the North-South economic debate which has almost universal support from economists and such prestigious organisations as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade Secretariat and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
The Australian Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has supported trade liberalisation. This is an issue which has singular relevance to Australia for two reasons. Firstly, Australia has, and is perceived by many Commonwealth nations to have, very high trade barriers. Secondly, Australia's self-interest dictates freer trade. In support of the first point I will quote from the Association of South East Asian Nations Business Quarterly for the second quarter of this year. It states:
The South East Asian countries have protested constantly over this thorny subject. It reached even Prime Ministerial proportions when Australian Premier-
That is how the article is written-
. . . Malcolm Fraser and his Singapore counterpart Lee Kuan Yew spoke rather heatedly on the issue.
The Business Quarterly then goes on to remind us that Milton Friedman described Australia as the most cossetted economy on earth. Then, in the unkindest cut of all, it quoted our Prime Minister at the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Lusaka when he said:
We need policies which will free those resources of capital and labour that are at present locked into unproductive uses and allow them to reflect the operation of market forces including most importantly, the competitive forces of international trade.
The article went on:
In spite of the strong stand taken by Australia against the European Economic Community protectionistic behaviour, there are still no signs that Australia will practice the sound economic sense its Prime Minister is so fond of preaching overseas.
In support of the second point, let me quote from what the Prime Minister had to say at the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development in Manila concerning protectionist devices. He said:
Even in terms of cold-blooded self-interest, such devices are short-sighted and self-defeating.
The Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne comes at a significant time for Australia. Our Government is in the process of considering further protection for our biggest protected industry-the car industry-which protection cost car buyers an additional $1,OOOm each year in a nation in which the average annual real economic growth over the whole decade of the 1970s has been only about $2,000m each year. For Australia's sake and for the sake of our credibility with the Commonwealth Heads of Government

who will be our guests, we must match our rhetoric on the matter of trade with hard action. Many good things may come of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting but none more important than a forced, hard look at trade barriers.
Finally, in case honourable members believe that there is anything new on earth, I will quote from an autobiography of Rudyard Kipling where he said:
And on a warm night I attended a Labour Congress, where Labour debated whether some much-needed life-boats should be allowed to be ordered from England, or whether the order should be postponed till life-bouts could be built in Australia under Labour direction at Labour prices.
I thank the House.
Mrs CHILD (Henty) (lO.lO)-ln this House in July 1975, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) stated:
Ten per cent or even fifty per cent of the truth is as good a way of misleading this Parliament and the Australian people as a downright lie. The half truth, the partial answer and the skipping over of the full facts are a misleading of this Parliament.
It is very seldom that I agree with the Prime Minister, but on this occasion I agree with this statement. Truth has become a casualty in this House, and never has this been more clearly illustrated than in the two censure debates which have taken place over the past few days. For the past six years, the Government has prefaced every debate on every issue in this House with a tirade about Labor's three years in office. If we could ever believe a word the Government says, Labor is responsible for every ill from which this country suffers.
The Government continues to harp on stability in government; it harps on integrity in government. Let us consider integrity first and have a quick look at some of the Prime Minister's promises, albeit most of them made in pre-election speeches. In 1975, the Prime Minister said:
There will be no international safaris by members of Parliament. Australia does not need a tourist as a Prime Minister.
We could all agree with that. In 1974, the Daily Mirror reported:
Mr Fraser suggeSted higher unemployment benefits if the number of jobless got much worse. He said the Government should pay a minimum wage of $80 a week if the number of unemployed reached 250,000.
It is well over that figure now and the Government is still paying $36 to unemployed persons under the age of 18. In April 1977, the Sydney Morning Herald noted:
The Fraser Government will continue to exempt pensioners over 70 from any means test.

1722 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Adjournment

Tell that to the pensioners. The list goes on and on. In November 1975, the Government stated:
The Australian Assistance Plan will be maintained. We will maintain Medibank.
In 1977, the Government stated:
Interest rates have begun to fall-they will keep on falling.
Who could ever believe that a government of integrity has been established?
Turning to the repeated claims of stability, we are al ways told that conservative governments provide stability and sound administration in stark contrast to the chaos which ensues under Labor governments, although I do not know that one could say that Wran produces any chaos. Listen to this: In the supposed turmoil of the Whitlam years three Ministers departed in three years. Under our present sound and stable administration, 12 Ministers either have resigned or have been sacked, and two more should be. The government is stable all right, but 12 of the nags have bolted. some went with a bang and some went with a whimper. Some went via the revolving door; they were back again before we even had time to miss them. One did not even get to wear his morning suit before he was sacked. Some enjoyed the experience so much they did it twice or even three times. Some luxuriate now in cushy jobs overseas and some still skulk around the back benches. No one can tell me that these constant upheavals are a mark of sound and stable government; they are more a mark of rudderless, dispirited government.
At the heart of this turmoil is the character of the Prime Minister. He has earned neither the respect nor the trust of his colleagues, and he knows it. He is well aware that he can expect no mercy from them as he starts to look like a loser. When that day comes they will all be in the razor gang. In this poisonous atmosphere of mistrust, truth is the casualty. In this poisonous atmosphere of mistrust, good government in Australia is the casualty and the people of Australia, for whom we are supposed to govern, have become quite irrelevant.
Mr TUCKEY (O'Connor) (lO.15)-The motor vehicle industry is put into perspective today by articles appearing in the Press. On page 25 of the West Australian, an article headed '10,000 in demand to save jobs' states:
ADELAIDE: More than 10,000 workers from South Australia's car manufacturing and allied industries marched through the main streets here yesterday, demanding that action be taken to save their jobs.
It is reasonable to accept the concern that workers have for their jobs and the living it provides for their families. However, the article further states:

The march was peaceful and orderly, with the protesters chanting the familiar 'What do we want?-we want jobs' . . .
But their mood changed when the Minister for Industrial Affairs, Mr Brown, was invited to the microphone on the steps of Parliament House . . .
They booed, hissed and chanted while Mr Brown doggedly stayed at the microphone . . .
It is the stock in trade of the labour movement, and in that I include the present Opposition, to deny the right of free speech in this fashion. However, this politically oriented rally overlooked that it was attacking a friend. Honourable members wi1l remember the emotional letter dated 17 July that each of us received from that same Honourable Dean Brown opposing tariff reform and defending these workers and their industry in South Australia. So that is the South Australian situation.
Page 7 of the Australian Financial Review takes us to the heart of the vehicle building industry in Australia and tells us what is happening in Victoria. An article headed 'Wage claims halt Victoria's Ford and Nissan car plants' states:
Almost 5,000 workers at Ford's car, truck and tractor plants in Broadmeadows are on strike over a $30 wage claim . . .
Action on the claim has come from . . . the Vehicle Builders Employees' Federation . . .
In the meantime, 3,400 workers on the Falcon and Cortina lines are on strike, 500 at truck assembly plant and 40 in the tractor assembly section. An additional 700 workers in the plastic component factory are also involved.
Most importantly, it states:
Tooling up for production of the Laser at the Broadmeadows plant will also be affected.
The company has recently upgraded its anticipated output from 18,000 to 21 ,500 units for the nine months . . .
VBEF pickets are preventing installation of the Laser line, which includes a number of robot units.
'What do we want? We want jobs!'
Then we had the hypocrisy of a paid-up advertisement in the Age dated 27 August which was jointly sponsored by General Motors-Holden's Ltd and the Vehicle Builders Employees Federation. It states:
. . . in the interests of a healthy and strong local vehicle manufacturing industry, high employment and an industrialised Australia.
If high employment were the objective, could someone tell me why 20,000 vehicle workers were not working yesterday? Why is it necessary to picket that part of a company's plant where attempts are being made to increase economies of scale and meet the competition of high degrees of automation that exist overseas? That is the story of Australia's 50,000 vocal and militant vehicle workers.

Adjournment

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1723

What is the story for anyone of Australia's millions of consumers? This industrial action will limit a person's opportunity to buy the car of his choice. It inevitably will add to the $3,000 plus premium that our present tariff policies already oblige him to pay in support of this group of nonworking Australians who believe he owes them a living and are ever prepared to go on strike to prove it. The Opposition members, allies of this group, have complained vigorously about the effect on family incomes of home interest rate rises, yerat least those charges are below most international equivalents. That $3,000 I referred to represents approximately $25 a week in hire purchase payments made by the typical Australian car owner. That is much more than his interest rate increases and in no way is supported by international vehicle production costs. Mr Deputy Speaker, by its actions the VBEF has failed to convince me that it should be protected from international competition to the cost of all other Australians.
Mr MILDREN (Ballarat) (10.19)-1 wish to draw the attention of the House to a case of disadvantage under the latest health scheme that has been brought to my notice in the electorate of Ballarat. The circumstances throw further light upon the lack of awareness or the lack of compassion, or both, of the Government towards the less affluent and the disabled. I refer to the case of a married couple with two young children aged 8 years and 7 years. They live on one income only, as the wife remains at home to give very loving care to the elder of the two children. The husband receives a gross income of approximately $280 a week, which is just about or slightly below the average weekly income. Being a family of only two children, of course, they were ineligible for the increase in family allowance announced in the recent Budget. The elder of the two girls, Bernadette, is profoundly intellectually disabled-a bit like the honourable member for O'Connor (Mr Tuckey) only this girl is someone for whom we can feel some compassion-and is totally dependent. Her parents have struggled to look after her at home. She is so disabled that she is being treated as chronically disabled. Being considered a chronic case, under the previous health schemes she received outpatient care, and casualty treatment under the care of specialists and pharmaceuticals. The situation with this family is that all these items are now subject to a charge because the only factor being taken into account is the actual financial state of the parents. These parents are striving with great courage and dedication to keep their daughter with them. The cost

to the State, if the child were to be institutionalised, would be far more than it would cost simply to pay for the treatment of this child while she was cared for at home. The cruel Government knows this. If this is an indication of the sincerity of the Fraser Administration in this, the International Year of Disabled Persons, it is a disgrace.
These persons are truly admirable. They do not see themselves as courageous or sacrificial and they strive to reassure me that many other people are much worse off. That is the degree of dedication we can expect from such folk. They are speaking only of the cost of medical care, but that is only part of the cost. The paltry sum of $15 which constitutes the handicapped children's allowance barely recognises the sacrifices that these people and others like them make. They deserve much better treatment. It is to be hoped that the consciences of some intellectual members of the Government will be instrumental in having this situation remedied. On behalf of these folk in Ballarat and, I suggest, in many other electorates throughout the country, I entreat the Government to act responsibly and to give these people the justice that they so rightfully deserve.
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin) (10.22)-1 am pleased to see the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) in the chamber, just as I am pleased to see the honourable member for O'Connor (Mr Tuckey) and the honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom) behind me. I ask the honourable member for Wills whether he has enjoyed this week. As a back bencher, I was thoroughly ashamed to come into this chamber and hear all the claptrap that I heard this week. I have to come to Canberra to try to tell honourable members that Tasmania is sinking, that we do not have ships going to the island, that no industries are functioning over there and all I have heard is a bit of claptrap-members acting like little school boys, coming to Canberra and fighting about a little document one way or another. It is a lot of rot. I thought the honourable member for Wills had more intelligence than that. I thought he realised that the people of Tasmania had a bit of respect for him. They thought he knew something about industrial relations. Does he know that things are falling down completely in Tasmania? No ships are coming across to the island. Industries are stopping. They are. putting people off. The apples cannot be exported from Tasmania because of the shipping strike. Yet grown men come to the national Parliament and go on with all this rot-not just one side, but the other side too. We have had intellectual giants in the other place trying to pull people apart like rag dolls, and

1724 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Adjournment

it is damn stupid. We should all start to wake up (Mr Good luck) could take a little interest in

to ourselves.

it-and that is the financial position of the Aus-

D.o honourable memb~rs know what the people out m the open arena thmk about us? They think we are a mob of fools. When we come to the national Parliament in Canberra we do not talk about the problems of Australia; we talk about trying to break people, trying to pull them apart.
We do not even worry about the problems in Australia. I can tell honourable members that there are some problems in Australa today. We, as the Government, should wake up to them and the Opposition, which says it cares for the working man, should wake up to them too. The Opposition talks about the poor and the disabled. We are killing the poor and the disabied in Australia at the moment; yet the Opposition argues about what is going on in this Parliament at the moment. It is damn ridiculous, if you do not mind my saying so,

tralian Council for Rehabilitation of Disabled. ACROD is a voluntary organisation supported
partly by a Commonwealth Government grantin-aid and partly by subscriptions and donations from members. A small national office is main-
tained, located since mid-1979 in Canberra. In 1965, the Australian Government acknowledged the work of the Council and provided the first grant-in-aid. For the years 1975"76 to 1978-79 the Council was provided with a grant-in-aid of
$150,000, with no increases or adjustments. This level of grant was increased by $10,000 to $160,000 in 1979-80 and has been maintained at that level for the last three years, despite inflation. If the grant-in-aid had been increased in line with the consumer price index, the grant in 1981-82 would have been $296,000.

Mr Deputy Speaker. I am not an intellectual

giant, I am not a barrister and I am not a solicitor

but I am a practical person and I recognise that

we have heard rot this week. I thought the

honourable member for Wills had far more intelli-

.gence than to waste two days going on about irrel-

evant things, things which do not really make this

nation tick. I am sorry, but I must also give the re-

porters a bit of a burst. They wait like vultures in

the Press Gallery to get a little story rather than

pinpoint constructively the problems we have in

Australia. They would waiting to devour the

rMathineirstweraiftolrikCe ovmumltuunries~'

cations (Mr Sinclair), waiting to devour the Min-

ister for Industrial Relations (Mr Viner); waiting

for mistakes which are quite irrelevant in the con-

text of the problems we have in Australia today.

We had all better start to wake up. We live in

ACROD has always raised a proportion of its

own funds from its membership. Increasing press-

ure has been placed on members to raise their

annual contribution. From 1978-79 ACROD members increased their

ctoont1ri9b8u0t-8io1~

from $59,000 to $76,000. In addition, revenue was

raised through the hiring of films and the sale of

publications. In 1980-81, these additional receipts

amounted to $34,000. It can be seen that ACROD

has acted responsibly in attempting to raise funds

from its own sources. However, many of the or-

ganisations are now facing financial problems.

Hospital and educational facilities are suffering

from cut-backs in finances. The majority of

ACROD's members are funded in part under the

Handicapp~d Persons Assistance Act. It is ack-

nowledged that there is at least a $40m backlog in

subsidies to be paid out to facilities funded under

glass houses. We could not take the bit of criticism the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act. Be-

about a little bit of drinking. We ran to the Privicause of the financial straits of the organisations it

leges Committee. People out in the open arena are has been impossible for them to increase further

starting to say: 'What are they made of? They are. their generosity in contributions to ACROD.

not made of very much at all because they are

worried about trying to destroy, to character assassinate. They do not have the guts to get on with the problems of the country. They would rather pull people to pieces'. I warn my own Government members that we had better start to heed what they say. We will be faced with a rabble such as that opposite if we do not watch what we are doing. We, the back benchers, had better start saying what we think rather than allowing people to destroy the country we are all trying to fight
for.

It is appalling that in the International Year of Disabled Persons this organisation is forced to cut back its services which are of benefit to disabled people. For the financial year 1980-81 the Executive Committee approved a deficit of $40,000 to ensure that the Council could reasonably fulfil its obligations during the International Years of Disabled Persons. This has meant a depletion of ACROD's resources and a further deficit is now impossible. One of the major areas in which ACROD has had to cut back is the publication of

Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (10.26)-1 a quarterly journal. It has been published since

would like to raise something of a little more subJuly 1963 but it will no longer be issued. In the

stance than that which we have just listened tojournal there is the reported speech of the Prime

perhaps the honourable member for Franklin Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) at the opening of

Adjournment

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1725

ACROD's office in Canberra on 20 May 1981, just a few months ago.
Mr SainsburyWe funded that.
Mr CUNNINGHAM-Of course the Government did. The Prime Minister said when he opened the building:
This is an occasion both for congratulations and for renewed commitment. This building symbolises a realistic concern for the well-being of disabled persons within the Australian community. I have no doubt that this building will be symbolic of the new hope, and the larger expectations which disabled persons now have.
Let us take a little look at what these people have following the Budget. Because of the stinginess of this Government, all ACROD national committee meetings have been discontinued. Staff cuts have already commenced and all project officers have been given notice.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! It being 10.30 p.m., the debate is interrupted. The House stands adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow.

House adjourned at 10.30 p.m.

NOTICES

The following notices were given:

Mr Viner to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Judges' Pensions Act 1968.

Mr MeVeigh to move:

That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the
following proposed work which was referred to the Parliamenty Standing Committee on Public works and on
which the Commillee has duly reported to Parliament: Construction of a Commonwealth office building at Townsville,
Qld.

Mr McVeigh to move:

That, in accordance with the provIsions of the Public
Works Committee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the following proposed work which was referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which
the committee has duly reported to Parliament: Garden Island, N.S.W., Modernisation stage 2.

Mr MeVeigh to move:

That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public

Works Commitlee Act 1969, it is expedient to carry out the

following proposed work which was referred to the Parlia-

mentary Standing Committee on Public Works and on which

the Committee has duly reported to Parliament: Armoured

centre redevelopment, Puckapunyal, Vic.

-

1726 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Department of National Development and Energy: Special Arrangements for Disabled Persons
(Question No. 462)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) In view of the fact that 1981 isdesignated as the International Year of Disabled Persons. what special arrangements has the Department of National Development and Energy made to assist disabled persons.
(2) Do any special arrange'ments made include (a) increased employment of disabled persons and (b) improved access for disabled persons to any building or other facility occupied by the Department; if so, what are the details.
(3) What budgetary allocations were made in 1980-81 to facilitate any special arrangements for disabled persons in the Department of National Development and Energy.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the Minister assisting the Prime Minister's reply to Question No. 458 which appeared in the House of Representatives Weekly Hansard for 10 June 1981 (Pages 3564 to 3566).
Department of Aboriginal Affairs: Special Arrangements for Disabled Persons
(Question No. 482)
Mr Holding asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) In view of the fact that 1981 is designated as the International Year of Disabled Persons, what special arrangements has the Department of Aboriginal Affairs made to assist disabled persons.
(2) Do any special arrangements made include (a) increased employment of disabled persons and (b) improved access for disabled persons and (b) improved access for disabled persons to any building or other facility occupied by the Department; ifso, what are the details.
(3) What budgetary allocations were made in 1980-81 to facilitate any special arrangements for disabled persons in the Department of Aboriginal Affairs.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Prime Minister to Question No. 458 (weekly Hansard, page 35640f 10June 1981).
Superannuation Liability of Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 1327)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

(I) What statutory authorities under his aegis have liabilities to the Commonwealth by way of employer contributions
for superannuation which have not been paid ot which have not yet been determined.

(2) If these contributions have f10t been paid, what are the amounts involved and how and when is payment to be made.

(3) If the contributions have not yet been determined, when is the liability expected to be assessed and how is payment expected to be made. .

Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable

member's question is as follows:

.

I refer the. honourable member to the answer to Question No. 1320 given by the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, which appeared at page 1265 of the Hansard of 10 Septem bel' 1981.

Superannuation Liability of Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Business and
Consumer Affairs
(Question No. 1330)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(I) What statutory authorities under his aegis have liabilities to the Commonwealth by way of employer contributions for superannuation which have not been paid or which have not yet been determined.
(2) If these contributions have not been paid, what are the amounts involved and how and when is payment to be made.
(3) If the contributions have not yet been determined, when is liability expected to be assessed and how is payment ex pected to be made.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) to (3) Please refer to the answer provided by the Minister for Finance to question No. 1320, Hansard 10 September, 1981 P 1265.

Vehicle Conversion to LPG Usage: Department ofIminigration and Ethnic Affairs

(Question No. 1561)

Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

(I) How many (a) cars, (b) commercial vehicles and (c)

trucks were being operated by his Department, excluding ve-

hicles supplied by the Department of Administrative Services,

as at 30 June 1980.

..

(2) How many of these vehicles had been (a) converted to LPG usage and (b) purchased already equipped for LPG usage.

(3) Have plans been made to increase use of LPG in vehicles operated by his Department; if so, what are the details.

Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 1563 given by the Minister for Administrative Services, which appeared at pages 3579-3580 of the weekly Hansard of
10June 1981.

Answers to Questions

23 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1727

Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Trade and Resources
(Question No. 2840)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
(I) Further to the Review of Commonwealth Functions which called for Ministers to scrutinise all authorities within their portfolios (Hal/sard, 30 April 1981, page 1850) which statutory authorities within the Minister's portfolio are to be (a) terminated, (b) continued and (c) reviewed in depth.
(2) If the scrutiny referred to in part (I) has not been completed, when will it be finalised and the results reported to Parliament.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am at present examining authorities within my portfolio with a view to recommending those that should be terminated, continued or reviewed in depth. I will be reporting to the Prime Minister before the end of October 1981 and it is expected that Parliament will be informed of any results which require legislative action later this year or early 1982.
Atomic Bomb Tests in Australia
(Question No. 2883)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 27 August 1981:
(I) How many atomic bombs were exploded duri ng the tests of atomic weapons conducted in Australia in the 1950s.
(2) On what dates and at what locations was each bomb exploded.
(3) What was the explosive force, measured in tonnes of TNT equivalent, of each bomb exploded.
(4) How many persons were employed to allend each test, indicating the categories of personnel, including members of the armed forces, scientists, public service engineers, and employees of the then Postmaster-GeneraI's Department.
(5) What safety and/or decontamination procedures were followed in respect of these persons to deal with or avoid problems associated with fallout.
(6) What monitoring procedures have been used since the period of atomic testing in Australia to keep track of the persons referred to in part (4) to determine the incidence of cancer and other possible radiation-induced illnesses, and cases of premature death, other than by accident.
(7) If nO monitoring of these persons has been conducted, what is the reason.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Twelve.
(2) and (3)-

Date
3 October 1952 15 October 1953 27 October 1953 16 May 1956 19June 1956 27 September 1956

Location
Monte Bello Emu Emu Monte Bello MonteBello Maralinga

Approximate size
Kiloton range Kiloton range Kiloton range Kiloton range Kiloton range Kiloton range

Date
4 October 1956 I I October 1956 22 October 1956 14 September 1957 25 September 1957 9 October 1957

Location
Maralinga Mara'linga Maralinga Maralinga Maralinga Maralinga

Approximate size
Low yield Low yield Kiloton range Low yield Kiloton range Kilot,?n range

Source: Australian Ionising Radiation Advisory Council reports Nos 4, 5 and 7 tabled on 30 May 1979, 13 November 1979 and 22 May 1980 respectively.
(4) to (7) My Department is co-ordinating an intensive investigation into the involvement of Australians in the atomic weapons tests program to establish what levels of radiation exposure could have occurred to those who were in radioactive environments after the explosions.
The investigation will include a survey of all Australian personnel who were involved in the program and can be traced.
In addition, the Australian Ionising Radiation Advisory Council has been asked to examine the safety procedures in force at the time of the tests.

Departure Tax
(Question No. 2932)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Irrtmigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 27 August 1981:
What was the cost of collecting the departure tax during 1980-81 and what is the expected cost of collecting the tax during 1981-82.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The direct cost of collecting the departure tax during 1980-81 was approximately $895,000 and the expected cost of collecting the tax during 1981-82 is $967,000. These amounts cover salaries and related expenditures, printing and distribution of stamps, cleaning and security services where applicable. In some instances, salary costs are for officers performing duties additional to collection of departure tax.

National Tuberculosis and Brucellosis Eradication Scheme
(Question No. 2969)

Mr Campbell asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 8 September 1981:

(I) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the

proposed seminar to be held on 10 and II September 1981 in

Broome, Western Australia, for the purpose of bringing to the

attention of Aboriginal-run callie projects the need to be

actively involved in a national tuberculosis and brucellosis

eradication scheme.

.

(2) If so, would the Minister provide a detailed breakdown of the funds allocated by the Aboriginal Development Commission for this proposed seminar.

Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

1728 REPRESENTATIVES 23 September 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) I have been informed that the seminar was arranged for 17 and 18 September 1981. It has been organised by the Aboriginal Development Commission in conjunction with the Western Australian Department of Agriculture.
(2) The Aboriginal Development Commission allocated $4,248 for the seminar. Some 40 delegates and advisers from some 20 Aboriginal pastoral properties indicated their intention to attend the seminar. Details are: travel expenses $1,848, accommodation $1 ,400, catering $500, contingencies $500.
Russian CTC Line: Compensation to Passengers
(Question No. 3107)
Mr Mildren asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
(I) Did the Prime Minister give an undertaking in June 1980 that, where Government action against the Soviet Union has directly resulted in financial loss to particular individuals or firms, the Government would consider sympathetically claims for compensation for these people.
(2) If so, what guidelines were established by the Department of Finance to decide who should receive compensation as a result of Government action banning the Russian CTC line from Australian ports during the Olympic Games period in 1980.
(3) What was the final date on which claims for compensation could be submitted.
(4) Has compensatioR been paid to any individual who was booked as a passenger on the Russian CTC line and who suffered loss as a result of the ban; ifso, (a) what sum was paid in compensation in each case, and (b) what were the circumstances of each case.

Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The Prime Minister announced on \3 June 1980 that the Government had considered in detail the question of compensation for firms, organisations and individuals affected by the actions the Government had taken towards the Soviet Union and Iran. He referred to previous Government statements that compensation claims from affected firms, organisations and individuals would be considered sympathetically and set out the principles which would underlie consideration of claims and the criteria on which examination would be undertaken.
The essential principles underlying consideration of claims are, as the Prime Minister announced, those which have been applied in consideration of such ex gratia payments by the Government over the last decade or so:
payments should relate to the necessary financial effects of Government policy or actions to the extent that effects are outside the control of individuals;
the policy or actions of the Government should either have adversely affected the reasonable, well-founded expectations of persons and/or have had disproportionate effects on different sections of the community; and
offers of payment should be restricted to financial consequences which are the direct result of Government policy or actions.
Payments are only to be made in respect of total unrecouped expenditure (excluding profits and overheads).
A copy of the full guidelines established by the Government is being provided separately to the honourable member.
(3) 12 December 1980.
(4) No.


