House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 122, 1981 Tuesday, 5 May 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

1932 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Petitions

Tuesday, 5 May 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2.45 p.m., and read prayers.
JOINT SITTING Representation of Australian Capital Tenitory Mr SPEAKER-I inform the House that, in accordance with the provisions of the Senate (Representation of Territories) Act 1973, at a Joint Sitting held in the Senate chamber at 2.15 p.m. today, Margaret Elizabeth Reid was chosen to hold the place in the Senate rendered vacant by the death of Senator John William Knight, a senator for the Australian Capital Territory.
PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Proposed Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that: Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within four years is contrary to the national interest. Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in:
(i) The creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) Higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Barry Jones, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Morris.
Petitions received.
Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia, respectfully calls for:
The immediate and unconditional withdrawal of any proposals to deny unemployment benefits to unemployed people under 18 years old.
That the level of Benefits for all unemployed people, and including people receiving sickness benefits and pensions, be raised to at least 120 per cent of the poverty line.
That future employment policies be devoted to job creation and the restoration of full employment rather than the evasion of this responsibility by hiding the unemployed in short term training and education schemes.

Public acknowledgement of the fact that unemployment is the result of insufficient jobs and not the fault of any minority group, the education system or the unemployed themselves.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Ml' Howe and Dr Jenkins.
Petitions received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the I louse of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of children's services, which has been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 Budget, and further, that annual budget allocations in the area of children's services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Toxic Shock Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned by the threats to women's health and lives posed by Toxic Shock Syndrome, and urge the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
(I) Tampons, sanitary napkins, vaginal deodorants and similar sanitary products to be re-classified under Therapeutic Agents (not under "Cosmetics" as at present), in order to bring them under the scrutiny of the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee. We believe manufacture must be under the strictest hygienic conditions.
(2) After re-classification, we urge an immediate government-funded inquiry into all aspects of manufacture and content of these products. This must lead to: (i) contents of product and instructions for correct usage to be shown on packaging; (ii) removal of synthetic fibres, chemicals or ingredients that are potentially or actually harmful to users.
(3) Allocation of extra funding for ongoing research by the National Health and Medical Research Council into these products, results of this research to be made public to ensure all health workers and potential users are fully informed. This campaign of public education would necessitate multilingual distribution of the information where appropriate.
Your petitioners therefore humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert possible threats posed to women's health by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Family Law Act
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth that allegations have been made by litigants that unjust decisions in relation to ancillary matters are being made at the Family Court of Australia.
We call on the Government to amend Section 79 (I) of the Family Law Act, to allow all Family Courts to be open and publication of details of proceedings permitted, provided

Petitions

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1933

names of parties and other identifying information is prohibited from disclosure.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Connolly.
Petition received.
Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth, do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
1. Note that legislation establishing plant breeders' rights in other countries has had serious adverse effects, namely:
(a) Virtual monopoly control of seed production has passed into the hands of a few large international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation.
(b) The varieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and will not grow without the aid of artificial fertilizers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers.
(c) The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, rendering them vulnerable to disease and other environmental threats.
2. Recognise that maintenance of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to prevent exclusive control over plant genetic materials from falling into private hands.
3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gardeners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden produce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment of plant breeders' rights in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrCowan.

Australian men of having issues of concern to thcm considered, debated and voted on by thcir Parliamentary representatives without intervention and interference by an unrepresentative 'Advisory Council'.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrJull.
Petition received.
Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth, do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
1. Note that legislation establishing plant variety rights in other countries has had adverse effects, namely:
(a) Virtual monopoly control of seed production has passed into the hands of a few large international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation.
(b) The varieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and will not grow without the aid of artificial fertlizers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers.
(c) The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, rendering them vulnerable to disease and other environmental threats.
2. Recognise that maintenance of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to prevent exclusive control over plant genetic material from falling into private hands.
3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gardeners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden produce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment of plant variety rights in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kerin.
Petition received.

Petition received.
National Women's Advisory Council
To the Honourable the Sepaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled.
The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the National Women's Advisory Council has not been democratically elected by the women of Australia;

Community Health Program
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
We the undersigned citizens do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government
take steps to ensure that, at the least, the community health program in New South Wales be maintained at its current level; and that the Commonwealth does not cut back the specific grants given under Section 96 of the Constitution in relation to these programs.

That the National Women's Advisory Council is not representative of the women of Australia;
That the National Women's Advisory Council is a discriminatory and sexist imposition on Australian women as Australian men do not have a National Men's Advisory Council imposed on them.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the National Women's Advisory Council be abolished to ensure that Australian women have equal opportunity with

And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
by Mr Leo McLeay. Petition received.
Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport
To the Honourable, the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-

1934 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Petitions

1. We call upon the Commonwealth and State Governments to select a site for Sydney's second Airport now and to protect it by immediate development.
2. We do not agree to the expansion of the Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport.
3. We support the Marrickville Municipal Council's opposition to the Airport extension proposals.
4. We do not agree that nuisances from aircraft noises are reducing.
5. We oppose any shorter evening 'curfew' hours.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray .that there be no extension of Kingsford-Smith Airport, Sydney.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Leo McLeay.
Petition received.
Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. The hotel industry in Australia is long-established and a valuable part of the community of this nation, providing places where the people may partake of the three basic needs of life: a place to eat, a place to drink, a place to sleep.
2. The hotel industry is accepted throughout the nation as occupying an important place in the social and economic activities of Australia.
3. The hotel industry is almost entirely within the private sector and makes a large contribution to the government in taxes of various kinds.
4. The hotel industry has a need to sustain an appropriate level of turnover and growth, to make profit, and to sustain and improve the level of employment.
5. The hotel industry of Australia is gravely concerned at published reports that the Government intends to increase excise charges on beer in the forthcoming Budget.
6. Sales of beer constitute the major source of income of most of the industry's 5,811 hotels in Australia.
7. The very steep rises in beer excise in 1975 and 1978 severely retarded the growth of the Australian hotel industry.
8. Any further increases in excise on beer in the 1981 Budget would further retard the industry at a time when growth is essential to maintaining economic viability and the ability to serve the constantly growing needs of the community.
9. Such is its significance as a community requirement, beer occupies a place on the Consumer Price Index, and any alteration to its cost to the community would have an inflationary effect.
10. Any increase in excise would result in and force the hotel industry to pass on such increases to the consumer by way of higher prices for beer.
11. Higher excise would be only the starting point for an upward spiral in beer prices because of the presence of other factors, such as State Licence Fee taxes, which are directly linked to excise rates.
12. The hotel industry of Australia already is gravely handicapped by heavy excise and other tax imposts, its growth is at a standstill; and, inevitably must decline if beer excise is increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives:
1. Recognise the importance and place of the Australian Hotel industry in the social and economic life of the nation.

2. Accept that the viability of the hotel industry is essential to the maintenance of employment opportunities and stability of the industry is essential to enable it to continue to provide for the hotel needs of the nation in this period of growing popUlation and increasing tourism.
And further, that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives resist and reject any move to increase excise on beer.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon.
Petition received.
Discriminatory Legislation
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament in Canberra assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That currently discrimination in the provision of work, in appointment to jobs and in promotion exists in Australia on particular grounds including, inter alia, grounds of race, ethnic origin, martial status, pregnancy, sex and/or sexual preference; and That currently discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits is exercised against particular groups of individuals in particular, against married women.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in Commonwealth employment, in employment of individuals under federal awards, in employment of persons by statutory bodies and quasi-governmental organisations, and in employment of all persons in areas over which Commonwealth and Australian Capital Territory equal opportunity legislation should have jurisdiction; and
That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits to all persons without regard to sex and/or marital status.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Sir William McMahon.
Petition received.
Trade Unions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that we are gravely disturbed by the actions of militant unions and the ACTU, the failure of the President of the ACTU to assist positively in settling the dispute which has caused massive losses to Qantas our National Airline, and we applaud the action of the Government in using RAAF planes to rescue Australians stranded abroad.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament and the Government should be of firm resolve not to permit such unions to hold the country to ransom and continue to take a foreceful and resolute stand against such union militancy.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.
Education
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
A petition of the undersigned citizens, residents within the Federal electorate of Kingsford-Smith respectfully showeth:

Petitions

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1935

Our dismay at the reductions in the total expenditure implemented in 1980 and proposed for 1981 and in particular on government schools and colleges.
Our concern at the immediate and long-term effects such reductions are having and will have, upon the educational needs and welfare of the children and students within public schools, Technical and Further Education Colleges, Colleges of Advanced Education and Universities.
Our further concern that education, which is a major element in the public sector of the Australian economy has been consistently down-graded from a position of importance in the development of the National economy' as a whole.
Our affirmation that Australia's own development depends upon the development of its most important natural resource, our children, and that education must be restored to a position of major priority for this task by this and all future Federal Governments.
We call upon the Federal Government to immediately restore and increase substantially its allocation of resources to education in government schools and colleges in order to achieve these ends.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lionel Bowen.
Petition received.
Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens of New South Wales respectfully showeth that the Federal Government did not make increased funding available for government school programs such as:
1. General recurrent. 2. Migrant education. 3. Disadvantaged schools. 4. Special education. 5. Capital grants. 6. Multicultural education. 7. Disadvantaged country areas. 8. Children in institutions. 9. Services and Development. 10. Education Centres. 11. Special projects.
but increased the money available to the non-government school sector by 5.9 per cent.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honourable House will restore and increase substantially, in real terms. the allocation of funds for government school programs.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Robert Brown.
Petition received.
Butler Tanks Post Office
Petition to the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned residents of Butler Tanks of South Australia showeth:
That owing to changes by Australia Post in a new mail cartage Tender MSF 222 and MSF 222 (a) to close on Tuesday 24th March 1981. And owing to the fact that the majority of mail that was distributed on this mail run, was in the past sorted by the Butler Tanks Post Office but is now sorted by the Tumby Bay Post Office.
Your petitioners wish to bring to your knowledge. that these changes will:

(a) Effectively prohibit the existing mail contractor from being able to tender fairly for the contract. He has faithfully carried out this mail run for the last 31 years.
(b) We feel it will deliberately bring about a situation that could result in the closure of the Butler Tanks Post Office. which with its auxiliary services is the only facility available to the district for this isolated community. This Post Office also provides support facilities for the nearby Mount Hill School.
Your petitioners therefore pray that your honourable House will:
(1) Change the new contracts MSF 222 and MSF 222 (a) back to the conditions that existed prior to its introduction.
(2) Return to Butler Tanks Post Office. the right to sort all mail addressed to Butler Tanks as it used to previously.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Porter.
Petition received.
FAMILY ALLOWANCES Notice of Motion
Mr BURR (Wilmot)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House is of the opinion that-
(1) The Government should increase the family allowance benefits by 53 per cent so as to take account of inflationary increases that have occurred from June 1976 to December 1980;
(2) Family allowances should be adjusted annually in the future in accordance with either the consumer price index or national wage movements; and
(3) In order to raise the necessary finance to fund increased family allowances, a levy be imposed on all raw minerals leaving Australia. such a levy to operate in a manner similar to the coal export levy.
DISALLOWED NOTICE OF MOTION Mrs Darling proceeding to give a notice of motion-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will reframe her notice and put it in a proposition form.
TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION Notice of Motion
Mr SPENDER (North Sydney)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting. I shall move:
That this House-
(l) deplores any attempt by foreign courts to exercise extra-territorial jurisdiction in a manner which is in any way in conflict with or incompatible with Australian sovereign national authority;
(2) urges the Government to take whatever steps may be open to it to prevent the exercise or attempted exercise by foreign courts of any such extra-territorial jurisdiction.

1936 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

EDUCATION
Notice of Motion
Mrs DARLING (Li1ley)~I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House--
(1) expresses grave concern at the Government's decision to-
(a) terminate special support for educational research, (b) abolish the Education Research and Development
Committee, and (c) scale down the in-house and contracted research
activities of the Department of Education, and
(2) calls on the Government to restore the Australian Research Grants Committee's funding to the level of the 1966 grant in updated values.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
HEALTH CHANGES
Dr BLEWETT~I direct my question to the Treasurer as the Minister most responsible for the latest health muddle, Will he please inform the House, firstly, what the definition of an approved hospital table will be for taxation and Commonwealth health benefit eligibility purposes; secondly, whether the tax rebate will apply on basic medical and basic hospital tables if they are held separately; and, finally, whether tax deductibility will remain for medical and hospital expenses?
Mr HOWARD-The answer to the last part of the question is yes. The answer to the second part is that the tax rebate will apply for either basic hospital or basic medical tables. The answer to the first part of the question is that after further Cabinet consideration within the next day or two a statement will be made about the precise definition of the subject matter on which the honourable gentleman asked his question.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOUSE
Mr McLEAN-I ask the Minister for the Capital Territory: What is the latest cost estimate for the construction of the new Parliament House? Is it a fact that a decision not to proceed with the new Parliament House would be in accord with the overall economic objectives of the Government and would achieve, with one decision, taxpayers' savings equal to approximately 40 per cent of those achieved by the so-called razor gang after 350 decisions?
Mr HODGMAN~ The original precompetition budget for the new and permanent Parliament House was $151m at May 1978 prices. In August last year a budget of $220m at May 1978 prices was established. I indicate to the honourable member that at the moment the Parliament House Construction Authority is working

on a detailed updating of costs, not merely for the building but for the entire project. Lastly, despite a very lengthy hearing by the Review of Commonwealth Functions committee, no decision was made either to interrupt or to defer the construction of the new Parliament House for the national capital.
STATES GRANTS
Mr WILLIS~I address my question to the Treasurer. It relates to reports that at the Premiers Conference yesterday the Government offered the States only a 9 per cent rise in the basic level of financial assistance grants for next year. Is the Treasurer aware that total Commonwealth payments to the States have already fallen by 12 per cent per head of population in real terms since 1975-76? Does he acknowledge that the only portion of Federal payments for the States which has shown any real growth during the last five years has been revenue sharing grants? Since the rate of inflation for government consumption is currently over 13 per cent a year and the population is growing at about 1.3 per cent a year, is he at all concerned that rather than providing real growth as they have in the past, realtinancial assistance grants per head of population are likely to fall by some 5.5 per cent next financial year?
Mr HOWARD-The proposals made by the Commonwealth to the States at yesterday's Premiers Conference, and therefore the outcome of that Conference, are fully consistent with the commitment that this Government has shown, particularly over the past two weeks~ to the cause of smaller government, to the cause of making greater room in the conduct of our economic affairs for taxation relief. Everything that the Government has done in the context of the Premiers Conference has had that overall objective in mind.
The Government has provided to the States, for the general revenue payments, a formula which is not as generous as the formula which operated from 1976 onwards. I make no bones about that because that formula provided for real growth of up to 6 per cent or 7 per cent in real terms during some of the years between 1976 and 1980. Clearly the sort of arrangement that the States were looking for would, on my calculations, have involved a revenue sharing growth factor of 5 per cent or 6 per cent in real terms. That plainly would have been unacceptable, and quite plainly it would have been inconsistent with the sort of approach that we have adopted.
This Government, as honourable members on both sides of the House know, has a number of very major commitments in areas such as defence

Questions Without Notice

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1937

and income support payments which contain unavoidable real increases from year to year. If any kind of overall Budget result of responsibility is to be achieved, it is therefore necessary that the other areas which are not subject to those sorts of pressures be the subject of a very stringent approach, and that is the approach that this Government has taken. We believe it will result in a greater and better ordering of priorities by the States and will be fully consistent with the commitment to smaller government which has been so clearly in evidence on our side of the House in recent weeks.
EMPLOYMENT SITUATION IN AUSTRALIA
Mr HARRIS-My question is directed to the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs. Were the Australian Bureau of Statistics figures on the labour force released yesterday? What do those figures show about the present employment situation in Australia?
Mr N. A. BROWN-It is true that yesterday the Australian Bureau of Statistics figures on the labour force for March 1981 were released. The figures show several things. First of all, they show that total employment rose by some 146,900 people in the year to March 1981 and by 328,500 in the last two years. Secondly, they show that between February and March of this year total employment increased by some 69,400. But it should be noted that the most pleasing aspect of this last series of figures is the number of school leavers who are shown by the figures to have found jobs over the month-some 16,300 young people. A comparison between the figures for this year and the figures for last year shows that a higher percentage of schoolleavers this year have found jobs compared with the same period last year. The figures also show that the position of school leavers looking for their first job has improved substantially compared with the same period in both 1980 and 1979.
The figures, looked at in their totality, show an improvement over all significant fronts. They show the value of the Government's employment and youth programs in better equipping young people to find jobs and to acquire skills to fit them for those jobs. Finally, they show without any doubt whatsoever that only through sound economic policies will permanent and productive jobs be generated. I suggest to the House and to honourable members that those policies are producing jobs. The figures prove that those policies are producing jobs. The policies should be given every encouragement to continue doing exactly that.

PUBLIC HOSPITAL CHARGES
Mr ARMITAGE-My question, which is directed to the Treasurer, refers to reports that the Government intends to ensure that public hospital charges increase by up to 60 per cent. I refer also to the Treasurer's reported acknowledgment today that various State rates and charges will have to be increased as a result of recent expenditure reductions announced by the Government. I ask: Does the Treasurer acknowledge that the inevitable effect of such price increases will be to increase the rate of inflation? Is he concerned that for hospital charges alone the increase in the consumer price index is likely to be in the order of one per cent? Will he explain to the House how these inflationary actions are consistent with his continued strictures on the need to reduce inflation?
Mr HOWARD-The extent to which any of the changes made in the health area result in increases in the consumer price index depends upon the extent to which, in the main, health insurance premiums rise as a result of charges altering, particularly in the hospitals area. The honourable gentleman asks me to put a precise CPI figure on that situation. I say to the honourable gentleman that it is not possible to state precisely what the CPI consequences of particular proposals will be.
Mr Armitage-But you grant that they will increase inflation?
Mr HOWARD-The honourable gentleman should contain himself. In this respect 1 am on common ground with his colleague the honourable member for Gellibrand because both of us agreed on a television program last week that it is impossible at this stage to say precisely what the effect on health insurance premiums will be. As a consequence we do not know precisely what the effect on the CPI will be. I make absolutely no equivocation about the fact that if there is an increase in health insurance premiums there will be an increase in the consumer price index. I make absolutely no argument about that. The Government's anti-inflationary policies are designed to remove across a broad front the conditions which produce inflationary consequences. That does not mean and has never meant that governments can avoid making decisions which have specific price effects. It would be quite unreal for any government to maintain the position that it was never going to take a decision which had a specific effect on the consumer price index. Just as it was necessary in the interest of an overall energy policy to adopt a policy of world parity pricing for oil it is equally necessary in the interest of having a rational approach to health policy to introduce

1938 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

the sorts of proposals announced last week by my colleague the Minister for Health.
URANIUM: SALES TO SWEDEN Mr O'KEEFE-I direct my question to the Minister for Trade and Resources. Is it a fact that in March this year Energy Resources of Australia Ltd announced that it had reached agreement with the Swedish electric power utility OKG for the sale of uranium from the Ranger project? Will the Minister inform the House whether the Government has approved this contract and what its implications are for the developing Australian uranium industry? Mr ANTHONY-Last week I gave approv!ll for two contracts negotiated between ERA and the Swedish electricity authority OKG for the sale of 3,150 tonnes of uranium oxide between 1982 and 1996. It is very pleasing that we were able to negotiate this contract after we had been able to finalise the safeguards agreement between our two countries. Of course, these contracts will have to accord with that agreement. It was particularly pleasing to carry out this negotiation with Sweden, which has now contributed one per cent to the capital of ERA. This takes up the full 25 per cent it is able to offer to overseas shareholdings. There has been a major public debate in Sweden about the whole question of using nuclear power for peaceful purposes. Indeed, it was a major political issue in the country and a referendum was held in 1980 to decide what the attitude of the country should be. It was decided at that referendum that the six existing power stations would continue to operate and that Sweden would construct another six stations. Mr Barry Jones-And then phase it out. Mr ANTHONY-Sweden is going to build another six power stations. Mr Barry Jones-But as a temporary expedient. Mr ANTHONY-Does the honourable member believe that it is a very temporary decision? However, it will mean that Sweden's percentage of power from nuclear sources will go from being 25 per cent at present to 50 per cent. I am pleased that Australia can make such a major contribution to helping Sweden with its energy requirements.
PUBLIC SECTOR BORROWING REQUIREMENT
Mr FREE-My question, which is directed to the Treasurer, relates to his unsupported assertion to the Premiers yesterday that a reduction in the public sector borrowing requirement is essential

to reduce inflation and interest rates. If this is so, how does the Treasurer explain the fact that although over the last three years the public sector borrowing requirement has fallen from 5.7 per cent of gross domestic product to 3.4 per cent, inflation has increased and is very likely to rise further while interest rates have increased to their highest levels ever?
Mr HOWARD-The Government-I in particular-has argued a lot recently that the present high level of interest rates is a consequence of the very keen competition for funds which now occurs between a very large public sector borrowing requirement and an upsurge in private sector calls on our capital markets. I have said on numerous occasions in the past, and I repeat it today, that the greatest contribution that any government in Australia, be it Federal or State, can make to the cause of lower interest rates is to control its own demands on our capital markets. The government that has made a contribution towards reducing calls on our capital markets in recent times has, in fact, been the Commonwealth Government.
The honourable gentleman knows as well as I do that the lowering of public sector demand in one month or one given period is not necessarily followed by some precise adjustment in the level of interest rates. But, over time there can be absolutely no argument that the price of money in our community is affected by the demand for and available supply of that money. Governments contribute to demand for money by their own borrowing requirements and the contribution that this Government has made towards reducing the public sector borrowing requirement is a contribution which we believe should be matched by other governments around Australia.
INSULIN SYRINGES Mr SPENDER-Can the Minister for Health advise the House whether there is a proposal under consideration to prevent the importation into Australia of the American Becton and Dickinson insulin syringe and the Monojet insulin syringe? If so, can the Minister say firstly whether he is aware that some diabetics claim there are particular advantages in the design and operation of these two syringes Dot available in syringes manufactured in Australia, such as the capacity to mix two insulins, quick and slow acting, in the syringe with the knowledge that an injection of the correct amount of each insulin will be delivered. Secondly, will the Minister re-examine the whole question of any proposal to prohibit the importation of the American syringes?

Questions Without Notice

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1939

Mr MacKELLAR--T am aware of quite a degree of concern amongst Australian d~abetics about the way insulin is supplied, and particularly questions relating to the sorts of syringes which are used for the injection of insulin by people needing it. There have been a number of consultations between the associations representing diabetics and officers of my Department and in recent times there have been consultations relating to this matter. I am concerned to ensure that diabetics in Australia receive the best possible equipment in order that their treatment may be of a suitable and safe nature. Those consultations are continuing. I hope that they will be concluded shortly.

some substantiation of those reports, what action is intended to be taken?
Mr SINCLAIR-The Government regards it as being tremendously important that the privacy of the Australian telephone service be maintained and every possible action will be undertaken to ensure that it is. If there should be a telephone tap by anybody within the Australian network at any stage without the proper authorisation in accordance with the procedures laid down by this House it will be regarded very seriously by this Parliament and by the Government and every errort will be made to ensure that appropriate punishment is extracted and that the breach, if there should be a breach, is not repeated.

BROADCASTlNG LEGISLATION
Mr DAWKINS--My question is addressed to the Minister for Communications. Is it a fact that in the Minister's statement which was circulated yesterday at the Administrative Appeals Tribunal hearing into the Channel ATV 10 appeal, the Minister set out details of a significant relaxation of the foreign ownership provisions of the Broadcasting and Television Act? Can the Minister explain why these proposed legislative proposals were not detailed to this House when, on 9 April, the Minister made his statement regarding the proposed changes? Given the inconsistency, I ask: Which proposal represents the Government's intention, particularly following the Minister's answer to the honourable member for Boothby on 30 April? Can the Minister also explain whether the foreign ownership provisions put forward to the AAT are proposed to be in complete substitution for the existing provisions?
Mr SINCLAIR-The answer to the last part of the honourable gentleman's question is no. In respect of the balance of the question, the full details of the Government's proposals, as 1 intimated to the honourable member for Boothby, will be made available to the House for debate and consideration when the legislation is tabled in this House. Until that time the other information is there for information so that people may have some general idea of the intention of the Government and so that comment can be received from interested parties.
ALLEGED TELEPHONE TAPPING
Mr JULL-My question is directed to the Minister for Communications. 1 refer to the Press reports of the possible tapping of Prince Charles's telephone calls to Great Britain. What investigations are under way at the moment? Is there any further news on the investigation? If there is

However, a number of significant questions have arisen as a result of the investigation already commissioned. As soon as I learnt of the report I asked Telecom Australia to contact the Australian Federal Police to ensure that an investigation was made into the likelihood of any breach of privacy. It seems that there is some discrepancy between the alleged number of telephone calls that have been reported and the number that were actually made.
Quite a degree of speculation has emerged about the whole credibility of the media as a result of the award of the Pulitzer Prize to Miss Janet Cooke, a journalist on the Washington Post, in the United States of America. One would hope that the same type of exercise is not now being pursued by Mr Simon Regan.
I understand that there is a good deal of speculation at the moment about whether a price is to be paid to Mr Regan as a result of the production of the tapes. Whilst I regard very highly the qualities of those employed within Telecom, it is interesting that apparently the people allegedly responsible have been prepared to pass these over, without any payment, and yet they are currently being marketed in a very extensive way around the world in an advertising campaign that any of us in the political cause would regard as being quite significant.
There are a number of serious discrepancies which I feel it is proper to mention. However, the matter is being treated very seriously by the Government, Telecom and the Federal Police. When I have any information which will be of help, certainly I will reveal it to thc Parliament.
HOUSING LOANS INSURANCE CORPORATION
Mr UREN-Is the Minister for Housing and Construction aware of the opposition of the Housing Industry Association of Australia, the

1940 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

Real Estate Institute of Australia and the permacommitment was given by the purchaser to con-

nent building society movement to the proposed tinue to make moneys available on the basis

sale of the Housing Loans Insurance Corporoutlined by the honourable member for Reid, that

ation? Does the Minister accept the view of these is, make moneys available to people in rural areas

bodies that the sale of the Housing Loans Inand people who might be termed in need of as-

surance Corporation could lead to a serious resistance. That is the condition on which the Cor-

duction in the availability of low deposit loans poration is to be sold. Quite obviously the ques-

particularly to people living in remote areas? If tion of the honourable member for Reid has no

so, what action does the Government intend to substance. If he read the statement he would

take to provide stability to the housing finance know the facts of the situation. This Government,

sector at a time of rising interest rates and increasas always, has pledged, and is determined to carry

ing rates of default on housing loans?

out its pledge, to assist those people in need of

Mr McVEIGH-The Government's decision welfare and other housing.

to sell the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation was based on a thorough evaluation of the role of the Corporation in the Australian housing indus-

DROUGHT DECLARED AREAS: INTEREST RATES

try and a firm commitment of the Government to Mr MacKENZIE-Has the Minister for Pri-

honour its philosophical base. Discussions have mary Industry seen statements from certain rural

been held over a couple of years.

organisations that the Government's agreement

Mr Uren-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. The Minister's answer should be relevant to the question. He mentioned the Government's philosophical base but the Corporation was introduced by a conservative government in the first place.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order.

with the trading banks not to pass on increases in interest rates to farmers who are currently in drought circumstances is a sham? Is the claim of those organisations correct? If so, what has the Government done or what can it do about that
agreement?

Mr McVEIGH-The Government looked at all facets of the proposal. The Government and I as the Minister responsibleheld detailed discussions over a long period with the people about whom the honourable member for Reid spoke and all other interested people. We are fully aware that the Corporation, which was the product of a free enterprise Government, has fulfilled a useful role in society. I suggest to the honourable member for Reid that he ask the 432,000 people who have been assisted with a total loan allocation of $8,322m what they believe was the

Mr NIXON--It is a fact that when the Treasurer announced the lifting of the limits on interest rates for loans under $100,000 to a maximum of 12.5 per cent, arrangements were made with the banks that those people living in drought declared areas would get the benefit of maintenance of the interest rate existing at the time. It is also a fact, as the honourable member says, that a number of rural organisations have complained bitterly that indeed the banks have not been passing that benefit to the farmers and to the small businesses located in these drought declared areas.

role of the Corporation. The fact is that the Government's decision to sell the Corporation was based on the premise that sufficient experience had been gained and that other organisations now present in the housing insurance industry could fill the role. The Corporation had approximately 60 per cent of the housing mortgage industry. The Government believes that now there are sufficient interested parties who can fill the vacuum when the Corporation is sold. We are committed to non-interference by government in the areas of private enterprise.

The fact of the matter is, as I understand it-the bankers came to the Cabinet table for Budget discussions and this matter was discussed then-that the bankers said that they had been processing only the applications of those individuals who applied to the banks separately for the benefit. This is not something that has been passed on across the board; it has gone but only to those individuals who have come into the banks and said: 'Look, here I am in this drought declared area. This is the Treasurer's statement. Therefore, I should get the benefit'. The banks are still saying

The Government can get a little upset when the that they have been passing the benefit to those

Press and others either deliberately misrepresent a people. I think the lesson for all of us is that it is

situation or do not tell the truth. Had people read essential that the farmers in fact have that piece of

the Prime Minister's statement in detail with advice, that they have to go positively to the bank

honesty and fairness they would have been aware and seek to get the benefit of the lower interest

of a proviso that the Government would sell the rate which otherwise will not automatically be

Corporation on the understanding that a firm granted to them.

Questions Without Notice

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1941

The second thing is that any individual complaints that the honourable member, for example, might have, I think ought to be referred to the general manager of the bank in question. If he raises such questions with the general manager of the bank I am sure that they will be attended to. The banks gave an assurance that they had every sympathy with the problem of farmers in drought declatedareas and that they would administer the thing with sympathy and understanding. If honourable members in the House are getting complaints of that nature they can bring them to me, if they are not satisfied with the attention that they are getting, and I will pass them on to the Treasurer.
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS BUREAU
Mr HAWKE-I ask the Prime Minister, firstly, whether he is aware that the principal spokesman for the national employers, Mr George Polites, said in August last year:

work of the Industrial Relations Bureau and to report to me about it in case he wished to recommend any particular action in relation to the Bureau, its activities and its effectiveness. After the last election I wrote again to the then Minister for Industrial Relations drawing that matter to his attention and asking for the review to be brought forward to the Government. A decision was taken in this matter only a few days ago. I think it needs to be understood that before the Industrial Relations Bureau was established there was within the department concerned the Arbitration Inspectorate. That inspectorate was designed and meant to make sure that employees throughout Australia were getting the proper benefit of the awards and that employers were not, if you like, cheating on the awards in dealing with people who did not adequately know what their rights were under the awards.
Mr Hawke-They did the job.

. . . the Industrial Relations Bureau must be a strong contender for the title of the statutory body which has done least to achieve the aims and objectives around which it is created. It has become almost an irrelevancy . . .
Secondly, is the Prime Minister aware that this unequivocal view is shared by the trade union movement and the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission? Thirdly, does the Prime Minister recollect that between March 1978 and June 1980 the staff of the Industrial Relations Bureau-the Prime Minister's brainchild-- increased by 77 per cent and inspections decreased by 40 per cent? Fourthly, is the Prime Minister aware that in recent months there has been an attempt, recognised within the IRB as merely cosmetic, to lift the inspections figures, which attempt in no way vitiates the devasting condemnation by Mr Polites? Finally, in the light of these facts, and given the abolition of the Prices Justification Tribunal and the emasculation of the Trade Practices Commission, and given specific ministerial recommendations to the razor gang that the IRB be abolished, is the decision not to abolish the IRB capable of explanation in any other terms than a manic determination by the Prime Minister to get his own way?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I thank the honourable gentleman for his question because it was an interesting one. The Industrial Relations Bureau decision has been taken by the Government not least because the Minister for Industrial Relations wishes to survey its actions. I think it needs to be understood that last June or July, because of public criticisms of the Industrial Relations Bureau, I wrote to the then Minister for Industrial Relations and asked him to review the

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-There could well be a debate about the effectiveness of the work done when that function was within the department. It is very easy indeed to make an inspection if it is done very quickly and not thoroughly. There is a question as to the thoroughness of the inspections that were undertaken in earlier days. On the advice that is available to me-I have no doubt that the Minister will be making his own judgments about these things-and on the advice that the Government has at present, the Inspectorate now, as part of the Industrial Relations Bureau, is working with a degree of thoroughness that did not occur in earlier times. If there are employers who are somewhat jaundiced at the Industrial Relations Bureau because the inspections are being carried out with greater thoroughness, that is only a question of the Industrial Relations Bureau doing the work which it is meant to do and which ought to have been done by the earlier Inspectorate, but which perhaps was not done on earlier occasions. That is part of the advice that was available to the Government when this decision was made. Another part of the work of the Bureau involves in a very real way the capacity of individuals to receive some kind of protection under the law, protection from the actions of powerful and often dominant trade unions. There is an injunction on the Industrial Relations Bureau to try to solve any matters brought to it by conciliation and negotiation rather than by resort to the powers it has under the law. Again, the advice that we have is that progress is being made in these areas.
Mr Hawke--What was the Minister's advice?

1942 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Wills will remain silent. He is continually interjecting. I ask him to remain silent.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-If the honourable member does not know where he is, we cannot blame him for that. The advice that we have is that the Industrial Relations Bureau is starting to work effectively as a protector of individual rights. That can be as the protector of individual rights against the predatory actions of some trade unions or actions undertaken by employers. It is very much part of our philosophy to do what we can to make sure that the rights of individuals are not submerged by powerful bureaucracies, whether they are employer, trade union or government bureaucracies. Against this background we believe that the Industrial Relations Bureau should be encouraged to continue its work. I have no doubt that the Minister will report to the Government about these matters, and make a judgment against the background of the objectives we would want to achieve about the effectiveness of the Bureau. I can well understand one reason why the honourable member for Wills would want the Bureau abolished. Quite plainly it is because it would make it a good deal easier for some trade unions to trample on the rights of individual trade unionists.
STATUTORY RURAL MARKETING BODIES
Mr BURR-Has the Minister for Primary Industry seen statements by the retiring President of the National Farmers Federation, Mr Eckersley, that farmers should oppose any attempt by the Government to curb the role of statutory rural marketing bodies? Will the Government heed that call in view of the review of government functions and other recommendations by parliamentary committees?
Mr NIXON-I cannot recall seeing the actual comment made by the ex-president of the National Parmers Federation in respect of government attitudes to rural marketing statutory authorities. Let me make it perfectly plain that the activities of the razor gang-I cannot think of its proper name--
Mr Hawke-You were a member of it.
Mr NIXON-Of course I was a member. I was Lhe sharp edge of the razor on some things, too. Its proper title is the Review of Commonwealth Functions. That committee has already looked at the whole range of government activities. Let me immediately assure the House that there was nothing in the statement that alluded to the prospect of disposing of the statutory marketing

authorities where industry wishes to retain them. That remains government policy. It is not the intention of the Government to dispose of, for example, the Australian Dairy Corporation, or the Australian Wool Corporation. These are statutory marketing authorities which have been requested by industry to be put in place and maintained in place, and they will be kept in place.
SALES TAX
Mr JOHN BROWN-I direct my question to the Treasurer. Has the Department of the Treasury or the Australian Taxation Office retained a consultant to prepare a report on sales tax in Australia? Has the consultant made any recommendation to increase the level of sales tax? Finally, is the Government considering increases in the rates of sales tax in respect of items listed in the Third Schedule of the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act, or any other items?
Mr HOWARD-J am not immediately aware of consultancy arrangements which are made from time to time by the Australian Taxation Office. As the honourable member knows, the administration of the Taxation Office is independently vested in the Commissioner of Taxation and, therefore, stands in a relationship to the Minister different from the Department of the Treasury. I will make some inquiries as to the substance of the honourable gentleman's question. J am not aware of any recommendations of the kind that he described. As the honourable member knows, it is not my habit to speculate either way about suggestions which are made from time to time about taxation changes.
ABORIGINAL LOANS COMMISSION
Mr VINER-(Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations)-Pursuant to section 36 of the Aboriginal Loans Commission Act 1974, I present the final annual report for 1979-80 on the Aboriginal Loans Commission.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect)-I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman claim to have been misrepresented?
Dr KLUGMANYes.
Mr SPEAKER-He may proceed.
Dr KLUGMAN-On the last page of yesterday's Sun Herald an item-I will not read the whole item-stated:
Federal Labor MP Dr Dick Klugman has a son attending Cumberland High School . . .

Australian-United States Defence Facilities

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1943

I have no sons and no sons attending Cumberland High School. In the Sydney Morning Herald on Friday, 1 May, in a report on Federal Parliament by Jenni Hewett, there is an implication that a question asked by me and a question asked by the honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham) were questions given to us by the Australian Labor Party's spokesman on health and that we were asking the questions on his behalf. I assure the House that the questions, as far as I am concerned and, I am sure, as far as the honourable member for McMillan is concerned, were our own questions and were not based on anything given to us by anybody else.
JOINT AUSTRALIAN-UNITED STATES DEFENCE FACILITIES
Ministerial Statement
Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence) -by leave-Honourable members will know that recently the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) spoke to the National Press Club about joint Australian-United States defencerelated facilities in Australia and associated questions. For those members on either side of the House who have not seen the full text of the honourable member's statement, I have ascertained that a copy is available in the Parliamentary Library. The statement followed an invitation that I had issued to the Leader of the Opposition and his deputy to refresh their briefings on these facilities. In accepting this invitation the honourable gentlemen asked that they might also visit the facilities themselves, and I readily agreed to this. Discussions about the facilities were held in my Department both before the visits and after. As a consequence, the honourable member's statement to the National Press Club was one of substance and importance. For this reason and because of the significance of the statement, particularly some parts, for our nation's alliance with the United States of America, I believe it proper that I offer some comment to the Parliament.
A good deal of the statement accords not only with my own views but also with views of Ministers over many years in governments from both sides of the House. I welcome and value this continuing bipartisanship in regard to these important matters. I welcome particularly the honourable member's statements about the facilities at Pine Gap and Nurrungar and that the requirements of his party's policy are met at both facilities. The honourable member said: 'In certain conditions, industrial centres and military installations in Australia could-I repeat, couldbecome nuclear targets. Pine Gap and Nurrungar

would be unlikely targets and, in our view, Smithfield not at a\1'. I agree with this assessment. The honourable member very properly reminded his listeners that he and his deputy were bound by the restrictions on public disclosure about the facilities at Pine Gap and Nurrungar. He went on, however, to say that much of those restrictions was part of 'obsessive secrecy' surrounding these establishments.
With respect, 1 do not believe that the secrecy attaching to these facilities is obsessive. Why would this Government, or any other government, wish to maintain secrecy about the facilities when their position would be much easier if there were no secrecy? Let the House not be under any misapprehension that the degree of secrecy observed by this Government is more or less than that observed, and required, by the Labor Party in its years of office. Given the basic accord between us regarding the facilities at Pine Gap, Nurrungar and Smithfield, I am more amazed that it is the facility at North West Cape-a naval relay station- -that apparently causes my honourable friends difficulties. 1 wish to spend some time examining these difficulties, which I believe to be lacking real substance. First, however, I wish to deal with a particular subject regarding the North West Cape station that has been raised in the Press. A newspaper recently, under the sensational headline 'China, South Africa could use base to send war orders' stated:
A secret treaty between Australia and the United States allows the North West Cape signals station in Western Australia to be used by any of Washington's allies without the Federal Government's knowledge or consent.
This means Australia could become a naval command post in a Middle East war, a conflict between North and South Korea or even hostilities between China and the Soviet Union.
If the Americans wished, the North West Cape station could be used by South Africa to send orders to its navy.
I should not bother the House with this sort of Press sensationalism had not my honourable friends in their public comment indicated some concern about the matter. There is no secret treaty as stated in the Press. That is a fabrication. There is a document entitled 'Agreed Minutes of Interpretation'. It is dated 9 May 1963 and was signed by the then Australian Minister for External Affairs, Sir Garfield Barwick, and the then United States Ambassador, Mr William Battle. The minutes are not 'secret'. They are unclassified. The fact of their existence has been public knowledge since 21 May 1963, when the then Minister for External Affairs affirmed their existence to the then Leader of the Opposition. Why the minutes were not tabled in the first place I do not know. It is clear enough that the reason they

1944 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Australian-United States Defence Facilities

have not been tabled since is that their significance is purely formal. So that honourable members may judge for themselves, I table the minutes. Let me deal with the first minute, which refers to Article 4 of the main agreement. The minute says:
Any use of the station by third countries would be a matter for agreement between the two governments. However, communications originated by a third government and accepted into United States channels elsewhere than in Australia would be United States defence communications in the context of this agreement.
The minute deals with the use of the station by third countries. There was and is nothing new in this.
Before the Second World War Australia's defence communications system was linked with the systems of the then British Commonwealth countries. During the war Australia became associated also with the United States communications network. It has remained so since. Through its association with the United States and United Kingdom communications systems, the Australian communications system has been associated with the communications systems of North Atlantic Treaty Organisation countries, to which the United States and United Kingdom are allied. There is nothing secret about this. It has been general public knowledge for decades. I am afraid that it was taken for granted that this background was known to my honourable friends when they visited the station and discussed its operations with my officers.
Honourable members will appreciate that these arrangements are not only of benefit to the third countries concerned. Australia has received, as it continues to receive, the reciprocal advantage of world-wide access to other parties' communication facilities. When the North West Cape station was established, there was certainly no suggestion that this co-operation between allies should cease. Already in May 1962 the then Prime Minister told this House that the purpose of the station would be to provide radio communication for United States and allied ships over a wide area of the Indian Ocean and the Western Pacific. In March the following year, he stated that such use was intended for allied submarines as well as for allied surface ships.
The object of the minute of interpretation that I am dealing with was to ensure that this practice not be ruled out by the text of the main agreement, which referred only to US and Australian communications. It was, as I say, essentially a formality. The interpretation having been duly established, for ongoing practical purposes it could

be forgotten. For the sake of completeness, perhaps I should add that the North West Cape station will also assist merchant ships in putting their messages into the civil network if they cannot themselves gain access to that network, or if they are in distress. That a NATO or New Zealand message might occasionally be transmitted through North West Cape does not seem to me objectionable.
Except in the broadest sense that members of the communications network are countries that share certain attitudes regarding global strategic issues, use of facilities in a member country does not involve that country's endorsement of the traffic through those facilities and related activities. Concern in that respect fails completely to comprehend how modern communications work. Once a message has been accepted into the system-and access is automatic for countries such as Australia which participate in the standing arrangements-it is normally handled by computers rather than individuals, and sent to its destination with little or no human intervention. The actual route taken by a particular message could be traced only afterwards, not predicted before or detected at the time. In large, sophisticated, highly automated highfrequency networks like the US defence communications system and those of its allies, messages are not necessarily transmitted by the shortest route but by the speediest and most reliable. Deliberately created redundancies in the system mean that there are a substantial number of alternative routes available. So even the originators of the message, let alone other countries, do not know how it might be relayed.
There was another statement in one of the papers that North West Cape was probably used by the South Africans to transmit intelligence messages to America about Indian Ocean shipping. This was attributed to a defence spokesman, but any such spokesman was not a member of the Defence Force or my Department. The statement is purely speCUlative and in fact untrue. South Africa has no common user access to the US mili~ tary network.
I want to say a few words about very low frequency communications to submarines. Third countries' use of North West Cape's very low frequency transmission without Australian knowledge or consent would be possible only if the third country had suitable reception equipment and also access to US cryptographic key material. It would not otherwise be possible for third countries to have access to the VLF channels without Australian knowledge because they would have to use the Australian channel. I leave it to the House to consider to what countries the United States

Australian-United States Defence Facilities

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1945

might pass its cryptographic key material, given that this would enable the other country to read all US traffic on that channel.
The statement that, in the circumstances I have described, the North West Cape station could become a naval command post in some conflict between third countries is another absurd fabrication. It also ignores the elementary fact that the North West Cape station is simply a relay station. It does not originate messages and could not act as a command post. With all sincerity I ask the honourable Leader of the Opposition and his deputy to accept that the lack of attention to these matters during his recent intensive discussions in my Department and at the North West Cape station itself had no sinister motivation. It was not a deliberate withholding of information. It was not dishonesty towards our guests by my officers or myself. The explanation is quite simple. The focus of the discussion was entirely on other, more substantial and significant matters regarding the station. The minutes of interpretation are not matters of such substance. The arrangements for third party use are, as I have said, well established and well known. They do not attract the sort of attention that, quite understandably, was being paid to other aspects of the subject. Nothing arose in the discussions that might have triggered off a reference to these arrangements.
There are other arrangements regarding North West Cape that were similarly not discussed during the recent briefings. There was no reference whatsoever, for example, to the arrangements for land use at North West Cape or regarding commissaries. So that the honourable gentleman may be persuaded that none of this information was deliberately withheld from him I now table all related documents. I hope that he will agree that my explanation to him accurately reflects the type of discussion in which he was engaged. The documents, together with an explanatory note; are:
(A) The 1967 arrangements for the use and occupation by the United States Navy of Commonwealth land and for associated matters.
(B) The 1965 technical arrangement relating to telecommunications service.
(C) The 1966 technical arrangement relating to commissaries at North West Cape.
(D) The 1968 technical arrangement for the handling of Royal Australian Navy and Royal Navy submarine message traffic via North West Cape.
I turn now from these peripheral issues to the central theme of my honourable friend's statement. This was a demand for new and more extensive

Australian control over the transmissions of the North West Cape station because of a 'dramatic change taking place in nuclear doctrine'. The honourable member's description of trends in United States strategic capability and doctrine contained what I would describe as some rather elementary misconceptions. In essence, he said that the United States is moving from a doctrine of mutually assured destruction to the use of nuclear weapons as a normal part of the conduct of a war. He even speaks of the United States moving towards a first-strike capability, that is, a preemptive strike that effectively destroys an opponent's ability to strike back.
In Soviet military doctrine, the distinction between the use of conventional and nuclear weapons in war is unclear. For decades, therefore, United States policy has been concerned to establish deterrence across the whole spectrum of possible nuclear assault. The United States cannot credibly deter limited and selective attack against United States military targets by threatening to wipe out Soviet cities-especially when the response might then be to wipe out United States cities. The Soviet Union has been making immense allocations of resources to the development of larger, more accurate and harder-hitting intercontinental ballistic missile forces-a highly important fact that my honourable friend failed even to mention, let alone assess in his statement to the National Press Club. The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics will shortly be in a position to destroy the bulk of the United States intercontinental ballistic missile force with only a part of its own. Should the United States then respond with its submarine and residual bomber force, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics would still have capability for a further devastating strike. What United States President would press that button having regard to those circumstances?
United States strategy for deterrence must demonstrate to the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics that there is no level of attack that would not result in at least a matching loss by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. Also it must demonstrate that even after attack on its intercontinental ballistic missile force, the United States would still have the capacity to take out targets of value-be they military, industrial or politico-administrative. The basic concept of ensuring that a President has a wider range of response than national suicide goes back twenty years or more. Far from being a new and dramatic change, as my honourable friend believes, Presidential Directive No. 59, issued by President Carter in late 1979, was merely the latest in a long series of statements of this doctrine. Directive 59

1946 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Australian-United States Defence Facilities

updated basic doctrine more directly to current and prospective conditions. Four important points in the doctrine are: It does not aim at a first-strike capability; it does prepare the United States to respond to a limited Soviet nuclear attack in ways other than automatic, immediate and massive retaliation; it does not, however, assume that nuclear war could be kept limited; but it does aim to avoid automatic escalation.
What I have been describing does not amount to any 'dramatic change' in US nuclear doctrine, such as the honourable member claimed was changing the whole basis and justification for our co-operation in the North West Cape station. The basic principles of US nuclear strategy have been unchanged for decades. The technological developments the honourable member spoke of are in the future, and uncertain. It is not acceptable to read into them now a fundamental change in US nuclear doctrine. In any case, the Leader of the Opposition is falling into the basic error of confusing capability with will and intent. I do not deny for one moment that Australian controls are required concerning North West Cape. We must always be able to judge whether the operation of the station risks our security or associates us with policies and operations contrary to our interests. But the whole point of our arrangements is that US strategic policy is not to be assessed simply in terms of technological capability, but more essentially in terms of intent. It is common ground, I believe, that no control measures can be effected at North West Cape. It is a relay station, not an originating station. My predecessor in this portfolio, the honourable member for St George (Mr Morrison), said in August 1975:
. . . the practical, realistic and effective mode of monitoring and control is certainly not a matter of intervention in the operations of the station. The proper focus of our effort is the United States global policy. If we know what that is about, we will have an accurate understanding of the type of message being transmitted through North West Cape.
I agree with every syllable in that statement made by my honourable friend some six years ago. The statement very accurately comprehends the essence of Australia's control over North West Cape. It comprehends the limitations on Australian control in respect of practical measures. It understands the requirement for us to judge the impact of developing US policies upon Australian interests at an earlier stage, and in a more substantial way. My honourable friend, however, wants 'Australia's consent to be mandatory for all orders to initiate military action which flows from the station'. He also wants us to be 'given firm and convincing assurances that the Station will not be used to send orders for a first-strike nuclear attack nor to initiate a limited strike'.

These demands can be expected to arouse some unthinking support. Let us look at them more closely. What these demands amount to is an Australian veto over United States use of the North West Cape station. Is it reasonable to expect the US to co-operate in such a veto? Would it be sensible and acceptable for Australia to seek it? My answer to both questions is no. The United States carries enormous risks and responsibilities in the global relationship with its Soviet adversary. Australia, a United States ally, remote from the central theatres of strategic confrontation, cannot realistically say to the United States: 'Now every time you want to send a signal through North West Cape initiating military action you must first secure our permission'. The NATO countries do not have this arrangement. The formula applying to United States initiation of military action from their territory is 'notil1cation time and circumstance permitting'. Yet they are far more directly exposed and vulnerable than is Australia.
Look at the practical implications of my honourable friend's demand. The United States Defence Communications System is built on a network of redundant capacity. If one link goes out or becomes less efficient for any reason, including enemy action, other links are automatically selected by the switching equipment. There is no way, therefore, that we can select out messages coming through North West Cape. Messages, and particularly important messages such as those initiating a military action, will travel through multiple channels and facilities. The only sure way of stopping a message transiting North West Cape would be to stop all messages coming to North West Cape. In effect, we should have to close the station down. How else could we be sure, also, that our demand was being met?
Does my honourable friend understand that if the station closes down, our own communications will severely suffer, and at a time when fast and reliable communication would probably be of first importance to us? Has my honourable friend paused to reflect on how he would deal with some possible consequences of the demand he wishes to make of the United States-for example, a demand from the United States that we should expose our own national traffic to its monitoring and consent, or a denial of access to the allied communications network and consequent disruption of our defence communications beyond Australia? I ask the House to look at the matter from another, more fundamental point of view.

Australian-United States Defence Facilities

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1947

When we and the Americans agreed on the establishment of the North West Cape station we acknowledged and accepted the common and enduring security interests that shaped our co-operation.

unsound. I do not believe that it would be in this country's basic security interests to close down the station. Our protection against major threats ultimately depends upon the efficacy of the United States deterrent.

That was some two decades ago. We have seen some very large changes in the international situation and our own strategic circumstances since then. Our present perspectives and policies give far more emphasis to our independent national interests and responsibilities. Yet all parties in this House continue to acknowledge the fundamental importance to us of our alliance with the United States. We accept that the alliance still assumes a substantial community of interest and a substantial degree of mutual trust. This was the spirit of Mr Barnard's dealings with Mr Schlesinger. It is certainly the attitude of the present Government. The alliance can involve risks to our security, although I agree with my honourable friends that the risk presently associated with the joint facilities is not significant. The alliance can risk our involvement in matters in which we should prefer not to be involved.
All these positive and negative factors have to be weighed. There is scope-quite significant scope-for us to influence our ally's policy. We cannot, however, expect that we shall always be able to influence it to the extent we believe desirable. We have to make a judgment then, and a choice. This is really what I am saying to my honourable friend. I am saying that he cannot leave his choice to the last minute as he seems to envisage, This is not sensible, reaiistic or practicable politics. He has to make it earlier. Nor can he, even at an early stage before the pressure of a developing situation is upon us, say to the Americans, 'Give me your assurance now about no military use and limited nuclear attack and all will be well between us', because, for the reasons I have explained, he wilLnot get this assurance. So he has to ask himself the fundamental question: 'Has the time now come when the disadvantages of the alliance outweigh the advantages, when the risks of association with some policy we disapprove of outweigh the benefits of our continuing co-operation in security matters?'
I can see the logic of his reasoning about knowledge and consent I respect it. But I do not for one moment accept that the time has arrived or is in prospect when we need to contemplate the closure of North West Cape, of which he speaks so lightly, and the effective reduction of our alliance with the United States that this would most certainly entail. J believe, and I have sought to demonstrate, that the argument that has led him now to this extreme position is ill-founded and

The honourable member rightly demands that Australia not behave as a servile client state of the United States. Surely, however, that is what his own policy involves; for he seeks to retain United States protection while reducing United States capacity to provid,e that protection. He seeks to retain United States protection while freeing Australia from risk and requiring all risks to be borne by our protector. This is not the attitude of an independent ally prepared to make its contribution and to accept its share of the risks.
J ask my honourable friend most earnestly to think again. I ask him to weigh the rhetoric of his fine sentiments-and let him claim no monopoly of nationalist sentiment-against the substantial national interests involved in the ANZUS alliance. I ask him to let the House know, to let the nation know, whether he believes that the time has now come in respect of North West Cape station for the alliance to be reduced and our prlj.ctical co-operation with the Americans dismantled. There is no ambiguity about the Government's attitude. We believe the United States carries an enormous burden on behalf of the free nations. We believe that through the ANZUS alliance we can continue to help in the discharge of that burden. This is precisely what we propose to do. I present the following paper:
Defence-Joint Australian-United States FacilitiesMinisterial statement, 5 May 1981-and associated papers,
Motion (by Mr Moore) proposed:
That the House take note of the papers.
Suspension of Standing Orders Motion (by Mr Moore)-by leave-agreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the Leader of the Opposition speaking for a period not exceeding 25 minutes.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (4.0)'-Quite recently the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) and I visited several joint facilities in this countryNurrungar, Pine Gap, North West Cape and Smithfield. Clearly this was the most intensive investigation ever undertaken by representatives at least of the Opposition-probably it was equal in intensity to any investigation undertaken by any members of this Parliament-into the fUnctions, purposes and implications of these centres. At a Press conference at Smithfield I said that it was my hope that the product of our visit would be an informed and persistent discussion and debate in

1948 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Australian-United States Defence Facilities

Australia in relation to American nuclear strategic policy and its implications, I pointed out that Australia is very much involved in the implications of that sort of policy as a consequence of a number of factors, the most dominant of which is the operation of these bases.
I have expressed my views in relation to three bases-Smithfield, Nurrungar and Pine Gap. They have been stated again clearly and correctly by the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen). I have expressed also my reservations about the lack of control, the lack of knowledge, and the absence of procedures for Australia's consent in relation to the way in which the North West Cape base operates. Nothing that the Minister said today in any way diminishes that concern. Everything he has said reinforces the justification for the worries which we-that is, my colleague, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and I-have expressed in relation to the centre. Today's statement does not contribute to the informed debate which I had hoped would get underway following our visit and the statements which we made.
Today's statement is one of self-exculpation by the Minister for himself and the Department of Defence for a very clumsy episode over the Easter period. It transpired that Mr William Pinwill, defence correspondent for the Australian newspaper established that there were third country access provisions in relevant documents for the North West Cape facilities. A number of developments transpired immediately after that disclosure was made which at best leave serious question marks in relation to the Minister's claim that these documents were never secret. I would prefer to give the benefit of the doubt to the Minister and to the Department of Defence when they state that never at any stage was there an intention not to inform either the Deputy Leader of the Opposition or me about the existence of this document or any other document.
I repeat that some rather strange events occurred in that period, For instance, an unnamed defence spokesman was asked whether I was made aware of the existence of this document. He said no, The journalist then said: 'Why was he not informed?' And the anonymous source said: 'Because he did not ask'. Clearly, they did not ask because they did not know that the document existed. I do not regard it as a crucial document in terms of determining the attitude of either the Deputy Leader of the Opposition or myself on this matter. However, I find it unfortunate that there was not a full disclosure of all relevant matters, including this document.

I deal further with the obsessive secrecy that afilicis Australian authorities in this matter. On 22 April 1981 the editorial in the Australian stated:
After The Australian revealed the existence of the agreement, the Department of Defence denied it was 'secret', insisting that the report referred to 'unclassified Agreed Minutes of Interpretation'. As the Department put it: 'The Minutes of Interpretation do not constitute a treaty, nor are they secret',
Fair enough. The editorial continued:
But when our Defence correspondent, William Pinwill, asked for a copy of the 'unclassified' agreement, yesterday the response was that it was 'not available to the media', And this three days after its assertion that there was 'no secret',
If it was no secret why was it kept a non-secret so effectively? This is like a new top security classification-'Destroy before reading'. It is sheer nonsense! Clearly, there was an effort on the part of someone in the bureaucracy or the Ministry to impede proper access to documentation which had already been declared to be public documentation. I have stated the concern of the Opposition, My colleague the Deputy Leader of the Opposition has also stated the Opposition's concern. We have stated it several times and we will continue to do so.
I wish now to declare the attitude of the Australian Labor Party on this matter, The inescapable fact remains that Australia has a sovereign right to be in ultimate control of affairs on her own territory, In these circumstances we find present arrangements covering the North West Cape unsatisfactory, We would seek to renegotiate the North West Cape agreement to provide, firstly, that Australia's consent is mandatory for all orders to initiate military action which flow from the station; and, secondly, that we be given firm and convincing assurances that the station will not be used to send orders for a first-strike nuclear attack or to initiate a limited strike. If the United States would not accept these reasonable provisions designed to protect our national sovereignty then we would ask it to wind down the operations of the North West Cape as rapidly as possible. I make no apologies for that declaration of principle and policy.
The North West Cape facility operates under circumstances dramatically different from those which applied less than a decade ago. Military equipment, hardware-especially strategic nuclear equipment-command control and communications systems and eady warning systems are all profoundly more effective and efficient than they were several years ago. We have reached a point where we are moving into a new generation of nuclear armaments with greater accuracy and a capacity to take out hard targets

Australian-United States Defence Facilities

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1949

such as reinforced concrete silos containing interSecondly, we recall a public announcement in

continental ballistic missiles. We are seeing the course of the last election that, after the elec-

America's nuclear capacity moving more towards tion, there would be major naval exercises involv-

a first-strike force. That, in turn, will contribute to ing units of the United States and Australian

a degree of instability in super-power relation-
ships. I do not deny for a minute that at the same
time Russia is rushing headlong towards improving her nuclear capacity and effectiveness. But the fact remains that the North West Cape communication facility operates in circumstances of greatly
enhanced military and nuclear capacities at a time when we are moving towards a new generation of nuclear missiles with a first-strike capacity. It is
operating in different circumstances. We are moving towards a point where the deterrent role of the United States nuclear force is about to be superseded apparently by a first-strike capacity. In those circumstances we have a profound obli-
gation to ensure that the operations of the North West Cape facility or any other facility under our

fleets in the north-west Indian Ocean. In the upshot, once the election was safely out of the way, the Australian units exercised separately and quite distantly from the American units. The reason was that the Australian Government had concluded that it was not in our best interest to be seen so closely involved in those sorts of exercises with America, given the volatility of conditions in the Middle East and the possibility of certain difficulties arising for Australia in terms of both foreign relations and trade relations. What we are proposing in principle is no different from the policy the Government pursues when it suits it, \Ve are concerned that messages can be transmii ted through this facility without any knowledge by the Australian Government and in circumstances which would determine a course of events over

control, proceed with our consent and that we which we would have no control, either nuclear

know what is happening. Should we wish for cerconflict or more conventional conflict.

tain things not to happen we should be able to regulate such operations. To argue for anything less than that is to surrender in the most craven
way the sovereignty of this country. That we will not accept.

I give another illustration of why there is a need for Australia to be alert to this matter, to take a very keen interest in the role and implications of this facility and to ensure that our best interests are at all times preserved. It is unfortunate that

these things receive such scant attention in this

I point out another factor. The North West Cape facility could be used also for more conventional engagements should that be the wish of the
United States. There could be circumstances in which America might conclude that its interest was such that it should undertake certain things, for instance conventional engagements. 11 could
do so in an area where we had a major self-interest which was somewhat different from that of the

House. When they do they are usually the victims of frenetic propagandising to the effect that 'the Russians are coming' from members of the Government, especially the most obsessive and manic member. It does not contribute to a betic!' understanding about major developments in the world in which we are directly implicated. H j:; equally unfortunate that the media finds lillie interest in this matter. It is proposed that America should establish a peacekeeping force in the

United States of America. In those circumstances Middle East. I refer to an article in the

we do not want the course of development of our Washington Post which was reproduced in the

foreign policy pre-empted and then determined Guardian Weekly of 29 March this year. It was

by actions initiated by the United States of headed 'Smuggling US. Forces Into Mideast'. II

America, as powerful and as important an ally as stated:

she undoubtedly is to us. There can be no quibble The problem is how to establish an American 'strategic

on the part of members of the Government that they share this view when it suits them. They were the people, after all, who professed much commit-
ment to the Americans at the time of the most regrettable incarceration of diplomats in Iran. But

presence' on the ground in a way that would deter--m con ceivably defend against-Soviet penetrations without emb,l[- rassing the host nation and/or unnerving the neighbourhood.
or The solution: Smuggle it in, so to say, in the guise of a peace-
keeping force to supervise compliance with the terms ;j" Israeli.Egyptian peace treaty.

they were much less than enthusiastic in the support they gave to trade embargoes. That support
fell considerably short of what the United States sought. Self-interest for Australia determined a

1 put to one side my very genuine concern that il has been consistently proposed by America thaI. Australia should provide military support to such a deployment. That is a matter for another

different level of response from that which the occasion. I suggest, so that we can clarify Ih"

Americans believed was appropriate in terms of issue, that it is most unlikely that there would bc a

its sovereignty.

direct Russian military penetration into the

1950 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Australian-United States Defence Facilities

Middle East for a number of reasons which have limited nuclear war. He said that there would be

been extensively canvassed publicly by intelligent, inevitable escalation. I suspect that he is right but

informed, concerned analysts-people who supthere is a schizophrenia if he is right and the Presi-

port the West. What is more likely is some sort of dent of the United States is saying something to

Middle East conflict involving Arab states and, the contrary. The point I am making is that in the

perhaps, Israel. But again, here is a classic insuccession of American Executives there have

stance of when, should this project go ahead, been changes in nuclear doctrine on the part of

messages could be communicated through the the United States of America.

North West Cape facility without any awareness on the part of Australian authorities with extraordinary implications for this country which we would want to resist. Therefore, I put the argument that our concern is entirely justifiable and consistent with protecting the national interest

Mr Killen-Will my friend pardon my interrupting him, but Mr Brown did say that he doubted very much indeed that there could be such a thing as a limited nuclear war. I agree with his sentiments.

and preserving our sovereignty.

Mr HAYDEN-The point must also be taken

We recall what happened in 1973. The North West Cape facility, with other facilities in the world, was put on a red alert at the time of military engagement between the Israelis and the Egyptians. We knew nothing about it until it was over. The Minister, in his statement, argued that it is wrong of me to suggest that there has been a change in nuclear doctrine in recent times. On page 12 of the statement which was distributed to members of the House, as distinct from the way in which it will appear in the Hansard, he stated:

on board that Harold Brown returned to that point of view, which was one he expressed before he became Secretary of Defense, only in his final statement when the game was up and he knew he was on the way out. The American Executive believed otherwise. There is no indication of any changes. I am making the point that there has been a succession of changes in American doctrine of substantial order. The Minister admitted that there is a need for control. On page 13 of the statement he said:

The basic principles of US nuclear strategy have been unchanged for decades.
He also said:
Presidential Directive No. 59, issued by President Carter in

I do not deny for one moment that Australian controls are required concerning North West Cape . . . But the whole point of our arrangements is that US. strategic policy is not to be assessed simply in terms of technological capability, but more essentially in terms of intent.

late 1979, was merely the latest in a long series of statements of this doctrine.

He agrees that there should be control but then says that it is a matter not of capability but of in-

That is palpable nonsense. There has been a suctent. The Government does not believe that the

cession of changes over the decades in the concepAmericans have this intent. I do not believe that

tualisation and projection of American nuclear they have either. I believe they would honestly

strategic doctrine. To the 1960s the John Foster assure us that they do not. But the history of man-

Dulles doctrine was massive retaliation. He said kind is littered with the distress and vicissitude of

that the war would be all over in a few days. In the countries that made the mistake of believing that

1960s McNamara evolved a policy of mutual another country's good intent would always be

assured destruction. Nixon advocated a policy of there to preserve them from difficulties of some

flexible response and escalation control. President form or another. I repeat that America in 1973

Carter issued presidential directive No. 59 which, put North West Cape on red alert and did not

incidentally, is secret and is not known in all its advise us. At the time of the abortive exercise

detail to the Government. All the Government aimed at rescuing the imprisoned diplomats

knows is what other honourable members and I America went into Iran through Oman airport

know from informed reading from public sources without the authority of the Government of

in the community. The presidential directive conOman. This created great difficulties in the re-

ceives that a protracted nuclear war could be lations of the Oman Government with its neigh-

selective and controlled. I refer to what Defense bours. Of course, we need control. We need effec-

Secretary Brown said on this matter in his Fiscal tive control. But it is wrong of the Minister to

Year 1982 Annual Report. He said:

suggest, as he does on page 17 of his statement,

In addition to providing the ability to devastate the full tarthat we are opposed to the military use of these get system of the Soviet Union, the countervailing strategy bases. They are military bases. We are saying that

gives the President a wide range of options, including more selective, lesser retaliatory attacks . . .

we have a right to know, we need to know what is happening. There needs to be knowledge of what

The Minister said that was nonsense, and that is taking place and there needs to be consent. I

there is no such thing as controlled, restricted or jump back to page 11 of the statement where the

Australian-United States Defence Facilities

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1951

Minister implies that the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics may be overhauling the United States in terms of strategic capability and that by implication we have a great obligation to be perhaps less questioning in this matter-more compliant,
as it were. In those circumstances I seek leave to

have incorporated in Hansard a table of deployment provided by the Defence Department. This is a document which the Department said could be made public.
Leave granted. The document read as follows-

STRATEGIC BALANCE--1981-1982

Predicted levels for 1985

Present levels

With SALT II

Without SALT II

SALT IIlimits

US USSR

US USSR

US USSR

MIRV'ed ICBM's 820 MIRV'ed SLBM's 1,200

550

820

495

820

700

1,400

520

200

690

380

700

470

1,070

1,020

1,185

1,200

1,400

1,870

Bombers with ACLM's 1,320

135

200

1,070

1,020

1,320

1,200

1,600

1,870

Missiles with single warhead or MRV's ICBM
Missiles with single warhead or MRV's SLBM Bombers without cruise missiles
Total operational delivery vehicles Total warhead numbers

2,250 2,250

Landbased 500
Seabased
350 1,900 9,200

580

500

760 ISO 2,500 8,000

210 2,030 11,700

420

350

540 100 2,250 9,000

145 2,090 13,800

710
150 2,730 12,000

Note: The figures for delivery vehicles (,Present Levels' and 'With SALT IT') are much more accurate than those for total warhead numbers and the 'Without SALT II' columns which depend on a large range of assumptions.

Mr HAYDEN-It shows very simply that the arms capabilities of the two powers is about equivalent. America has about 9,000 warheads and Russia has about 8,000 warheads. Matters of
precision, of greater impact, accuracy and so on have to be taken into the calculations. But the countries seem to be about equivalent. I observe for the record a matter that ought to be pursued in this House with more vigour than we have the opportunity to do, namely, the overwhelming case for pursuing SALT II-the strategic arms limitation talks-detente, world disarmament, peace-things that do not belong to starry-eyed idealists but things of concern to people genuinely
worried about the future of mankind. This table shows that with SALT II the number of warheads available to the United States will go up to nearly 12,000, to Russia to about 9,000 but that without SALT II the number will go up to nearly 14,000 for the United States and up to 12,000 for Russia. That is a mad escalation to self-destruction. We have an obligation to ensure that to the extent that we make a contribution in terms of the nuclear deployment between the super-powers, it is a contribution towards deterrence, not one that in any way at all might facilitate a first strike. That is
what we are constantly talking about. Harold

Brown in the statement. I quoted from-J acknowledge that the Minister arranged for me to receive this-said of the effects of any nuclear exchange between the super-powers:
For massive nuclear exchanges involving military and economic targets in the United States and the Soviet Union, fatality estimates range from a low of 20-55 million up to a high of 155.. 165 million in the United States, and from a low of 23-34 million up to a high of 64-100 million in the Soviet Union.
That is massive slaughter of mankind. In those circumstances we have no compunction at all about declaring our determination to do everything we can to regulate the nuclear race between the super-powers to ensure that to the extent that it - exists it is a mutual deterrent role and beyond that to work for eventual nuclear disarmament.
The other matter that the Minister invites me to take up is that of ANZUS. There is some implication in what he says that there is perhaps a doubt about the strength of our commitment to the alliance, perhaps even nascently a betrayal of the American alliance, of ANZUS by these sorts of questions. The Curtin Labor Government 40 years ago established the Australian-American alliance. On that occasion Curtin was condemned by the conservatives for betraying Great Britain. The criticism never ceases. I want to say only one

1952 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Australian-United States Defence Facilities

thing on that matter. It is my concluding point. I invite the Minister and his colleagues to respond. The Minister sees great difficulties with what I am proposing. He believes what I am proposing is impractical and unreasonable. Overriding all that the Minister states quite categorically that the proposal is a threat to the effectiveness of the ANZUS alliance. Does he know that the two most senior people in the American Embassy, apart [rom the Ambassador who is yet to arrive, have declared to me, to members of my staff and to at least one of my colleagues that they find no problems with what we are proposing. They understand completely our concern about national sovereignty. They believe they can work with the proposal. We are up to date with what the ANZUS alliance means. We are not prepared to be servile. We do not see it as a master-servant relationship but one of equals. We are determined to make it work but it will work in circumstances where there will be areas of disagreement. That is clear.
The final point that I want to make on the strength of the ANZUS alliance comes from Admiral Synnot who said yesterday:
. . . the ANZUS defence treaty with the United States did not guarantee security.
He continued:
the US would help Australia if it were under fundamental threat-
Whatever that is--
but he told a Commonwealth Club luncheon in Adelaide there could be many other occasions when Australia might have to deal with lesser though very demanding threats on its own,
That seems to me to be a sensible assessment of what it is all about. That is what we are aboutnational self-respect, a determination to preserve our sovereignty but to work, in spite of all the differences which are going to arise from time to time, in a self-respecting way, not a servile or demeaning way, with our major ally.
Mr STREET (Corangamite-Minister for Foreign Affairs) (4.25)-This debate gives me the opportunity to make one or two points regarding Australia's relationship with the United States. Those points need to be made following the speech that we have just heard from the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden). The first point is that Australia regards the United States as a close friend and valuable ally and in my experience the United States feels the same about us. It is an indication of the special nature of the relationship that governments in both countries recognise that no genuine alliance can exist unless each country acknowledges that its first responsibility must always be to protect the national

interest of its own country. That is our policy. Although 1 have said it before I reiterate it here
today.
Historically, there is no question that our alliance with the United States has served Australia's interests well. Equally, I believe the United States regards us as a reliable ally in which it can place its trust. Indeed, one of the strengths of the relationship is that it has enjoyed the support or the peoples of both countries and the support of all major political parties in Australia and in the United States. Recently, however, and in my view regrettably, there have been some ominous signs from the Leader of the Opposition that the Australian Labor Party may no longer be prepared to \end the kind of support that is needed for Australia to be able to claim bipartisanship when it comes to our alliance with the United States. In attempting to cast a shadow over Australia's alliance with the United States, again to my regret, the Leader of the Opposition has been encouraged by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen). On 24 March this year the Deputy Leader of the Opposition said in Parliamenthis comments were recorded on page 836 of Hansard-that it would be 'naive, and dangerously so' to ask Parliament 'to base our foreign policy on implicity trusting the United States'. The Deputy Leader of the Opposition also charges that United States policy is 'unprincipled and transparent' and that 'Washington encourages or is about to encourage terrorist activities '.
To the casual observer the individual attacks by the Opposition on elements of the American alliance, the Government's approach to the Reagan Administration, the Government's assessment of the Soviet threat to international order, the B52 agreement and use by the United States of defence facilities may have a veneer of being based on Australia's interests. Taken collectively, however, these statements suggest the conclusion that there are elements within the Labor Party which are having second thoughts about supporting Australia's close relationship with the United States. I genuinely hope that these elements are not allowed to throw into jeopardy bipartisan support in Australia for our alliance with the United States. If that were to happen it would be to the serious detriment of Australia's national interests and to the detriment of the part we can play with our partners in the Western alliance.
I take this opportunity to elaborate on why bipartisan support for Australia's alliance with the United States is so important. In doing that I remind members of the Opposition that the responsibility for preserving that bipartisan approach falls onto them and their party. The

Australian-United States Defence Facilities

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1953

Government can see no reason why that support should be withdrawn or why it should be subject to a series of restrictive and unrealistic conditions. The first and most important point is that a bipartisan approach gives us the freedom we need to participate actively and constructively within the Western alliance system. Australia must be seen to speak with one voice for it to be treated with the significance it deserves. The Western alliance system is the traditional and contemporary foundation of our security. It offers the ultimate guarantee of our security, should there ever be a direct threat to Australia. Our participation in that system-and the weight given to our viewsflows in part from our participation in ANZUS.
This year marks the thirtieth anniversary of the signing of the ANZUS treaty. During the last 30 years the meaning of that treaty has changed as external circumstances have changed. The fear of renewed Japanese militarism which motivated our interest in a treaty has shifted to a broader concern about the implications of Soviet expansionism. But the fundamental strength of the alliance, based both on shared perceptions about the sort of world order we want to sustain, and on a strong base of public support in both countries, has endured. The persistent claims of the Labor Party that there is something wrong or improper about such a close relationship between Australia and the United States of America is not only without any foundation but also it is potentially dangerous. Indeed, governments in both countries recognise that their first responsibility must be to protect their own national sovereignty and that it is inevitable that differences will arise over particular issues from time to time. For instance, differences have emerged in the past over specific trade matters such as access to the United States market for some of our primary products. The Australian Government is also I1rmly opposed to the extra-territorial application of United States law, particularly in the anti-trust area. Recently, we have been active in impressing on the United States that Australia has real interests at stake in the successful and early conclusion of a law of the sea convention and that we expect that, in the current review, the United States will take account of the views of its al lies and friends.
It is a measure of the strength of the relationship between Australia and the United States that these differences can be accommodated without any need for them to affect our broader links. Clearly any deep divisions within Australia over the very value of that relationship will have adverse consequences. However, the Government is committed to working on and strengthening our links with the United States and, in that, there is

no doubt in my mind that we have the support of the overwhelming majority of Australians. Political relations between our two governments remain very close. During my visit to Washington I was particularly struck by the genuine warmth which senior administration olTicers obviously feel towards Australia. Australian political leaders and the officials in our embassy in Washington enjoy excellent access at senior levels to explain our views and to argue in favour of our interests. I expect that the visit of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) to Washington in late June will provide a further demonstration of the political warmth of our relations.
The Australian Labor Party must [ace up to the consequences of any withdrawal of bipartisan support for our alliance with the United States. Such withdrawal would directly attack the basic friendship and trust which has been built up over many years. It would undermine the close and regular consultation on matters of mutual concern, which is such a feature of the relationship. It would reduce our ability to take the part we believe Australia should be taking within the Western alliance. The creation of any divisions resulting from the withdrawal of bipartisan support would not just be restricted to governments. Australia's relations with the United States gain much of their strength and vitality from the fact that they are so broadly based. The relationship depends not simply on the actions of our two governments in certain narrow political areas but on a multiplicity of links-personal and professional, private and public, in virtually all facets of our economy, society and culture. It is ridiculous to expect that any deep division on the value of our alliance with the United States would be restricted to party politics. Its effects would inevitably be felt far beyond that. As I said previously, I genuinely hope that those elements within the Labor Party seeking to undermine that Party's support for the United States alliance are unsuccessful.
Either inadvertently or deliberately there are always some who, while they find it possible to remain silent in the face of huge military efforts on the part of the Soviet Union, raise the cry of warmongering whenever the West shows any signs of matching that effort. Clearly some Labor Party members fall into that category, but if the rest are prepared to think seriously and unemotionally about the consequences of ending bipartisan support, there is no reason why that support cannot be consolidated and cannot remain a feature of Australia's relationship with the United States. At
this time that support is particularly important. We are facing a particularly tense and challenging

1954 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Australian-United States Defence Facilities

period in international relations. The burden of much of the response to this situation falls inevitably on the United States as the leader of the Western alliance. Australia and the other allies can offer counsel and support. We can debate vigorously and consult regularly when we think certain policies are mistaken. But finally the major decisions on such fundamental consequence to us all-decisions about the nature of the United States military arsenal, about the approach to the relationship between the superpowers, about the best strategy to adopt to dangerous situations like that in the Middle East -can only be taken in Washington by the President of the United States.
It is of the utmost importance to us to know that under the Reagan Administration there is a readiness to hear our views and to take them into account when awesome decisions of this kind are being taken. The onus must; however, lie with us to ensure that those views are presented clearly and in time. One of the main functions of our foreign policy must be to ensure that this happens. I am confident that with continuing support from the Australian people it will happen and that we can look forward to a further deepening and strengthening of our very important relationship with the United States. Australia will be all the better off if the alliance continues to be given the support it deserves from both sides of the national Parliament.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (4.37)-The Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street), in his speech, took out of context some remarks of the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden). His remarks, from my point of view, attempt to indicate that the Australian Labor Party is anti-American. It is nothing of the sort. As the Leader of the Opposition has said, he, I and all our colleagues have the closest of relationships with the American representatives in Australia. They fully understand our position. In fact they are somewhat mystified at the obsessive secrecy of this Government over a number of years.
America is a democracy, and we welcome that. As honourable members can understand, in a democracy there are different points of view. Recently representatives of the American Democrats visited Australia. They are very anxious to unseat the present President on a political basis because they have views different from his. In fact President Reagan's Budget will have the greatest difficulty in getting through Congress because the Democrats say that the President must look at other matters in America, not only what he thinks should be the priorities. Democracy allows for points of view, criticism and for governments and

Presidents being defeated. In that context, and only in that context, can people be fully informed of what the policies are and what was wrong with the outgoing administration. It is a searchlight which should be able to prevent the continuance of secrecy, corruption and matters that are unfair either in the domestic or in the international situation.
Let me ma.ke it clear that when I spoke on the basis of a reversal of policies in America, my remarks related to the fact that President Carter had a certain policy and the in-coming President had a different one indeed. Therefore, it is naive in the extreme implicitly to trust governments, because governments change. For instance, was our Prime Minister, John Curtin, going to accept what Winston Churchill said should happen; that our troops should not come back to defend our country but should be diverted to Burma or somewhere else or otherwise retained overseas? There we had a Prime Minister, duty bound to act in accordance with the wishes of his people. The sovereign aspects of Australia were foremost in his mind when he could not accept the view that the British Government would perhaps save us later. This is one of the same situations that we talk about. West Germany does not impJicity follow the United States. France does not implicitly follow the United States. That is a healthy arrangement because we are all working on the basis of what is best for the world. On 24 March 1981 I did say:
We have witnessed in Washington . . . policy reversals . . .
I said that these reversals could be unprincipled because they would involve the scrapping of human rights as an instrument of foreign policy. I also said:
Washington supports dictatorships or military juntas in South Korea, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia and a score of other countries. It is providing them with increased military assistance . . . which will be used to crush any dissident opinion . . .
I said that Washington was about to encourage terrorist activities against such internationally recognised governments as that of Angola because that Government is socialist or Marxist or perhaps just because it is noUn an alliance with the Americans. That is the context of what we are talking about. Who, in Australia, would disagree with that?
I will now come to the statement made by the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen). The statement adverted to an agreement made as far back as 1963 between Australia and the United States on the establishmentof what is called the North West Cape base. It has been the greatest political

Australian-United States Defence Facilities

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1955

hot potato in Australia for a long time. I can readily say that the Labor Party was defeated or annihilated at the polls because of its policy on the North West Cape arrangement, an arrangement which, as my leader says, we now understand. We did not always understand it. Let me, in the brief time available to me, perhaps ask how anybody could possibly understand it if an agreement says one thing and an interpretation says another. This is the problem. Today, for the first time-l suggest that this the first time that the Minister has been able to do it-the Minister has tabled a document entitled 'Agreed Minutes of interpretation' of the clauses. That is incredible. It has taken 18 years-from 1963 to 1981-for him to inform the people of Australia of what these minutes say. The Minister has made out that they were always available and were not secret. He made out that they were not classified documents and that their existence was known. Those were the three points made by the Minister, but the fourth point was that they were never to be disclosed until today. How in the name of fortune were the Leader of the Opposition and I able to understand those minutes if they had never been disclosed? They have never been tabled. They were not allowed to be tabled, until today, until the Minister decided to make the decision to allow them to be tabled. They were not tabled in 1963 for the same reasons.
I want to make some points about Article 3 of the Agreement between Australia and the United States relating to the Establishment of a United States Naval Communication Station in Australia. Article 3, in part, states:
Except with the express consent of the Australian Government the station will not be used for purposes other than purposes of defence communication and appropriate Australian authorities nominated by the Australian Government shall at all times have access to the station.
That was the 1963 arrangement. Do honourable members know and do the people of Australia know that at the same time as that arangement was made there was an interchange of correspondence between Sir Garfield Barwick and Mr Battle, the United States Ambassador, that said that whilst Article 3 required the express consent of the Australian Government, the two governments would agree by letter, which was never tabled and never put in public correspondence, that permission to use the base would require only consultation. It was clearly understood that consultation-no such word was used in Article 3-connoted no more than consultation and was not intended to establish Australian control over

the use or.-the station. So there was correspondence referring to consultation only when the explicit words in Article 3 were that there had to be express consent.
My colleague the honourable member for St George (Mr Morrison) in Parliament on 1 March 1973, when he disclosed information on the correspondence, said that this was the darkest day in Australia's history; it was the day on which the then Government sold out to another power the sovereign rights of this country. Look at the inconsistencies of the situation. In 1963 the Article stated that the express consent of the Australian Government was required. At the same time a letter, never disclosed, stated: 'It doesn't mean that. Don't worry too much about that, it only means consultation. We need not tell the people'. It was not until the Labor Party got to a position of power and Mr Barnard was able to talk about this base that we got some understanding of what it meant. What he said in 1973, when the then Labor Government had had a look at the operations of the North West Cape, is significant. I ask honourable members to bear in mind that, until 1973, governments had not allowed oppositions to visit the base. I make that point. It was only a Labor government that permitted the Opposition, whichever party it might be, to inspect the base. I congratulate the Minister for Defence for allowing us to inspect the base, but we allowed the then Opposition to visit the base at any time. It was not until recently that that facility was made available to us. After Mr Barnard had a look at the base he said:
. . . we were concerned that the station was an exclusively US concern, save for the presence of a single RAN officer.
There was only one Australian officer on that base. Admittedly, the position is much improved now. When we looked at the base the other day we understood the ramifications of the base. It is very clear that there is no input of information at that base. So why should we worry too much about that aspect of the base; there are more important aspects of the base to be looked at from the point of view of policy and Mr Barnard adverted to them. He said:
The station is only a small, technical instrumentality of US policy.
So it is. It transmits automatically, by computer, signals which nobody is expected to undertand and nobody has a right to interfere with. Mr Barnard continued:
The proper focus of our effort is therefore US policy. If we know that is about, we shall have an accurate understanding of the type of message being transmitted . . .

1956 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Australian-United States Defence Facilities

In other words we will have an understanding of countries can have an input into a base and that,

the policy considerations back at the Pentagon. on our understanding of Article 4, we cannot do

Accordingly, Mr Barnard said:

anything about it. I submit that is not so.

We have agreed with the US Government that the thoroughly inadequate and negative exchange ofletters in 1963 between the then Australian Foreign Minister and the US Ambassador be dropped. It no longer applies.
[ give full credit to Mr Barnard. We were then able to write out of the minutes the interpretation which I have read out and the minutes of interpretation have now been done away with. Originally therc were seven minutes of interpretation. The number has now been reduced to five and we have some of them before us today. Two minutes of interpretation have gone. The point I am making is that we should look at the fact that we presented to the Australian nation a set of words which do not mean what they say. It was the Labor Government which had to renegotiate Article 3.
Article 4, I now note, was the subject of information in the Australian. I knew nothing about the information contained in the Australian. Mr J)inwill did not discuss this information with me, he did not ask me for any comment nor did I com-- ment on it. I want to make that clear. The Minister's statement appears to put me into the basket of having made some comment about it. Article 4 of the Agreement is the most simple and clear-cut expression of the English language I have ever seen. It states:
The communications services of the station wiil be available to the Australian armed forces in accordance with technical arrangements made by the co-operating agencies of the two Governments.
That has been played down. I have only now found out that this could mean that use could be made of the station by third countries. Communications originated by a third government and accepted by the United States elsewhere than in Australia would be United States defence communications in the context of this agreement. For the life of me, nobody in Australia would readily understand that, when there is an agreement for services to be made available to the Australian armed forces in accordance with technical arrangements, the minutes of understanding mean, of course, that that gives a facility to third countries to use that base. That cannot be the situation as we understand it. It has never been disclosed to the Australian nation. Pinwill was right in what he said about that position. There are allies of the United States that are not necessarily allies of ours. I make that very clear. We do not belong to the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation. We do not belong to alliances that others belong to. We have no ready affiliation with South Africa, for example. How can we understand that all these

I want to make the point very clearly that we welcome the United States and its alliance, but we want peace and stability in the world. In the region in which we live Australia could be the best partner that the United States has in establishing peace and stability and a clear understanding of the priorities in this region. A Labor government in the 1960s could have kept the United States out of Vietnam. That war was unwinable and it caused the United States untold misery. The United Kingdom and Japan did not get involved and France got out. Why did we encourage the United States to get involved? Ministers of the then government did in a dishonest way for political advantage.
We are able to talk to the United States on a proper level and say: 'Look, we are here, we are up front whenever there are any problems in this area. You understand that'. The United States knows that we will not attack anybody. It knows that Australia is its best ally if there is any trouble in this region. It is mature enough to understand the situation. It is happy to have a bipartisan arrangement, certainly from the point of view of the Australian Labor party. The United States is mystified that it has been so maligned for allegedly being secretive about these arrangements. It is blameless from that point of view. It is this Government and previous governments of the same ilk that have hidden information from the Australian people and the Parliament.
We are not against any American alliance. We are fully in favour of peace and stability, and understandings and alliances of that type. We realise there is no future in war. That is all the more reason, as my leader has said, why we should urge the ratification of SALT II. If we get the ratification of SALT II-by agreement-we will limit the Soviets to 820 intercontinental ballistic missiles. If we do not get ratification the Soviets will be able to go to 1,400 ICBMs and that could lead to the end of the world.
Therefore, we are saying that we need more information about what arrangements have been made and what arrangements will be made by this Government. We want that information promptly. We just want to keep up with the strategic situation, the changes in American thinking and tactics. We should havethis is all we want-regular contact at the assessment and planning level in Washington. This does not exist now. In other words, we want a seat at the top table. On that basis, we would be aware of the

Health Care

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1957

strategic arrangements and we would know full plant. The Committee hopes to be able to submit

well all the communications that were being a report on this variation next week.

transmitted. That is what we mean when we say that we want to renegotiate the understanding.

HEALTH CARE

We do not want to lose our sovereignty, which has

Discussion of MaUer of Public Importance

been given away.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Mr Speaker has

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- received a letter from the honourable member for

Order! The honourable member's time has Bonython (Dr Blewett) proposing that a definite

expired.

matter of public importance be submitted to the

Debate (on motion by Mr Hodgman) House for discussion, namely:

adjourned.

The failure of the Government to honour its promise to maintain free public hospital provision and universal Com-

JOINT COMMITTEE ON THE

monwealth medical benefits.

AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY

I call upon those members who approve of the

Mr FRY (Fraser)- On behalf of the Joint proposed discussion to rise in their places.

Committee on the Australian Capital Territory I More than the number ofmembers required by

present the following report, together with exthe Standing Orders having risen in their

tracts of minutes and proceedings:

places-

73rd-74th series of proposed variations of the plan of layout of the City of Canberra and its environs.
Ordered that the report be printed.

Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (4.56)-The fifth Fraser health plan was conceived in deceit and planned in secrecy and is now clothed in cliche.

Mr FRY (Fraser)--by leave--This report Let me establish each of these three points. First

covers 17 variations to the city plan and recof all, the plan was conceived in deceit. There can

ommends the approval of works valued at over be no doubt that this fifth plan is the final out-

$4.5m. The Committee, in considering these come of the promise made by the Prime Minister

proposed variations, noted the twenty-first report (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in 1975 that 'we will main-

of the Australian Capital Territory House of tain Medibank'-a promise which has never been

Assembly Standing Committee on Finance. The abrogated, a promise which has never been aban-

Committee has deferred consideration on one of doned. It is true that the Friday after these latest

the variations, and made comments regarding changes had been made the Prime Minister told us another. It has approved the remaining -15 that his pledges have only a five-year lifetime. But

variations.

certainly when he last faced the electorate this

The committee has commented on the variation dealing with developments around the Belconnen Town Centre and Lake Ginninderra. Whilst allowing the construction of two service access roads from Emu Bank to provide for future

promise had not been abrogated and had never been abandoned. Therefore let us look at the fundamental principles of Medibank to which he committed himself five years ago and to which at least in public he has never abandoned.

commercial and residential sites the Committee There seem to be two major principles-first

feels that the five-metre limitation on developthat there should be free and open access to public

ment along the foreshores of Lake Ginninderra hospitals for all who wish to use them and sec-

does not provide sufficient protection of the lake ondly that there should be a Commonwealth

environment. Therefore, it is recommended that medical benefit for all taxpayers. These two essen-

no development be allowed closer than 10 metres tial or critical provisions of Medibank provided a

from the lake foreshore.

protection for all citizens against catastrophic ill-

The Committee is concerned about the lack of control over air, noise and water pollution in the Territory and has been informed by the Department of the Capital Territory that pollution control legislation will be introduced in the Australian Capital Territory by the end of 1981.

ness. These two elements which provided universal cover were retained in all the previous four Fraser twists and turns on medical cover. The previous four Fraser health plans all retained that universal element-medical benefit cover for all and free and open access to public hospitals.

However, there are still matters which the ComWe on this side were frequently chided by the

mittee wishes to consider, particularly the period honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd), per-

of grace allowed to existing operators to conform haps the honourable member on the Government

to the proposed pollution legislation. The varibenches who knows most about health and who

ation concerned is that which will provide for a therefore no longer contributes to health debates.

road to the proposed Koppers timber processing He always made the point that there remained

1958 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Health Care

this universal element in the Fraser schemes. We can now ask him: Where is the universal element now, where is the universal protection against catastrophic illness in this fifth Fraser health scheme?
Perhaps some people would say it is a bit unfair to accuse the Government of deceit in these matters. The Launceston Examiner opts for the other interpretation, which is simply administrative incompetence. An editorial in this newspaper states:
No Government which came to office with the promise that Medibank and health services standards would be maintained, but in five-and-a-half years has managed to make five substantial changes to the system, can be accepted as having all its administrative marbles intact.
That, of course, is the other alternative for which one can opt.
My second point is that the plans that have now been given to this Parliament were made in secrecy. We had an election six months ago. Yet there was no single indication from either the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) or the Prime Minister that the Government planned these two major reversals. There was no hint throughout that election campaign that the Government would limit Commonwealth benefits only to those
a taxpayers who in addition to paying their taxes
also entered into a contract with private health insurance agency. There was no indication that those taxpayers who made that extra financial commitment-a contract with a private health insurance agency-would be the only ones to get the Commonwealth benefit. There was no suggestion during the election campaign that ordinary citizens would be denied public provision in their public hospitals.
Of course, if the Federal Government gets its way -1 am glad to see signs of State resistancethe only free public provision in our public hospitals will be public provision for the narrowly defined poor. Indeed, if the bed costs that are now being suggested are correct most citizens will ffj.ce great expense. I would like the Minister, if he can, given the shambles of the statements we have had and the uncertainty about the actual provisions, to tell us whether it is true that a recommendation is being made that basic standard ward bed costs should rise from $50 to $80 a day, that intermediate ward bed costs should rise from $75 to $110 a day, as is indicated in one newspaper this morning, or whether it is correct that a $15 charge for services to out-patients will be introduced. Perhaps the Minister could use his speech in reply to clarify some of these points.
Thirdly, 1 have argued that the whole series of changes has been clothed in cliches. One of the great cliches is that of the user pays principle

which is reflected in most of the public statements of the Minister. I ask everybody to reflect on that cliche. In the field of health what does it mean to say that the user pays? The answer to that question must obviously be that the sick pay. In the health field the term 'user pays' is simply a euphemism for the fact that the sick pay. I suggest that in human terms the notion of the user pays simply amounts to a euphemism for the fact that the sick pay. I will suggest later that in economic terms the user pays principle in the health field is nonsense.
Another cliche from the Minister's speech maintains that the system must be equitable, paying particular attention to the capacity of individuals to contribute towards their health costs. A system based on flat rate insurance can never be equitable however much it is dressed up with rebates and other devices. How can a system in which the ordinary bloke pays as much as the fat cat for his health insurance be an equitable system? Let the Prime Minister come into this House and defend the equity of a system whereby he pays 0.8 per cent of his gross weekly income on health insurance and the family on average income pays at least 4 per cent of its gross weekly income on health insurance. Let the Prime Minister explain how that is an equitable system. We scarcely ever get him into any debate, of course, but we have hopes someday that he will come and explain to us how that is an equitable system. Where is the equity in such a health cover system?
It is true that there are special provisions for the socially disadvantaged but these are horrendous in their administrative implications and tragic in their human implications. According to the Minister's statement, allegedly something like one million socially disadvantaged may be picked up by his proposals; these are basically the unemployed and the working poor. All of these are somehow to be provided with identity cards for relatively short periods. One begins to envisage the kind of bureaucracy necessary to ensure that that proposal is carried out. For one thing many of the working poor have no contact with the Department of Social Security. Because they have a regular income they have very little contact, if any, with the Department of Social Security. It is likely they will not even collect their cards. What is to happen to them when they arrive in the hospitals?
I ask honourable members to compare this with a similar scheme introduced in 1970 consisting of a subsidised health benefits plan. Indeed, everything in the reactionary package announced last week can be found in previous experiments by this Government. In the case of the subsidised health

Health Care

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1959

benefits plan introduced in 1970 it can be found that even after five years of working at it and after five years of advertising, the take-up rate was only 47 per cent of those who, according to the Minister would be entitled to benefits under the scheme. Many people did not enter the scheme. A small proportion, less than half, did so. It was admitted on all sides to be an administrative nightmare and was very complex for the users. We have heard all this nonsense about small government. How is this kind of bureaucratic operation an example of small government when there will be a demand for possibly one million to two million cards a year with the complexities that will flow from that?
Moreover the number of socially disadvantaged tends to fluctuate a great deal. The unemployed tend to be in and out of employment. The earnings of low income workers fluctuate around that fairly stringent arbitrary cut-oft" income point set by the Government. Therefore, their eligibility for free medical and hospital cover will continually fluctuate. Has the Minister any real conception of the thousands of human tragedies that will derive from this uncertainty of health cover? Is it his intention to drive even the poor into expensive health insurance?

to specifically classify and identify the disadvantaged.
The changes are presented as ones that will save costs. Nothing in the fifth Fraser health scheme will contribute in any significant way to restraining health costs in this country. Indeed, I suggest that the reverse is likely to be true, that these changes are likely to escalate health costs for the total community. The fundamental reason for this is that the user pays principle makes neither human nor economic sense in the health area.
I have talked about that principle not making human sense. It does not make economic sense because it is not the user but the provider who generates costs in the health field. The only cost generated by the user is that of his initial visit to his doctor. It is then the doctors' decisions, the specialists' decision and hospital decisions that generate costs. Yet, these costs are virtually unrestrained by any proposal made in the fifth Fraser health scheme. Indeed, I think rather the reverse is likely to occur. The massive boost to private health insurance industry will simply underwrite unrestrained fee for service medicine. The Jamison inquiry constantly adverted to the problem of private fee for service and its effects on health costs in this country.

The eligibility for benefits is determined by arbitrary income levels. The cut-olf point is basically $160 per family; that is, those earning less than that $160-1 leave aside for the moment adjustments for children-will have all their health costs covered. But those whose income happens to be just over that level will have the full health cost payments to meet. Of course, this is inevitable in any of these types of systems. But those below the cut-off point will have all costs covered but in the case of those just above the cut-off point the health bills will have to be paid by the individual.
I recognise that because of this kind of system the Government is required out of necessity to define the socially disadvantaged. Therefore, it has all the problems associated directly from the regressive insurance proposals. The Government is compelled, because it supports such an expensive and regressive private insurance system, to categorise the socially disadvantaged in this way. Basically, the Labor alternative is to provide a system whereby people will pay according to their means. That is, contributions will be linked to income and therefore there will be no sharp cut-off point necessary such as that provided for under the scheme devised by the Government where there is a flat rate of insurance for most of the population and therefore the necessity

The Minister says that he recognises cost problems in the public hospitals of this country; so does the Labor Party. But the Minister's solutions to the cost problem in the public hospital sector is simply to abdicate responsibility for a national problem.
All the major contributions that a Commonwealth Government could make to cost containment are abandoned. There is to be no constructive input from the Commonwealth Government into controlling costs in the public hospital sector. The fact that the Government will divorce hospital responsibility and give it back to the States but retain health insurance responsibilities will mean a growing inefficiency because the two systems will be untied. It is obvious from the decisions now being taken in the States that the health and hospital systems of this country will fragment. We will have different services, different levels of cover and different systems in each of the States. Australians will be lucky to grow up in some States because of the health services offered there but unlucky to grow up in other States because of the abdication of national responsibility in the hospital field. Let me give the Minister this credit by saying that from all I have read of his statements I do not really believe that he himself believes in that abdication from national responsibility in the hospital field.

1960 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Health Care

At the very same time that this abdication is taking place and there are cutbacks in the public hospital sector the bed day subsidy in private hospitals is increased from $16 to $28 for surgical patients. I contrast this with the public sector which is being cut back. Growth in the provision of beds has been static for three years in the public sector but beds have been growing rapidly in the private sector. Yet, the private sector is to get more money in a period when everyone is saying
we should somehow restrain the number of beds provided. Again these surgical beds are very much the beds used for elective surgery. The Jamison inquiry pointed out that one of the excesses in the present system is excess elective surgery. Yet, we are now providing a payment to private hospitals simply to underwrite that. This whole subsidy makes no sense when we are trying to restrain health costs in this country.
We have had a lot of small government rhetoric to justify these changes. However, the question is not small or big government; it should be good or bad government. This sort of provision is clearly bad government. Virtually every generalisation made by the Minister about these changes is wrong. The system he is introducing is inequitable, not equitable. It will escalate costs rather than contain them. It will abdicate responsibilities in the hospital field, not exercise responsibilities. It will provide a bonanza for private insurance, private doctors and private hospitals but it will raise the costs for most Australians. It will add heavier cost burdens, particularly for the less well-off sections of the population. Further; as I have said, for the disadvantaged it will add enormous uncertainties. The Government has thrown down the gauntlet on this matter; we will certainly take it up. We pledge now to provide a
health cover system tied to income and free and open access to the public hospitals of this country.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health) (5.11)-1 am grateful to the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) for raising this matter in the House this afternoon because it gives me another opportunity to explain to the people of Australia and to this House the difference that exists between the approaches of the Government and the Opposition in philosophy and practice concerning the delivery of health care. The honourable member said that this latest policy was conceived in deceit, secrecy and cliche. I make it absolutely clear that the Government has not for a moment gone away from the proposition that there has been a change

in its attitude towards access to public hospitals and universal Commonwealth medical benefits. We stated in 1975 that we would maintain access to public hospitals and universal Commonwealth medical benefits. That was in 1975, bu~ no government can be required to continue with policies which bring about results inconsistent with other government policies and goals.
Free public hospitals for all people and the existing Commonwealth medical benefit arrangements have brought about a fall-off in the number of people with health insurance in recent years. That trend is continuing. That result is inconsistent with the Government's aim of promoting health insurance and its support for the community rating principle. Naturally the Government could not stand by and let that continue. Additionally, the continuation of free public hospital access for all people irrespective of their income and the existing divided responsibility arrangements for the administration of public hospitals could not be allowed to continue when it had been shown by the Jamison Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals that these arrangements were unnecessarily adding to the high cost of health care in this country. The honourable member said this plan was conceived in secrecy. Obviously with a detailed investigation such as was exemplified by the Jamison Commission of Inquiry one would not be stating in advance of the results of that inquiry what one's approach would be. I believe the
honourable gentleman is a man who has a bit of logic about him; he would understand that
proposition.
The Government has a duty to ensure that taxpayers' funds are spent wisely and efficiently. This Government is about that-spending taxpayers' funds wisely and efficiently. In these circumstances the Government had no choice but to review its overall health policy and make those changes necessary to ensure that we do have a coherent and sustainable health policy.
When reviewing its health policy over recent months the Government kept in mind at all times that all Australians should have proper access to health care services of high quality at a cost that the individual and the community can afford. I would like the honourable gentleman, and the people of Australia, to keep that in mind because the Government strongly believes that the most equitable and responsible means of achieving this overriding goal, where we have a highly complex and expensive health care delivery system, is under a policy that ensures that States fully
accept their constitutional responsibilities for the provision of health services and determine their

Health Care

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1961

own priorities as to how funds are to be allocated not an exaggeration to say that the cost of health

to the different parts of the health system. This is care in Australia, and throughout the developed

not a big brother government, in marked contrast world, is so expensive that if people were required

to the Labor Government that went before it.

t~ meet the full costs of many of the health ser-

The policy should ensure also that all Australians become far more responsible for their own health care needs and lifestyles, and more aware of the full cost of the health services available to them. I believe that special assistance schemes designed to cover people's hospital and medical bills should be available only to those in genuine need; namely, eligible pensioners and the disadvantaged. Those people in the community who can pay their own way should be required to contribute to the costs of the health services they receive, either by personal payment or through health insurance. I will be saying more about that. We believe that health insurance should be available at a reasonable cost and that it should have wide coverage in order to support the community rating principle. Government assistance towards the health costs of those who can afford to contribute towards their health services should be restricted to those who are willing to help themselves. We believe that providers of health care services should become far more aware of the costs that they generate. That is a very potent aspect of the generation of health costs. We must do all we can to ensure that those people provid-

VIces that they receive, the sums to be paid would be prohibitive. Even health insurance would not be within the reach of the average family if charges were set on a full cost recovery basis. People simply do not understand the enormous costs of intensive care treatment in hospitals and other treatment facilities. That is why I announced last week that the Government will be providing major subsidies under its new health policy to ensure that health insurance will be available at a reasonable cost to all those required to contribute towards their health bills. Some major examples of such subsidisation are: The decision for the Commonwealth to take over, at a cost of $120m annually, total responsibility for the payments for nursing home benefits instead of sharing it as we did with the health funds; the Commonwealth's payment to the Reinsurance Trust Fund, which assists registered health funds in ~ee~ing the hospital costs of the chronically ill, WhiCh IS set at $100m in the coming year; Commonwealth medical benefit payments; and the tax rebate for the cost of basic hospital and medical insurance. This measure will particularly assist low income earners.

ing services have a more accurate idea of the costs A subsidisation measure often lost sight of is the

of those services.

significant public sector contribution towards the

I emphasise that the health policy I announced last week is the most equitable and most responsible basis on which the Government can ensure that all Australians have adequate access to high quality health care. Under this policy special assistance arrangements will operate to cover the hospital and medical bills of those in genuine need. We will do this in relation to hospital costs by requiring the States to provide free public hospital accommodation and treatment for all eligible pensioners and their dependants plus the disadvantaged, as we have already defined. Special artangements will also apply to cover the private medical bills of these same people. If a doctor bulk-bills the Government for services provided to these people, they will not be required to meet any out of pocket expenses for their medical bills. If he does not, a Commonwealth medical benefit of 85 per cent is payable. These special arrangements ensure that those in genuine need are protected.
The Government equally believes that those who are not in need should contribute towards the cost of the hospital and medical services they receive. I mentioned that I would dwell on this point. I use the word 'contribute' carefully. It is

cost of a public hospital bed. In-patient charges are well below the real cost of providing a public hospital bed, which is expected to reach close to $200 a day next financial year. Considerable assistance is also provided to the aged, the chronically il~ and families with children through the commumty rating principle which ensures that the cost of insurance is borne equally by all those who are insured. The Government believes that a health policy based on the philosophy that special assistance schemes should be restricted to those in genuine need and that the Government should provide significant subsidies to ensure that health insurance is available for all people at a :easona.ble cost, is the most equitable health polICY aVailable. Equally, the Government believes that it has a duty to all taxpayers to ensure that its health policy is responsible. As I have emphasised on many occasions, the Government's fundamental goal in the health art:a is to ensure that all Australians have adequate access to high quality health care, but this must be at a cost that the individual and the community can afford. In the House last week, I stated:
It is not an exaggeration to state that the health care delivery system could become a bottomless pit down which an ever-increasing proportion of gross domestic product could be

1962 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Health Care

poured without any real increase in the health standards of Australians.
It is, therefore, important to ensure that a health policy has inbuilt checks and balances designed to ensure that the health care delivery system is not abused. The policy I announced last week has such inbuilt checks and balances, but on the other hand a universal health insurance scheme funded by a levy or through general taxation does not have those checks and balances. That is why the Government rejects a Medibank-type universal health insurance scheme. Too many people were deluded into believing they received free health care under that discredited Medibank scheme. I have said, and it has been said on many occasions, that there is no such thing as free health care. No matter what the Australian Labor Party may say, that is the case. Somebody has to pay for it.
It cannot be denied that major factors in the explosion in health costs that occurred in the 1970s were the introduction of Medibank and the openended public hospital funding arrangements which the Whitlam Government negotiated with the States. All people were provided with medical and hospital services without charge, so allowing consumers and providers of health services to lose sight of the need to fund those costs. If people do not see or realise the cost of the services they are receiving, irresponsible use of unnecessary and expensive services must result. The Government also rejects the discredited Medibank scheme advocated by the Labor Party because it would be the first step towards socialised medicine. This was a major element behind the Whitlam Labor Government's decision to introduce Medibank. I would like to quote from Mr Whitlam's remarks in 1972 so that nobody will be under any misapprehension as to what the Labor Party was about then and now. Mr Whitlam said in 1972:
It would be intolerable if a Labor government were to use the alibi of the Constitution to excuse failure to achieve its socialist objectives-doubly intolerable because it is just not true that it need do so.
The major act of nationalisation--
I repeat that-
The major act of nationalisation in the traditional sense to be undertaken by a Labor government in the next term, will be through the establishment of a single health fund, administered by a health insurance commission.
People who advocate the introduction of socialised medicine would do very well to look at the experience of countries which have such schemes. We do not want in Australia the sort of situation that has developed in, say, the United Kingdom, where the British Government has

been forced to restrict the supply of health services in order to rein in costs and where, as a result, there are long delays for people seeking elective surgery. I reject the Opposition's claim that the health policy I announced last week will mean the end of universal Commonwealth medical benefits.
At present, even though the Commonwealth meets the cost of medical bills in excess of $20, only about 20 per cent of medical services are covered. Nearly 80 per cent of medical services cost less than $20. The new Commonwealth medical benefit arrangements will apply to all medical services covered by the schedule fee arrangements. Under the new arrangement I announced last week 100 per cent of schedule fee items would be covered for those with insurance. The Government will not, of course, be paying medical benefIts for people who do not have at least basic medical insurance with a registered health fund. The Government believes this form of assistance should be restricted to those who help themselves by taking out insurance.
I find it difficult to understand how the Opposition can criticise the Government's health policy when it does not have a policy of its own. We have been told about secrecy in relation to the Government's development of a policy. What about the secrecy of the Opposition? We have been told now for many months that a grand unveiling will take place shortly, but it still has not occurred. It still has not occurred despite the statements we have heard from the honourable member for Bonython. We all know that the ALP's new policy will just be another dressed-up version of that discredited Medibank scheme of the Whitlam years, so J cannot understand why it is taking so long to prepare. Perhaps the Opposition is having difficulty in suitably disguising it because it knows that the Australian people comprehensively rejected the open-ended nature and the socialised nature of the original Medibank scheme.
The House should not lose sight of the fact that the new health policy I announced last week followed detailed consideration by the Government of the final report of the most comprehensive and far-reaching review of Australia's hospital system ever undertaken. The Government believes the policy I spelt out last week will ensure that its overriding aim in the health area-that all Australians should have access to high quality health care-is attained in the most equitable and responsible manner possible.
The policy I announced last week will ensure that these objectives are met through special assistance to help cover the hospital and medical

Health Care

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1963

costs of those in genuine need; ensuring that those private hospitals. This will cost some $21m. The

who are in a position to do so should contribute gain to the Government amounts to only $294m.

towards the cost of the health services they reTherefore, there is a net loss to the Treasury of

ceive; the promotion of insurance for those pro- $448m. Due to the change in the reinsurance pool

viding such a contribution through subsidy arcontribution the Government will gain $25m. The

rangements financed through the adoption of proposed reduction in payments to the States for

health service funding arrangements designed to hospitals will provide the Government with a gain

minimise waste and inefficiency in costly instiof $250m. The Government will gain $9m by res-

tutions; and acting to ensure that consumers and tricting the definition of disadvantaged patients

providers of hospital and medical services do not and by increasing payments to doctors from 75

abuse the health care delivery system. The per cent to 85 per cent for those who are accepted

honourable member for Bonython has said as disadvantaged. There is a gain of $lOm by

nothing today to show that the Government's polchanging the method of payment from paying all

icy is not the most appropriate for Australia and bills over $20 to paying only 30 per cent of all

all Australians. It provides a clear alternative to medical bills for insured patients. Those are the

the socialised and nationalised nature of the aims amounts which we can cost, but there will be

of the honourable member for Bonython and his further quite significant costs.

fellow members of the Australian Labor Party.

When 1 tackled Government members and

Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect) (5.26)-1 would members of the Department of Health to indicate

like to make a few points about the changes to to me whether they have considered some of the

health care services which have been introduced extra costs that will be involved, it became quite

by the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar). Both clear that they have not even thought about them. his policy statement last week and his speech I mention just one. If the Government is successtoday explaining that policy indicate that he ful in this exercise and persuades a significant

would probably make a reasonably good Minister number of persons in Australia to insure them for Foreign Affairs. On the question on which he selves, there will be a significant change in the

bases, as he put it, his Government's policy, 1 can proportion of people who now enter hospital as

agree with him only partly. Referring to his standard ward patients to those entering hospital

Government he said:

as insured patients, or doctor of choice patients.

This Government is about . . . spending taxpayers' The Government then becomes liable for 30 per

funds wisely and efficiently.

cent of all medical fees incurred by those patients.

I put it to the House that what this Government is At present no government pays anything towards

about is the spending of taxpayers' funds but not doctors' fees for a standard ward patient. Doctors

about the spending of them wisely and efficiently. are not able to charge for standard ward patients

This is another example-I think it is about the being treated in hospital. The treatment is free or

eighth edition-of the Fraser Government's is paid for by State governments and hospitals

health scheme where each problem that has arisen under the present system of sessional fees or

has been as a result of what the Government has salaries.

referred to as a previous solution. Another set of
solutions was introduced last week. It will come into force on 1 September and will cause further significant problems.

As soon as a patient falls into the new category of a private patient a fee becomes payable for every medical service rendered to that patient in hospital. Those fees will be very significant. In my

Let me deal, firstly, with the way that the view the cost to the health funds and to the Com-

Government has persuaded the media and its own monwealth of newly labelled 'doctor of choice'

supporters-as I understand it, its back bench patients having a battery of pathology tests will be

members in this House and in the Senate-to behuge. But it will enable fairly shrewd hospital ad-

lieve some saving will be involved. No saving will ministrators to balance their budgets. Everybody

be involved as far as Commonwealth revenue is admitted to hospital will be immediately given a

concerned. The increased expenditure and loss in battery of tests and all kinds of medical services

revenue amount to $740m-odd. An amount of because now they are all private patients. The

$120m is lost due to the fact that the Government Commonwealth will pick up 30 per cent of the bill

will take over the responsibility for nursing home and health funds will pick up either 55 per cent of

benefits for insured persons. The introduction of a the bill in the case of patients who are insured for

tax rebate for basic health insurance will incur a 85 per cent, or 70 per cent of the bill in the case of

loss to the Government of $600m. The Governpatients who have 100 per cent cover. The

ment has increased from $16 a day to $28 a day Government has not even costed it or thought

the benefit which is paid for surgical patients in about it. If the Government is successful in its

1964 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Health Care

attempt to move standard ward patients into the category of private patients this will involve a
huge cost to the Commonwealth Government. When it talks about a saving of $250m it has not thought through the position. This is not possible
in all States because there is a huge difference in
the mix of private patients and standard ward patients. I asked a" question on notice-question
No. 235, dated 24 February 1981-as to the proportion of occupied bed-days by patients status in
public hospitals in the different States. The
answer I received indicates that huge variations are to be found. During the last financial year 53 per cent of all patients in public hospitals in New
South Wales were private patients. The Aus-
tralian Capital Territory had 62 per cent; Queensland, 20 per cent; the Northern Territory, 11 per cent; and Tasmania, 14 per cent.

If the Government is successful in forcing a means test upon the States the proportion of standard ward patients moving into the category of private patients will be much greater, for instance, in Queensland. Let us assume that according to the means test 70 per cent of people ought to be private patients in public hospitals. There will be an increase from 20 per cent to 70 per cent in Queensland and an increase from only 53 per cent to 70 per cent in New South Wales. Huge differences will ocur in the income generated in the different States and the costs applicable to the different States. Having spoken about this matter with people in the Department of Health and the Treasury, I am quite sure that the Government has not thOUght about those problems. It has just looked at the problems in a broad sweep. Earlier today I asked the Minister for Health whether I could incorporate in Hansard a table which I have prepared showing the effect upon Commonwealth revenue in a full year at current prices. I ask leave of the House to incorporate that table in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

EFFECT ON COMMONWEALTH REVENUE IN A FULL YEAR AT CURRENT PRICES

Increase

Decrease

$m

$m

Tax rebate for basic health Insurance

600

Nursing home benefits for insured

persons . . . . . . . . -

120

Improvement in home nursing

1

$28/day instead of $16/day for surgi-

cal patients in private hospitals .

21

25

Change in reinsurance pool con-

tribution . . . . . . . . .

Increase

Decrease

$m

$m

9

Restriction of definition of disadvan-

taged patients and increase in pay-

ment to doctors from 75-85 per cent

10

Change from payment of medical bills

over $20 to 30 per cent of all medi-

cal bills for insured patients only .

250

Proposed reduction in payment to

states for hospitals . . . . .

294

742

Treasuiy therefore loses a net $448m.
Dr KLUGMAN-I thank the House. There will be huge increases in costs to the bureaucracy. One should be able to talk about this matter for' half an hour. The Minister said that a million people will have to be labelled as being disadvantaged. The Minister said also that we want only the poor people labelled as disadvantaged. This will not happen. Every migrant in his first six months in Australia -without an income test, the Minister points out-will be labelled as disadvantaged. Some migrants coming to Australia are in a particular category. They are rich migrants and are called 'entrepreneurs'. If a person is an entrepreneur and has more than $200,000 in cash he or she can come to Australia but for the first six months after arrival in Australia that person automatically will be labelled as disadvantaged. That is quite ridiculous. We are not talking about disadvantaged people.
It reminds me of the Melbourne University kindergarten which is subsidised by this Government because a proportion of the children attending have parents who are migrants; in other words, they are overseas academics. Both parents receive an academic income but as they come from overseas the Government subsidises the fees which have to be paid at the Melbourne University kindergarten. That sort of thing will happen again in this situation. Imagine what will happen. A million people will have to be declared disadvantaged each year. The Government says that this has to be done at six-monthly intervals. So two million bits of paper must be filled out. What a ridiculous proposition!
When the Minister was interviewed at a Press conference on Friday he said: 'People can go to hospital or see their doctor without that chit. They can get it later'. When somebody walks in from the street, will the doctor accept that that person will come back with that chit in six weeks or three months so that he can get paid? The Government has not thought it through. I can understand hospitals being prepared to accept that proposition but I am sure that the medical

Health Care

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1965

profession will not. The thing that worries me most about the introduction of this scheme is that obviously it has not been thought through.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Order! The honourable member's time
has expired.
Mr HARRIS (Chisholm) (5.36)-1 am delighted to join in this debate on behalf of the Government. The new health care scheme announced last week by the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) is a first class scheme. The announced changes were very necessary. In listening to this debate and the debate on health care services last week one is very much struck by the way in which honourable gentlemen opposite seem to wish to return to the arrangements made in 1975. They seem to be fixed upon the notion that those arrangements should never be altered. Of course, the reality is that they are largely irrelevant to the circumstances of the day, and, our experience over the last five years has demonstrated that they simply do 110t work.
When this Government came into office it inherited arrangements which had been made by the former Whitlam Government regarding Commonwealth funding of States hospitals. The Tasmanian and South Australian agreements were for a period of 10 years and agreements with all the other States were for a period of five years. Clearly the former Labor Government did not intend that those arrangements would last forever. No sensible government would have intended simply to renew those agreements after each five year or 10-year period without looking at the consequences of each agreement. With our previous experience there is no doubt that the openended 50-50 funding arrangement between the Commonwealth and the States simply has not worked. It has been characterised by a steady increase in the cost of delivery of health service without an equal improvement in the quality of that service. The unsatisfactory experience led to the Government's instigating the Jamison Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals. 1 was interested to hear the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) say that these changes by the Government were conceived in secret. I would have thought that anyone who has an interest in the health scheme, as he claims he has, would be aware of the investigation being conducted by the Jamison Commission of Inquiry. He would have understood very readily that in the circumstances it was very likely that changes would come about in the health scheme. As the Minister for Health
said, it was hardly likely that the Government would be commenting upon the matter until the

Jamison inquiry had produced its report. That report left no doubt that the existing arrangements were totally unsatisfactory. 1 wish to quote briefly from two or three sections of that report.H states:
Information provided to the Commission shows a general over-supply of hospital beds in Australia, significant differences in total provision between States, mal distribution of beds within the States and a close relationship between the supply and use of hospital beds
The States have been encouraged by the hospital cost-sharing agreements in particular to devote a large share of their health budgets to hospitals.
The present budgetary processes are cumbersome and time consuming.
. . . the attitudes and efficiency of some hospital administrations has not been impressive. The Commission has evidence of ridiculous and unsubstantiated demands for additional staff, inefficient allocation of stall' and rostering of overtime, and reluctance to introduce measures with proven cost savings such as contract cleaning. Other examples of wasteful practices include rosters deliberately organised to ensure that certain employees had a guaranteed overtime component in their wages. whether the hours needed to be worked or not, and arrangements for payment of salaries and allowances in excess of award provisions, sometimes with authorisation from the hospital's board but commonly without approval of the appropriate health authority. The Commission regards these as manifestations of poor managerial control and of a totallaek of appreciation of the managerial function in publicly funded institutions
. . . health authorities and hospital managements in general have not taken enough trouble to promote cost constraint-they must take more action; financial efficiency has taken second place to spending in many hospitals-this situation must be altered; the present system of funding encourages and promotes expenditure with little consideration of need-need must always be the main consideration;
It was because of that experience that the arrangements between the Commonwealth and the States had to be altered to a system which will require the hospitals and the States to have more regard to their costings. The States and the hospitals will now have a clear knowledge of the limit on the amount available to them from the Commonwealth and will have to ensure cost controls. The new system means that Australians will have a health care system which will be no less effective but far more cost efficient than previously. We will continue to spend money on health but we will not continue to waste it.
The health insurance system has also required significant changes. In recent times there has been a steady withdrawal out of the health insurance system of people who can pay, and should pay, for health services. The national figure is around 60 per cent, and in one State it was down to about 55

1966 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Personal Explanation

per cent. This is clearly unsatisfactory. It is contrary to the principle of the user pays and, more particularly, to the concept that those who can pay should contribute to the cost of their health care. It has meant that those who have the greatest demand, typically the older people, are paying more because, as fewer people contribute to the health insurance funds, as the community rating slips, those who are contributing have to contribute more than their share. This new scheme win result in a much higher proportion of wage and salary earners contributing to health insurance funds. They will be paying for their own health care.
This is not a scheme which leaves to their own devices those who are unable to contribute-quite the reverse. Pensioners, the unemployed, newly arrived migrants, and the disadvantaged will have their health costs met by this Government. The disadvantaged are clearly defined, but with a generous form of test. The scheme will enable all those who are able to pay to do so, and we will meet the cost for those who are not able to pay. The number in this category is significant. The .pensioner element includes nearly one million people and the disadvantaged element nearly one million people. We are very far from leaving to their own devices those who need assistance. Some criticism has been made by the other side that the disadvantaged section of the health scheme will be administratively difficult. 1 am advised that the administration of that section will involve no more than 50 extra people in the Department of Social Security. That is a very small price to pay to ensure that such an excellent scheme works.
In the next financial year we will be continuing to meet our promise of half tax indexation, but in the following year we will be paying a rebate of 32c in the dollar on the basic health insurance premium to all those who are meeting their own health insurance costs. That will mean a return of a total of some $600m to those taxpayers who are in a health insurance scheme. These changes were needed. I am sure they are welcomed in the community, and I am delighted that the Government has made the changes at this time.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-The debate on the matter of public importance is concluded.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Mr MORRISON (St George) 1wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?

Mr MORRISON-Yes, Mr Deputy Speaker, on the basis of an incomplete quotation. This afternoon in the statement on the North West Cape by the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen), he paid me the compliment of quoting part of a speech I made in this House in 1975. 1 am sure that he would not mind if I add what I think is very material to the quote that he selected. In that speech on 21 August 1975, following the quote the Minister for Defence extracted I went on to say:
To this end what we set out to do was to establish, to regain and to get effective consultation with the United States which, by this exchange ofletters--
This was the infamous exchange of letters between Sir Garfield Barwick and the United States Ambassador, Mr Battle, in 1963.
Mr MacKellar-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. As I understand the Standing Orders in relation to misrepresentation, the honourable member has to say where he was personally misrepresented. The honourable mcmbcr for St George is now quoting further extracts from his speech. 1 cannot understand how that is a point of personal misrepresentation. Was thc quotation used by the Minister complete or not, accurate or not?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for St George is claiming that the Minister quoted him only partially, and he is showing where the Minister was incorrect.
Mr MORRISON-I thank you for the ruling, Mr Deputy Speaker. The quotation was incomplete and I am seeking now to record in Hansard the statement. I made in 1975. The quotation continues:
. . . by this exchange of letters, had been denied to the Australian Government. Through discussions with the United States which form the basis of the legislation which we have before us tonight we made that consultation explicit. The substantial features are to ensure, to quote from the document:
. . . that the Australian Government would have full and timely information about strategic and operational developments relevant to the station and their significance for Australian national interests.
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS
Motion (by Mr Moore)-by leave-agreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent Notice No. 47, General Business, being calle4 on forthwith.
SPIRITS REGULATIONS
Motion for Disallowance
MrGILES (Wakefield) (5.48)-I move:
That the amendment to Regulation 9B of the Spirits Regulations as contained in Statutory Rules 1980, No. 384, made under the Spirits Act 1906, be disallowed.

Spirits Regulations

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1967

In simple terms, this regulation has been brought down by the Government to put into effect a statement made by the previous Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, Mr Garland. It aims to remove from fruit brandies the requirement currently in the Act for maturation-that is, storage-for a statutory period. Currently, the statutory period of maturation that applies to Australian-produced spirits applies to brandy and whisky. The statutory period also applies to Scotch whisky and items such as that which are imported into the country.
I wish to submit to the House five important reasons why this regulation should be disallowed. Firstly, at the time of the statement by the Minister concerned at that time, there was, as far as I could ascertain, no fruit brandy produced in Australia. If there was no fruit brandy produced in Australia where did the pressure come from to do away with the very costly period of maturation? I have been informed since then that one firm in Victoria, having ~xperimented for some months, is about to go, or perhaps already is going, into production of a form of fruit brandy. I am informed further that since then there have been other applications or inquiries from people as to whether they can produce fruit brandy without the necessity for a maturation period.
Secondly, if fruit brandy production as an Australian enterpr:ise takes off then I submit to the House that that type of competition could discriminate against Australian industries and, indeed, imported industries, such as Scotch whisky that have to undergo a highly expensive two-year period of storage; in other words, the maturation period. Thirdly, a working party of the National Health and Medical Research Council currently is investigating this complicated matter of which spirits should be subject by legislation to maturation periods. The working party is also looking at labelling as part of that general problem. What in effect the previous Minister's announcement has done-it was put into practical effect by the change of regulation-is to cut right across the work of that working party of the Natinal Health and Medical Research Council. Purely to demonstrate that point J seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard a page from a production by the Australian Wine and Brandy Producers Association Inc. headed 'Standards for Spirits and Liqueurs'.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-

AUSTRALIAN WINE AND BRANDY PRODUCERS' ASSOCIATION INCORPORATED STANDARDS FOR
SPIRITS AND LIQUEURS
Review Document
1. (i) Spirit is any potable alcoholic distillate produced by
tthheand3is7t%illvatIivonalocfohfeorlmaten2t0edCl.iquor and shall contain not less
(ii) Spirits may be reduced by the addition of water and may contain added sugar, caramel, natural flavourings, sweetening substances and colouring matter.
2. Brandy is a spirit obtained by the distillation of Wine in such manner that the distillate possesses the taste, aroma and characteristics generally attributed to Brandy and shall have been matured in wood at a strength ofless than 74% alcohol at 20"C for not less than two years.
3. Rum is a spirit obtained by the distillation of the fermented juice of sugar cane, sugar cane syrup, sugar cane molasses, or other sugar cane by-products, separately or together including mistuers of such distillates produced in such manner that the distillate possesses the taste, aroma and characteristics generally attributed to rum and shall have been matured in wood at a strength ofless than 74% alcohol at 20nc for not less than two years.
4. Whisky or whiskey is a spirit obtained by the distillation of the fermented liquor of a sacharified mash of cereal grain produced in such manner that the distillate possesses the taste, aroma and characteristics generally attributed to Whisky or Whiskey and shall have been matured in wood at a strength of less than 74% alcohol at 20nc for not less than two years.
Mr GILES-I incorporate that document not because 1 necessarily agree with everything the Association puts forward. It is but one section of a whole industry. 1 incorporate the document to point out that the particular recommendations that the Association puts forward in the piece on brandy are in total contradistinction to the Minister's action of some months ago.l must admit that it is unfortunate that the then Minister is no longer in the Parliament because it is very hard for a newer Minister to know precisely what motivated the Minister at that time. I repeat that at that point in time to my knowledge there was nobody in the country even producing fruit brandy for which no maturation period was required. As the House will admit, this matter is shaping up already as a bit of a dog's breakfast.
The fourth point I make is that the Government's role in bringing down regulations or Bills that affect any industry surely should be, I maintain, to look at the excellence of the product and to encourage the production of excellence in products and not, I submit, to lower standards. Certainly, the paper J have just incorporated in Hansard makes quite plain that that is the attitude of the Australian Wine and Brandy Producers' Association. The Association regards it as quite reprehensible that a government should require by regulation or by law aJowering of standards rather than a raising of them. It submits that that is a matter that affects the competitive position of quality goods of excellence in the market

1968 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Spirits Regulations

place and that this position should be maintained. Thirdly, the 1906 list of exemptions from the

Quite frankly, I go along with that general maturation requirement for imported and Aus-

thought. I think the job of governments is to maintralian products which I mentioned earlier,

tain standards and not to risk lowering them.

namely, gin, Geneva, Hollands, schnapps or

The fifth point I make briefly in passing is made for reasons that will be apparent as I go on. I outline some of the history of the matter. No section of the industry as such knew anything about it until this bald announcement was made sud-

liqueurs has been extended to include exemptions, according to the terms of the present Act, for the following:
. . . vodka, aquavit, arak . . . and such other spirits and distilled spirituous liquors are prescribed . . .

denly. On 19 June 1980 the then Minister for In addition, for Australian products only, the Business and Consumer Affairs announced his inexemptions include 'spirit for fortifying Aus-

tention to abolish maturation requirements on tralian wine'; that is proof spirit. Statutory Rule fruit brandies produced in Australia other than No. 16 of 1953 prescribed imported 'fruit

brandy distilled from grapes. On 22 December brandies-other than brandy distilled from

1980 Statutory Rule No. 384 put this intention grapes-masticka and the distilled spirituous

into effect, as I have already stated. The reasons liquor known as ouzo'. These fruit brandies infor this change were, according to the Minister at clude such products as Hungarian apricot brandy,

the time, that in 1953-not 1983-imported fruit kirsch and slivovitz-plum brandy. Why brandies were made exempt from the two-year imported fruit brandies received such preferential

maturation requirement. Further, within the last treatment in 1953 I do not know. If the Minister two years' potential-I note the Minister used the for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore)

word 'potential' advisedly, because there were not could tell me I would be vastly relieved.

any fruit brandy manufacturers in Australia then-Australian fruit brandy manufacturers pointed out that they would be at a disadvantage when trying to compete with the imported product. Well, 'potential' is the right word. At that time nobody was producing the stuff.

At this stage it is probably worth pointing out that a number of Australian products called brandy, such as apricot brandy, blackberry brandy, cherry brandy and plum brandy are classified as liqueurs, not as fruit brandies, as I understand it. This is, I understand, because their al-

Back in 1906, when I presume forelock tugging coholic content is less than that prescribed for a was more prevalent, this Parliament passed the true brandy and distillation is not used in the form

first Spirits Act which prescribed that all spirits, of their production, although a proportion of dis-

including brandy, whisky and rum but excluding tilled grape spirit is frequently a component. It, is

gin, et cetera or liqueurs:

also my understanding that a wprking party' is

. . . shall not be delivered from the control of the Customs for human consumption unless they have been matured

about to put forward some new proposals for definitions of 'liqueur', 'brandy' and similar terms.

by storage in wood for a period ofnot less than two years.

Once again I remind the House that this action by

This requirement applied then to both Australian and imported spirits, including fruit brandies. Since 1906 the Act has remained in its original form. For instance, the Act displays concern

the Minister appears to cut across the work of that working party. I think there is reason to suppose that the working party does not necessarily agree with the decision anyway.

for the impact of drink on men but not on To return to the subject of proper brandy, in

women-perhaps women do not or should not 1974 the question of reduction in the maturation

drink spirits. Also, a fine for faulty description of age of Australian brandy was raised with the Aus-'

spirits attracted a fine of 50 in 1906, and it is tralian Wine and Brandy Producers' Association.

$100 now. Allowing for inflation I imagine that Two years later, after numerous surveys, and

should be probably about $1,000 in 1981. That much discussion, opinion was divided. However,

just shows a change in community attitudes. Howin 1976 a majority decision was taken to the Bu-

ever, the consolidation of the Act to 30 September reau of Customs to reduce the maturation period

1980 shows some significant changes. For inof Australian brandy from 24 months to 12

stance, section 11 requires that imported whisky months. The Bureau of Customs responded on 29

has to be matured by storage in wood for a period April and on 13 October 1976. The main points

of not less than three years. It seems to me that made by the Bureau of Customs were: Firstly, the

this change implies some connection between the Bureau could not assess the validity of the pro-

length of maturation on the one hand and the posal without knowledge of new techniques being

quality of spirits either in terms of health or value used in relation to the maturation of brandy; sec-

in the market place, or indeed both, on the other ondly, the opinions of all interested parties would

hand.

need to be canvassed before drafting a case to the

Spirits Regulations

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1969

Government for approval; and, thirdly, amendments to the Excise Tariff Act and Spirits Act would be involved.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Mr GILES-Before dinner I was going over some of the history of what is a very complicated business, the maturation periods of some alcoholic beverages. To continue, on 10 October 1978 the then Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs wrote to me again stating:
With respect to imported brandy, as with other spirits, certificates issued by officials of the Government of the country of origin are normally accepted as evidence of compliance with legislative requirements that the product is derived from fresh grapes.
He went on:
Samples analysed by the Australian Government Analytical Laboratories . . . reported . . . two cases where there may have been a suspicion that the brandy was derived from other than fresh grapes. In neither case was there adequate evidence to sustain seizure or other action at law by Customs officials.
My deduction from this is that we do not know whether imported brandies are made from grapes or from other fruits or grains-or perhaps cabbages or turnips. So why differentiate in maturation requirements for imported fruit brandy? On 25 October 1979 the then Minister for Primary Industry announced the Government's decision on an Industries Assistance Commission report and indicated:
. . . suggestions made by the lAC in respect of regulations applicable to spirituous beverages would be subject to further study in consultation with industry sectors~--
Perhaps the House will note that phrase 'in consultation with industry sectors'. The Minister continued:
. . . and State and Territory authorities.
Presumably this decision by the Government led to a review of maturation requirements by the National Health and Medical Research Council, as I described to the House earlier, which began early last year and has not yet been completed. It seems quite absurd to me to abandon maturation requirements for Australian fruit brandy before the health consequences are known.
I would like to mention briefly some of the economies of maturation. As I mentioned at the start, potential Australian fruit brandy manufacturers have pointed out that they would be at a disadvantage when trying to compete with the imported product if the Australian producer had to pay the additional costs of maturation. I support this view fully and see no argument for further penalising Australian spirit producers over and above the penalties in various forms of subsidies provided by countries which export

spirits to Australia, in particular some European Economic Community countries and Japan. Consequently it is logical to me that imported spirits should be required to observe not less than the maturation standards set down for Australian spirits. The Government should back excellence, not do the opposite. I am indebted to the honourable member for O'Connor (Mr Tuckey) for this quotation:
When prohibition was stopped in North America in the 1920s, it was found that sales of 'proper' spirits, which during prohibition had been reserved for export only, did not rise as expected. People had become so used to 'moonshine' that in the transition period back to normality special production was arranged-I understand one product was called 'White Flash' with a guarantee that it had NOT been matured for more than 30 days.
I make the point that the Government's role surely is to encourage excellence and not allow that situation to apply in this nation. I would like to read the final paragraph of a letter that I received from Tom Angove, the Managing Director of Angove's Pty Ltd, Vignerons and Distillers, the makers of-if you will excuse my saying so, Mr Deputy Speaker-a very fine old Australian brandy. The letter states:
Thirdly, behaviour of the political machine over the whole matter concerning Excise duty and Customs duty applicable to home and imported spirits is a display of sequential blundering. Since the Whit1am Government started the chain of events the madness has bumbled onwards worsening the situation at every step. Committees, hearings, reports, departmental considerations and politics are destined to confuse issues and inspire donkey actions.
Finally, I make this statement on my own behalf: For good market-place reasons, which the Minister at the table, the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore), will understand more than most, and possibly for health reasons, the Government should be encouraging, not penalising excellence. This regulation is misguided. It cuts across the work of bodies currently working on this problem, including an interdepartmental committee, and it should be disallowed.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Is there a seconder to the motion?
Mr FISHER (Mallee) (8.6)-1 second the motion and support the comments and the arguments put forward by the honourable member for Wakefield (Mr Giles). The survival of the Australian grape industry and its continued well-being as a major contributor to decentralisation and to the viability of rural communities will be maintained only by leaving this industry to its own resources and free of government interference. Impositions from outside the industry during the 1970s, and the changes in market composition, have caused a major restructuring of the wine

1970 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Spirits Regulations

producing and brandy distilling industry. In the optimum stock cover must therefore be at least

absence of any further imposts the industry has three years. Increasing costs of holding stock

regained something of a balance between grape brought about by changes in taxation laws,

supply and demand. This delicate equilibrium coupled with fluctuations in the market, have led

position will be lost if new government imposts brandy distillers to reduce their stock cover. Fig-

are applied to the industry. These would have a ures from the Australian Bureau of Statistics re-

significant effect in rural grape growing communiveal that at 30 June 1975 stocks were 5.09 times

ties and would put at risk employment in wine clearances in the following year, 1975-76. At 30

producing and brandy distilling establishments June 1980, stocks were 4.21 times the expected

throughout Australia.

clearances for 1980-81. This reduction in stock

I believe that there is a widespread misunderstanding of the present state of the grape industry

cover represents approximately 2,100,000 litres of alcohol.

and of its share of the Australian market. In fact the annual growth rate in the volume of Australian wine sales as at February 1981 was 1.6 per cent; the lowest recorded for 20 years apart from 1970-71 when the SOc per gallon excise was in existence. Increasing costs, reduced margins and the removal of the trading stock valuation adjustment have adversely affected Australian wine and brandy producing companies' profitability. Deferred taxes in the wine industry will still be outstanding at the end of 1981-82. Per capita consumption of alcohol in Australia has now stabilised. The 1980 figure of 9.6 litres of alcohol is the same as the average for the previous seven years. The demand for wine is price elastic. An increase in the price of wine due to imposts arising from outside the wine industry's influence has significantly affected sales. The consequent reduction in the demand for grapes has been felt most in our rural communities.
On 9 November 1979 Australian brandy

At the population census of 30 June 1976,8,358 persons were employed in the grape growing industry and a further 4,526 were employed in wine production and brandy distillation. Because of the short life nature of the raw materials, such as grapes for the product, wineries and distilleries are generally located in rural areas near their sources of supply. In many of these regions the well-being of the community is largely dependent on the well-being of the wine producing and brandy distilling industry. Should there be a decline in wine production and brandy distillation brought about by reduced sales these rural communities will be most adversely affected, It is for these reasons that I have seconded the motion moved by the honourable member for Wakefield (Mr Giles) that the amendment of Regulation 9B of the Spirits Regulations as contained in Statutory Rules 1980, No. 384, made under the Spirits Act 1906, be disallowed.

received an excise advantage of $2,75 per litre of alcohol over other Australian spirits; that is, $16 per litre of alcohol compared with $18.75. Imported brandy has a Customs duty rate of $16.19 per litre of alcohol. The difference of 19c in duty rate is equivalent to only 5c a bottle. Clearance of Australian brandy for 1980 was 2.4 million litres of alcohol. In the years 1970-71 to 1973-74 clearances of Australian brandy exceeded three million litres of alcohol per annum. In 1980 Australian brandy increased its spirit market share from 15.3 per cent to 15.4 per cent. At the same time-this is something I believe which has not been recognised by the Government in the regulation-sales of imported brandy increased by 85.2 per cent to 400,000 litres. Imported brandy therefore increased its share of the brandy market in Australia from 9.4 per cent to 14.3 per cent in 1980. Australian brandy distillers have reacted to continuing fluctuations in the market by adjusting their stock cover.

I now briefly emphasise some of the other reasons for this action' and broaden' some of the questions raised by the honourable member for Wakefield. The question should be asked-it should be answered by the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore)-why imported fruit brandy should not reach the same requirements as the Australian product. It should be recognised that if we remove the maturation costs from fruit brandy, this necessarily gives both the locally produced fruit brandy and imported fruit brandy a significant advantage over grape brandy and other products. It is essential, therefore, that the question is answered as to why the Government has determined to remove the twoyear maturation period and whether Australian producers would gain as a result of this favourable treatment. It is also important to recognise that the industry is not unanimous in a view that there should be a reduction in the maturation age of Australian brandy. Therefore, I am concerned that consultations have not occurred with the in-

Statutory requirements have dictated a twodustry before this major decision was taken.

year maturation period for brandy. The minimum Earlier reviews -of this question have not been able

Spirits Regulations

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1971

to resolve the issue. In fact, the Bureau of Customs believed it could not assess the validity of reducing the maturation period without a more thorough knowledge of new brandy making techniques. It seems premature, then, for the Government to abandon maturation requirements for Australian fruit brandy before all these factors and consequences are known.
Too often, in the past, government decisions have had the opposite effect to that which was intended in relation to the wine industry. Since August 1973, excise on brandy has increased by a figure in excess of 600 per cent. Imported brandy has increased its share of the brandy market in Australia quite significantly, while consumption of both brandy and fortified wine is declining. Added to this problem, increasing sales of table wines in the past two or three years have caused a big increase in the production of by-product spirit from grapes. In the past year a large tonnage of grapes was purchased specifically for the production of spirit, but this is also reducing rapidly. If the present trend continues, we could well see a position in the near future where all the fortified spirit needs of the industry will be supplied by by-product spirit only, with enormous repercussions on the overall viability of the Australian grape industry.
Increasing wages, packaging costs, transport and distribution costs, fuel costs and general overhead costs, coupled with varying State legislative requirements, have led Australian wine producers and brandy distillers to introduce notable increases in efficiency through rationalisations and changes in technology and techniques. These moves have been taken to ensure the survival of a private enterprise Australian industry. I believe it would be a serious position indeed if the Government took this action in regard to this regulation. It would not be appropriate at this time for the Government to proceed with this amendment. It is for this reason that I believe, as the honourable member for Wakefield believes, that the amendment should be disallowed.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (8.15)- On behalf of the Opposition I support the honourable member for Wakefield (Mr Giles) and the honourable memb~r for Mallee (Mr Fisher) in their plea to the Government that this amendment to the regulation be disallowed. This motion, as moved by the honourable member for Wakefield, follows the making of a regulation which was gazetted on 31 December 1980 which had the effect of exempting fruit brandy, that is, brandy made from fruit other than grapes, from the requirement that it be matured in wood for a

minimum period of two years. One of the principal functions of the Spirits Act is to set down the standards for the spirits industry. Minimum periods of maturation are one of these standards. In respect of local producers these are set out in section 12. Certain exemptions to section 12 are allowed and the new regulation adds fruit brandy to the exemptions.
The statutory maturation period of two years is of considerable importance to the brandy industry. It means that it is not until the third year after crushing, fermenting and distilling, that the first sales of brandy can take place. This leads to a very important facet in the economics of the production of legitimate grape brandy. The costs of stockholding for that period are, of course, significant. Because the price of grapes is regulated, the brandy industry is in a difficult position to meet competition. So it is important that any changes in policy relating to the industry or in competing industries be very carefully considered before changes in laws or regulations are made. It is worth pointing out that in making these new exemptions, the Government did not consult with the brandy industry.
The Opposition believes and I am sure the honourable member for Wakefield will agree with the Opposition that this is a totally unacceptable state of affairs. The industry, in fact, had no say in the decision at all. It was not consulted and had no opportunity to make a submission to an appropriate policy-making body. That is not unusual. It would be fair to say that the Government's disregard for the brandy industry is notorious. The wine and grape industry employs in excess of 12,000 people and is particularly important to South Australia because it is in that State that about 85 per cent of Australian brandy is produced. I might say in defence of the South Australian people that the quality of brandy produced in that State is as good as any brandy produced in the world. 1 see that the honourable member for Kingston (Mr Chapman) is nodding his head. We all know that he is a particularly fine judge of brandy. At least he agrees with me on that point. The industry is not only of particular importance to that State, but also it is of particular importance to many rural communities in several States.
The Government, in introducing this measure, showed the great gulf that exists between its rhetoric and its performance insofar as small businessmen and farmers are concerned. Of course, the fact is that only two National Country Party members are sitting in the House when this important measure is being discussed. Because it is of vital concern to many supporters of the Country

1972 REP~ESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Spirits Regulations

Party that fact is quite distressing, but not terribly surprising when we, in this House, all know that the prime concern of the Country Party as exhibited by the Leader of the National Country Party (Mr Anthony) is with mining companies and not with farmers, a latter-day but very interesting manifestation of the Country Party.
The Opposition is aware that the production of fruit brandy in Australia is on a very small scale. Clearly the elimination of the two-year maturation requirement for this industry could result in goods bearing the name 'brandy' entering the market in unfair competition with the grapebased product. The Government is, in fact, lowering the traditional currency, the prestige that is attached to the name 'brandy'. The fact that grape producers have to mature their product in wood for two years before it can bear the name 'brandy' is something that they have accepted and embraced with a pride that that thereby gives their product the imprimatur of quality. The name 'brandy' is a prestige name. The Government is attempting to lower the currency of that name by allowing fruit brandy to be made, perhaps, in one or two weeks, yet using the name 'brandy'. I can understand that honourable members, like the honourable member for Wakefield, who represents an enormous number of grape-growers, could be confused, distressed and hurt by that fact. The goods that the Government is allowing the use of the name 'brandy' or are either locally produced or presumably imported.
The brandy industry is already suffering from a steep increase in brandy imports. The share of imports in the brandy market increased from 9.4 per cent to 14.3 per cent in 1980. Clearances of imports in that year increased by no less than 85.2 per cent. You, Mr Deputy Speaker, representing a country electorate, would be as distressed as the honourable member for Wakefield is if imports were affecting a product produced in your electorate. One would be hard pressed to find any other industry which has had to bear such a steep increase in imports in a single year. The effective level of tariff protection for brandy producers is only 5c a bottle. Why have brandy producers suffered so badly in comparison with most other areas of primary production and, may I say, manufacturing in-that the protection for their industry is 5c a bottle? I think that National Country Party members who represent the grape producing areas might stand up and ask why. Surely the honourable member for Wakefield is asking himself why it is.
Local production of brandy is now 20 per cent less than it was in the early 1970s in spite of an

increasing taste for brandy in Australia, as exhibited by many members of this House. Despite the problems of a lack of protection for the brandy industry, this Government has peremptorily exempted a competing product from the requirements of the Spirits Act in respect of maturation. At the same time there is great concern in the industry that sales tax will be introduced in the wine industry. Once again, the Government threatens the industry which is already suffering from below average profitability. If anybody questions the fact that there might well be an increase in sales tax or that sales tax may be introduced on wine, may I give a few statistics. In August 1978 the Government recommended an increase in excise on both beer and spirits. The increased beer excise, which added 3.5c a glass, was supposed to increase revenue by $194m in the first year. The Government felt that that was a reasonable impost on the working class-the beer drinkers. Nevertheless the Government imposed the excise, despite what reservations I might have. But in fact the excise raised only $185m extra. The Government sent thirsts down as its hunger went up. Only now, three years later, has the amount of revenue reached the 1978 estimate.
The impact on spirits was even more dramatic. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) estimated that the increase in excise in 1978, which added lOc a nip, would increase revenue by $12lm in that year. In fact the Government's own supporters, the whisky drinkers, let it down because the increase was only $25m in 1979-80, and revenue collections actually fell by $3m and increased by only $lm last year. Honourable members opposite can imagine that we on this side of the House think it is reasonable to suggest that there will be a sales tax on the wine industry to make up the gap that was evident when the Government increased the excise on spirits and people stopped drinking them.
I would like to say a few words in defence of the honourable member for Wakefield. The honourable member is in fact trying to retrieve his reputation by actually doing something for the wine and brandy industry. He has been particularly quiet on this industry for quite a long time. As you, Mr Deputy Speaker, would know, he is known in his electorate affectionately as 'poor old Geoff'. Actually I felt quite sorry for him tonight. In fact I think he cannot be all that bad because several times in his speech he used the expression 'raise the standard', so perhaps he is learning. I hope that he has more success with that expression than we had in 1980. No doubt he is 'poor old Geoff' because after all it was his Government that slapped an 80 per cent increase

Spirits Regulations

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1973

in excise on brandy which completely collapsed the brandy industry.
In 1970 Australia produced 3,486 kilolitres of brandy. In 1980 Australia produced only 1,650 kilolitres of brandy. The production of brandy has been halved in those 10 years. The wine-grape growing industry in the Wakefield electorate is trying to adjust to the movement in consumer taste from red wine to white wine and it is still coping with the falling demand for brandy due no doubt to Government action. As I have pointed out, it now faces a 15 per cent sales tax on wine in the coming Budget. We in the Opposition can only hope that this does not happen as it will cripple the Riverland grape growing area and the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area.
To sum up, it is clear that the Government has not acted responsibly in respect of this industry, particularly in the gazettal of the regulation. Accordingly, the Opposition supports the motion moved by the honourable member for Wakefield and invites all responsible Government members, particularly those from South Australia, who might well be concerned about grape growers in their State, to join us when we divide on this issue.
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (8.26)-1 thank the honourable members for Wakefield (Mr Giles), Mallee (Mr Fisher) and Parramatta (Mr John Brown) for their participation in this debate. I think it is particularly appropriate that part of this debate should take place after the suspension of the sitting for dinner. There are so many experts in this place on brandies, wines and other types of liqueurs that I am not at all surprised at the expert knowledge that has been brought to this debate. The honourable member for Parramatta found some difficulty is establishing who owns the name 'brandy'. Perhaps I should mention that the Australian Labor Party in Queensland has considerable trouble in finding who owns the name 'ALP' let alone having to deal with the problems in respect of brandy and those sorts of things.
This amendment to the Spirits Regulations exempts Australian fruit brandy-- that is brandy distilled from fruit such as apples and pearsfrom maturation for two years before sale. It gives effect to a decision made by my predecessor, the Honourable Vic Garland, and announced in June 1980. Fruit brandies are traditional and popular spirits in Europe but they have no fixed pattern of maturation. Some are matured, some are not. For nearly 30 years fruit brandies have been imported into Australia without having to be matured. There is no technical reason why the Australian

manufactured fruit brandies need to be matured if the imported brandies do not and the requirement simply resulted in an undesirable negative protection.
Fruit brandy is a specislised style of spirit that does not compete with grape brandy. Most fruit brandy is consumed by members of ethnic communities and, in any case, Australian manufacture is on a very small scale. In 1979-80 only 168 litres of alcohol were duty paid under the excise tariff item for fruit brandy. This represents about 46 dozen bottles. In contrast, more than 2 million litres of alcohol were entered under the grape brandy items in the excise tariff-more than 700,000 dozen bottles. Some contrast! Even when exempt from maturation, fruit brandy suffers a considerable disadvantage in that it attracts a significantly higher duty rate than grape brandy. The duty on grape brandy is $16 per litre of alcohol or about $5 a bottle whilst on fruit brandy it is $18.75 per litre of alcohol, or about $6 a bottle. This amendment in no way will harm the grape industry. It will do a great deal to ease the burden on small businessmen.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

HEALTH CHANGES
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong Treasurer)-I wonder whether I could have the indulgence of the Chair to correct portion of an answer I gave during Question Time this afternoon.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)--The Treasurer may do so.

Mr HOWARD-During Question Time this
afternoon the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) asked me a three-pronged question
on the new tax rebate for health insurance. The
first part of the question which read as follows:

Will he please inform the House

what the defini-

tion of an approved hospital table will be for taxation

and . . . health benefit eligibility purposes

I replied that further Cabinet consideration had
to be given to that matter in the near future and
that a further statement would be made. I realise
now that that answer was wrong, that in fact the statement made by my colleague the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) last week contained a
purported definition of what did constitute fiat
basic medical insurance. I should have drawn that to the attention of the House when giving that
answer. The mistake was not intentional and I
apologise to the House for misleading it.

1974 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

APPROPRIATION BILL (No.3) 1980-81 have linked achieving such arms control agree-

Second Reading Debate resumed from 28 April, on motion by MrHoward:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Upon which Mr Willis had moved by way of amendment:
That all words after "That" be omitted with a view to substituting the following words: "whilst not opposing the provisions of the Bill, the House-
(a) deplores the failure of the Government to fully spend appropriations in important areas of Government expenditure;

ments to other aspects of Soviet-American re-
lations. On the rare occasions in recent times on which relevant Ministers have mentioned these
matters in the House they have invariably argued that the strategic arms limitation talks process is
desirable and just as invariably have argued that Soviet actions on other issues have undermined prospects for agreement. For a recent expression
of that view 1 refer honourable members to an answer by the former Foreign Affairs Minister to a question from the right honourable member for
Lowe (Sir William McMahon) on 21 April last

(b) rejects the Government's claims that the improvements in economic growth that have occurred recently have been due to the effects of Government policies;
(c) recognises that such modest recovery as has occurred is due to the failure of the Government to achieve particular policy objectives and to factors beyond the controlofthe Australian Government;
(d) notes with alarm the gathering signs of an acute credit squeeze as exemplified by record and rising interest rates and shortages of home mortgage finance;
(e) expresses its concern that severely restrictive monetary policies and a threatened tightening of fiscal policy will produce a renewed downturn in the rate of economic growth, and a further rise in unemployment, and
(f) accordingly expresses its complete lack of confidence in Government economic policies".

year. Currently, abandonment of arms control negotiations is being regularly cited as an appropriate punishment for the Soviet Union should it intervene in Poland. 1 believe the Government
ought to encourage the United States to exclude abandoning SALT in any form from the list of actions against the Soviet Union should inter-
vention in Poland take place. Unquestionably a ~trong diplomatic, political and economic response to Soviet intervention should be undertaken by this Government. Should it do so it
would receive, as we on this side of the House have indicated before, strong support from the
Labor Party.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Before the debate is resumed on this Bill I remind the House that it has been agreed that a general debate be allowed covering this Bill and Appropriation Bill (No.4) 1980-81.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (8.31)-1 support the Opposition amendment. I wish to concentrate my remarks tonight on those sections of the Appropriation Bill which deal with the activities of our Department of Defence and Department of Foreign Affairs related particularly to one issue on which 1 hope there will be some diplomatic initiative from the Government and of course coordinated by its Departments. I want to enter a plea that the Government include amongst its priorities in foreign policy support for negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union on limiting quantitative and qualitative changes in nuclear weapon systems. In particular, the Government should encourage the United States Administration rapidly to conclude its review of the Strategic Arms Limitation talks treaty-SALT II treaty-and to encourage it to resubmit it, or an agreement very like it, after negotiations with the Soviet Union, to the United States Senate for ratification.

Abandoning nuclear arms control, however, would not be appropriate. 1 argue this for several reasons. Firstly, apart from the disadvantage that
all of us would suffer from uncapping a nuclear arms race, the Soviet Union would not suffer from such an action. No decisive shift in the West's
favour in the nuclear balance would occur. Nor would a shift occur which would enhance the West's capacity to use nuclear weapons in politi-
cal bargaining. The Soviet Union would be permitted massively to expand its nuclear force and would be able to deploy more of its heaviest miss-
iles which are superior to those of the United States in throw weight and therefore, potentially at least, capable of carrying many more warheads.
SALT agreements currently prevent this from happening. Secondly, having agreed to host instal-
lations directly associated with a nuclear war fighting capacity we have a direct interest in encouraging a stable nuclear balance. A great deal was said on that subject this afternoon. I will not
go into features of the debate that occurred this afternoon. We have however a further interest in that balance of nuclear weapons being maintained

In particular I ask the Government to abandon at the lowest possible level of warheads and delivits tacit endorsement of those people in successive ery systems. At. the moment there is a considerAmerican Administrations and in Congress who able excess of potential targets over warheads.

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1975

While that situation is maintained Australian cities are probably not endangered. Should that situation alter this position would be more
problematic.
If we play host to such facilities we are further morally bound to act in such a way that the safety and security of others is not threatened. It is not a debate we can opt out of and still maintain in the international community a reputation for seriousness and responsibility. We have the capacity to influence American decision making processes in this regard and to playa part in successful arms control arrangements and have a direct interest in doing so. There is a formalised process in our relations with the United States which will permit regular and detailed government intervention on these matters should the Government care to make use of it. This was established in the Barnard-Schlesinger agreement of January 1974. In it the Ministers agreed:
. . . to extend and strengthen their bilateral consultations to ensure that the Australian Government would have full and timely information about strategic and operational developments relevant to the station (NW Cape) and their significance for Australian national interests. These evaluations will include periodic meetings between Ministers, officials' meetings, and continuing contact in the diplomatic channel on the wide range of matters affecting the role and operation of the statio~.
It is to be regretted that this capacity to influence United States decision making has only notably been used in recent times to throw spanners in the works of former President Carter's demilitarisation of the Indian Ocean proposals. We used those channels persistently to argue with the United States that the demilitarisation proposals made by President Carter back in March 1977 ought not to be pursued by the United States in the form in which it was doing. I think it is to our discredit that in terms of arms control ventures, at least as far as the public record is concerned, that is the only initiative we have undertaken. It would be good to see this agreement now used to enhance arms control arrangements vital to the bulk of humanity. Two of the three main installations connected with the United States strategic nuclear deterrent, Pine Gap and Nurrungar, whilst enhancing the war fighting capacity of the United States, are simultaneously of profound importance to nuclear arms limitation agreements. It is high time the Government placed on record the detail of their significance in this regard.
Insofar as the presence of these installations can be justified in this country, they can be justified in terms of that contribution. This aspect of the functions of the two facilities became evident last year when the Iranian Government closed United States electronic listening posts in that

country. Those posts monitored missile tests and were able to listen in on signals between rockets and ground control in the Soviet Union. This capacity to monilor Soviet missile telemetry meant that the United States could ensure that modifications in existing types of Soviet intercontinental ballistic missiles stayed within the parameters set by the new types rule for length, diameter, launch weight and throw weight under strategic arms limitations agreements. Strobe Talbott, whose book Endgame the Inside Story ofSalt 11 is probably the most authoritative analysis of the SALT process, points out that thc Iranian sites were part of a varied and far reaching network of American facilities that kept track of Soviet military activity. He stated:
These facilities include aeroplanes, satellites, ships and ground stations outfitted with an array of equipment for taking photographs, detecting launches by infrared sensors, intercepting radio messages and tracking missiles and their warheads by radar. Redundancy is a deliberately designed and highly prized feature of the system.
The Carter Administration could justify pressing on with SALT and declining to plan a substantial increase in the number of American delivery systems because part of the functions performed by the Iranian listening posts and all the necessary means of monitoring arms control arrangements continued to be supplied by other part of the global system. Vital to this process are the facilities at Pine Gap and Nurrungar. Unlike the key elements of the Iranian installations some important aspects of the Pine Gap and Nurrungar operations appear not to have back-up elsewhere.
The functions of the two installations to which I refer are their role in providing information on the location of Soviet missile sites and military installations, the monitoring of Soviet missile telemetry and the provision of early warning of a Soviet attack. That is, an attack on the United States and not here. The fact that the two installations receive and transmit information from geostationary satellites means that the United States has access to immediate information on Soviet activities relating to the area I have discussed. They cover a blind spot in the American surveillance system which stretches from the Urals to Lake Baikal. In this area is located a considerable proportion of the Soviet ICBM force. On the best available information from unofficial sources these functions could not be adequately performed elsewhere. I will quote from recent public testimony given by Dr Desmond Ball to Sub-Committee C of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence, as I think it is useful in a discussion on this matter. Of the functions of the bases he said:

1976 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

Some of these operations are extremely critical and could not be done elsewhere because of technical and geographic reasons.
He then outlined some of the technical advances made associated with the two installations. He continued:
So while there is no doubt about the critical importance of this the real question is: Is it good or bad? To my belief intelligence of this sort is really strategically neutral; it can have bad effects; it can have good effects. The good effect is the SALT agreement. There is no doubt that SALT was predicated on adequate and detailed verification capabilities. You would not have had SALT unless you could have had a lot of the intelligen~e which comes down through satellites to the ground statIOn.
Of course, what makes the installations valuable to the strategic arms limitation process also enhances the United States war fighting capability. We should not forget that fact. This ambivalent role of the installations can be seen in their early warning function. Private anaylses suggest, for example, that Nurrungar is linked to program 647 which is run by the United States Air Force. The infra-red sensors of the three satellites in this program detect missile launches. This provides the United States with about half an hour's warning of an intercontinental ballistic missile launch. The time for a sea launched ballistic missile armed, is about five minutes. Assuming the con: tinued survival of the installations in a general war, they would provide a means of tracking the missiles for possible interception should that capability ever be developed by the United States. On the one hand, this advances the United States war fighting capability by enabling it to mount a timely response. On the other hand, the same function of the Nurrungar installation provides warning time that lessens fear in the United States of a surprise attack.
In the contemporary debate in the United States over whether a Soviet first strike could disarm the United States intercontinental ballistic missile force, reliable and lengthy warning assists those pro-arms control officials and the many people who also adopt that position in the United States Congress, to argue against a massive expansion of the American intercontinental missile force in response to the alleged Soviet capability. They can argue that there is sufficient time for the United States to fire on warning. Thus, whatever the quantitative developments in the Soviet ICBM force, deterrence remains viable. The ambiguous nature of the installations on the question of whether they serve global stability and prevent costly arms races largely depends on a variety of psychological and political factors rather than technical factors. Technical factors, of course, affect the psycho-political factors and can change calculations. This has happened with the North

West Cape installation, as the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) pointed out today and as he has previously pointed out at the National Press Club. The United States has given a counter force role to the sea launch ballistic missiles when previously they were strictly second strike. That is the result of the increasing accuracy of the American sea launch ballistic missile program which arises from the development of the Trident missile system. Because of this it is critical that this Government should be prepared to intervene in debates in the United States Administration on strategic nuclear issues as by agreement and involvement it has every right and duty to do.
lt was largely a political argument about the need to re-establish some form of political leverage over the Soviet Union which caused United States planners to move away from a doctrine of mutual assured destruction to one based on a United States counter force capability. This is very well outlined in a recent article by Dr Desmond Ball, a man who, I believe, has made by far the most significant contribution to mature thinking, such as there is in this community, on strategic nuclear issues, which appeared in Arms Control Today. In it he deals with the consolidation of the shift in United States doctrine as presented in July last year by President Carter in Presidential Directive No. 59. He discussed in his article counter force scenarios in the Single Integrated Operational Plan-SlOP-the plan for general and limited nuclear war. He points out that the Presidential Directive summed up trends evident in United States doctrine for a number of years. I seek leave to have a portion of that article incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as jollows-
PD-59 and its Antecedents
From this perspective, there was little new in the Presidential Directive on strategic nuclear targeting policy (PD-59) that President Carter signed on 25 July 1980. Indeed, there is a direct historical lineage between PD-59 and a series of studies set in train soon after President Nixon took office in January 1969. These studies led directly (if rather titfully) to National Security Study Memorandum (NSSM)-169, approved by President Nixon in late 1973, and then, in turn, to National Security Decision Memorandum (NSDM)-242, signed by the President in January 1974.
NSDM-242 contained three principal policy components. The one which engaged the most public debate was the reemphasis on the targeting of a wide range of Soviet military forces and installations, from hardened command and control facilities and ICBM silos to airfields and army camps. The second element of NSDM-242 was the requirement for 'escalation control', whereby the National Commll,nd Authorities (NCA) should be provided with the ability to execute their selected options in a deliberate and controlled fashion throughout the progress of a strategic nuclear exchange. And, third, NSDM-242' introduced the notion of 'withholds' or

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1977

'non-targets', i.e. things that would be preserved from destruction. Some of these, such as 'population per se', have now been exempted absolutely from targeting; others, such as the centers of poJiticalleadership and control are exempted only for the purposes of bargaining or deterring a resort to higher levels of violence during a war (,intra-war deterrence' and 'intra-war bargaining') and strategic reserve forces are to be maintained to allow their eventual destruction if necessary.
NSDM-242 also authorized the Secretary of Defence to promulgate the Policy Guidance for the Employment of Nuclear Weapons and the associated Nuclear Weapons Employment Policy (NUWEP), signed by Secretary Schlesinger on 4 April 1974. The NUWEP was developed through close military and civilian cooperation and sets out the planning assumptions, attack options, targeting objectives and the damage levels needed to satisfy the political guidance. (For example, the NUWEP contains the requirement that the US. strategic nuclear forces must in all circumstances be able to destroy 70 per cent of the Soviet industry that would be needed to achieve economic recovery after a nuclear war). The concepts and objectives set out in NSDM-242 and NUWEP provided the framework for the development of new strategic nuclear war plans. The first Single Integrated Operational Plan (SlOP) prepared under the new guidance was SIOP-5, which was formally approved in December 1975 and took effect on 1 January 1976.
There was some apprehension within the Pentagon in early 1977 that the Administration of President Carter and Secretary Brown might move to reverse the developments of the previous several years, but it proved unfounded. On 24 August 1977, President Carter issued PD-18, entitled US. National Strategy, which explicitly reaffirmed the continued use of NSDM-242 and NUWEP in "the absence of further guidance for structuring the US. strategic posture." This further guidance was provided by a Nuclear Targeting Policy Review (NTPR), an inter-agency study directed by Leon Sloss in the Pentagon. Various supporting studies were undertaken throughout the Defense establishment during 1978, on such subjects as Soviet views on nuclear war-fighting, the possibility of exploiting Soviet fears of China, and problems of termination of nuclear war. Phase One of the NTPR was completed in December 1978, and formed the basis of a new Presidential Directive drafted in early 1979. Although the NSC staff pressed for the formal acceptance of this draft, there was opposition from the State Department and from some elements within the Pentagon, and it was shelved for more than 15 months-until it was retrieved just prior to the Democratic Convention, revised and up-dated, and formally signed by the President on 25 July as PD-59.
TheSJOP SlOP-50 includes some 40,000 potential target instal-
lations, as compared to about 25,000 in 1974 when NUWEP was promulgated and the development of SIOP-5 initiated. These targets are divided into four principal groups, each of which in turn contains a wide range of target types. The four principal groups are the Soviet nuclear forces, the general purpose forces, the Soviet military and political leadership centres, and the Soviet economic and industrial base. Examples of targets within each category were given by the Defence Department to the Senate Armed Services Committee in March 1980:
I. Soviet nuclear forces: ICBMs and IRBMs, together with their launch facilities (LFs) and launch command centres (LCCs). Nuclear weapons storage sites. Airfields supporting nuclear-capitable aircraft. Nuclear, missile-firing submarine (SSBN) bases.
2. Conventional military forces: Casernes. Supply depots. Marshalling points.

Conventional airfields. Ammunition storage facilities. Tank and vehicle storage yards. 3. Military and political leadership: Command posts. Key communications facilities. 4. Economic and industrial targets: a. War-supporting industry
Ammunition factories. Tank and armoured personnel carrier
factories. Petroleum refineries. Railway yards and repair facilities. b. Industry that contributes to economic recovery Coal. Basic steel. Basic aluminium. Cement. Electric power.
The STOP is further divided into four general categories of options available for the employment of nuclear weapons: Major Attack Option (MAO), Selected Attack Options (SAO), Limited Nuclear Options (LNO, which are 'designed to permit the selective destruction of fixed enemy military or industrial targets'), and Regional Nuclear Options (RNO, which are 'intended, for example, to destroy the leading elements of an attacking enemy force'). Within each of these classes of options are a wide range of further options, including so-called 'withholds', four general categories of which have been publicly identified: Population centres; national command and control centres (exempted from attack at least in the initial phases of a nuclear exchange so as to enhance the prospects of escalation control); particular countries targeted in the SlOP (so that attacks on the Soviet Union would not necessarily involve simultaneous attacks on Eastern Europe, China, Cuba, Vietnam or other countries included in the SlOP); and 'allied and neutral territory'. Special categories of targets have also been delineated fot pre-emptive attacks against the Soviet Union and for launch-on-warning (LOW) or launch-under-attach (LUA) scenarios in the event of unequivocal warning of a Soviet attack.
While the general structure and contents of the SlOP will be essentially maintained, there are some five particularly noteworthy aspects of the recent developments in targeting policy which warrant consideration. The first, and the one which featured most prominently in journalistic discussion of PO-59, was the directive that relatively less emphasis be accorded the destrution of the Soviet economic and industrial base and that greater attention 'be directed toward improving the effectiveness of our attacks against military targets'. It should be noted, however, that military targets already account for more than half the 40,000 target installations in the SlOP (as compared to some 15,000 economic-industrial targets), and that the destruction of these has always been a prime objective. (For example, Atta,ck Options I and II in the 1962 SIOP were aimed at 'the destruction or neutralization of [Soviet] strategic nuclear delivery forces' and' [conventional] military forces and military resources in being' respectively; the successful execution of Attack Option II would have reduced the 'Soviet-Satellite residual ground forces' to seven Soviet and 10 satellite divisions and neutralized the Eastern Bloc air forces as effective combat elements).
A second noteworthy aspect of the recent develupments, and one of greater novelty, is the appreciation that the choice of targets is as much an exercise in deterrence as the execution of the plans is in war-fighting. As one White House official stated in late 1977, at the outset of NTPR:
'Tn the past nuclear targeting has been done by military planners who have basically emphasised the efficient destruction of targets. But targeting should not be done in a political vacuum.

1978 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

Some targets are of greater psychological importance to Moscow than others, and we should begin thinking of how to use our strategic forces to play on these concerns.'
Hence, there have been some changes to the targeting guidance so as to exploit potential Soviet fears, such as threatening the Soviet food supply and making a target of Soviet troops and military facilities in the Far East (,kicking the door in!') so that the Soviet Union would be more vulnerable to attack from China; and some consideration has been given to the adaptation of targeting to the dismemberment and regionalisation of the USSR, enhancing the prospects for regional insurrection during and after a nuclear exchange.
The most important consequence of this notion of targeting what the Soviets fear most, however, is the attention now being devoted to the targeting of the Soviet assets for political control-the Soviet state and its instruments of domestic and external coercion. This includes key CPSU and governmental buildings, military headquarters, command centres, KGB offices and border posts, communication facilities, etc. Again, US. war plans have always included some installations of this sort-for example, some 2,000 of the 40,000 potential targets designated in SIOP-5D are leadership and control targets; however, it would not be unreasonable to expect that by the time SIOP-6 is authorised these targets would account for as much as 20 per cent of the Soviet target base-perhaps some 10,000 .out of a likely total of 50,000 designated target installations.
A third point, emphasised by Secretary Brown in a message to the defense ministers of the NATO countries on 10 August 1980, is that greater attention has been accorded planning for the use of very limited and selective options in order to 'improve the contribution of our strategic nuclear forces to deterrence across the full spectrum of threats with which we must all be concerned'. Various packages of selected attack options (SAOs), limited nuclear options (LNOs) and regional nuclear options (RNOs) are being prepared to use in not just nuclear situations but also in what hitherto would have been purely conventional situations. According to testimony of the commander ?f the Strategic Air Command (SAC), General R. H. EllIS, before the Senate Armed Services Committee in March 1980,
Deterrence can no longer be neatly divided into subgroups, such as conventional and nuclear. It must be viewed as an interrelated, single entity. SAC is developing new options which provide to the National Command Authorities with additional flexibility to respond to future conflicts in a timely and controlled manner.
As an example of the use of RNOs and LNOs, General Ellis suggested that 'combat missions could be launched from Andersen [Air Force Base in Guam] to the Middle East' in response to Soviet conventional military activity in that region. As an example of an SAO, plans for nuclear strikes against Soviet military facilities near Iran, including military bases and airfields inside the Soviet Union, have been prepared so as to 'significantly degrade Soviet capabilities to project military power in the Middle East-Persian Gulf region for a period of at least30 days'.
A fourth point is that PD-59 emphasises that the preplanned target packages in the SlOP must be supplemented by the ability to find new targets and destroy them during the course of a nuclear exchange. While Soviet strategic nuclear installations and economic and industrial facilities would remain essentially fixed during wartime, there would be much movement of Soviet conventional military forces (including second echelon formations) and much of the Soviet politcal and military leadership would presumably be relocated. PD-59 requires the development of new reconnaissance satellites and signals intelligence (SIGINT) systems to provide the real-time intelligence capabilities necessary to effect this rapid retargeting.

The fifth noteworthy aspect of the recent developments in targeting policy is the recognition that US. command, control and communication (C3 ) system is inadequate to support any policy of extended nuclear war-fighting.
Tn this respect, PD-59 should be considered together with Presidential Directives 53 and 58 and a wide range of other measures intended to improve the survivability and the endurance of the American C3 system. PD-53, entitled National Security Telecommunications Policy and signed by President Carter on 15 November 1979, proclaiming that "it is essential to the security of the US. to have telecommunications facilities adequate to satisfy the needs of the nation during and after any national emergency . . . to provide continuity of essential functions of government, and to reconstitute the political, economic and social structure of the nation. "Its principal goal is described as ensuring connectivity between the National Command Authority and strategic and other appropriate forces to support flexible execution of retaliatory strikes during and after an enemy nuclear attack. "PD-58. signed by the President on June 30 1980 is concerned with the maintenance of "continuity of government." It directs the Department of Defence and other agencies to improve the capacity of selected parts of the government, from the President on down, to withstand a nuclear attack. The measures under consideration include plans for evacuating military and civilian leaders from Washington in time of crisis; the construction of new hardened shelters for key personnel, data processing equipment and communication systems; and the improvement of early-warning systems.
Mr BEAZLEY-I thank the House. The point is that the capabilities of the United States and the Soviet Union have not changed. They can still inflict massive damage on each other in any scenario. However, the desire to secure political advantage can, at the same time, induce an arms race, increase tension and therefore the likelihood of war, without changing the mutually destructive outcome of any conflict. I think that is the nearest that human beings come to displaying the social behaviour of lemmings. Without any public protest by the Australian Government a largely politically induced change of doctrine in the United States has markedly increased the risks that we ourselves confront of involvement in a nuclear war. This is because counter force increases the likelihood of war. As I have mentioned before in this place, an associated advocacy of limited nuclear war creates plausible scenarios in which we might be attacked in an exhange of nuclear hostages which falls short of an attack on the territory of either of the two super powers.
The risks to our major population centres, even if increasing, remain slight, I believe, for three reasons. Firstly, despite changes in doctrine, particularly in the American case and continuing Soviet doctrine, which at least formally envisages winning a nuclear war, the reality remains mutual assured destruction. At the back of their minds, planners in both super powers must come to that conclusion. Secondly, the bases in Australia are associated with command, control and communication. An attack on Pine Gap and Nurrungar in a

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1979

limited nuclear war would blind the United have outlined would have to be altered. It is time

States. If a doctrine of limited nuclear war, in the that the Government had the maturity to argue in

horrific nuclear war theology that has been develpublic and in detail the consequences of our in-

oped in the Soviet Union and the United States, volvement in nuclear weapons systems. The Min-

has any validity, blinding an enemy is the last ister for Defence tonight came nowhere near be-

thing a country would want to do. It would want ginning that process. If the Government did that,

the enemy to understand exactly what it was it would come to the conclusion that the arms

doing in a limited nuclear war to erase unwanted limitation process was not an issue of purely

escalation. Finally, both super powers have a American concern to be treated in an offhand

massive excess of potential targets over available fashion. 11 would be more supportive, through the

warheads. Forty thousand Soviet targets are listed bureaucratic channels that the Labor Govern-

by United States planners for which, assuming the ment established for it in 1974, of efforts by

total survival of the American nuclear weapons former President Carter to reduce numbers of nu-

system and including some theatre weapons in clear delivery systems -a position which is still

Europe, the United States has 14,000 warheads. well supported within the American defence bu-

In other words, there is an excess of about 26,000 reaucracy, within American Congress and re-

targets over available warheads.

cently an American public opinion poll by some-

The divergence between targets and warheads is even greater in the case of the Societ Union. In the first place it has fewer warheads than the United States. Further, because of the more dispersed nature of the American alliance system

thing like 70 per cent of the American population. It would be less willing to give tacit support to hunting packs in the Washington bureaucracy seeking an advantage over the Soviets which will never be there.

it would rightly have many more nuclear targets Such a use of the appropriations we are discuss-

to consider. Both sides are looking for reasons not ing today would materially advance the security

to attack particular targets rather than reasons to of our peoplc. I repeat that we are obliged by our

attack them. In these circumstances, in the event involvement in nuclear weapon systems and our

of a highly unlikely nuclear attack, I believe that capacity to discuss with the Americans aspects of

only the bases would be at risk. They would be their strategic doctrine, to assist world stability by

attacked either by an intercontinental ballistic encouraging comprehensive Soviet-American

missile carrying half a dozen warheads-two for arms control agreements.

each installation-or a submarine off our coastline. Current concerns about Soviet bombers

Debate (on motion by Mr Baume) adjourned.

being able to reach Australia in this regard are ridiculous. I was interested to see in the Sydney Morning Herald of Monday last week an intelIi-

APPROPRIATION BILL (No.3) 1980-81 Second Reading

gence repudiation of a suggestion by the Prime Debate resumed.

Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) that Soviet backfire bombers were stationed in Cam Ranh Bay and could reach Australia. However, by the same token it is the bases, not the ANZUS Treaty, which place us at risk in a nuclear war. Claims by the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) that we would be a target irrespective of their presence are, I believe, on any rational informed analysis of the super powers targetting doctrine, completely
wrong.

Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (8.51 )-1 am pleased to participate in the debate on Appropriation Bill (No.3) 1980-81 because I would like to point out some of the facts behind many of the decisions that have recently been taken in relation to governmental expenditure. It seems to me that
there has been a large degree of misconception about the role of government in Australia at the moment and as a result it seems worthwhile to go back to the realities of the role of government and

All these calculations are based on a continuwhat, in fact, has been going on. Statistics show a

ation in quantitative and qualitative terms of the different philosophical approach by the two

current nuclear balance. Should the cap on multisides-the coalition on one hand and the Aus-

ple independently targeted re-enter vehicle wartralian Labor Party on the other hand. If one

heads and the numbers deployed be removed, the looks at the different performance of this Govern-

situation could alter dramatically. For example, ment and the previous Government in relation to

the Soviet Union is prevented by the SALT progovernment expenditures, one will see why there

cess from putting 20 to 30 warheads on its heavy has been the need for an attempt to have a sub-

missiles. Should the Soviets be no longer restantial redirection of the process of government.

strained by international agreement, some of the Of course, that is evidenced by the amount of

calculations concerning the dangers to us which I spending by various governments. I have two

1980 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

tables which I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard.

Leave granted. The tables read as follows~

COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT BUDGET SECTOR OUTLAYS AT CONSTANT 1974-75 DOLLARS(*) 1972-73 TO 1980-81
$ million

Purpose

1980-81 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 estimate

Defence Education Health Social Security and Welfare Housing Urban and Regional Development Culture and Recreation Economic Services General Public Service Payments to or for the States, the Northern
Territory and Local Government Authorities Public Debt fnterest

1,691 612
1,083 2,907
338 68 161
1,832 1,078
3,398 933

1,612 1,043 1,152 3,024
410 175 193 1,812 1,223
3,360 866

1,628 1,663 1,283 3,712
702 378 237 2,353 1,296
3,700 888

1,596 1,631 2,543 4,331
484 351 218 1,767 1,251
3,820 834

1,694 1,715 1,974 4,955
426 195 200 1,238 1,259

1,701 1,719 1,932 5,330
362 110 187 1,149 1,284

3,977 1,096

4,235 1,181

1,738 1,684 1,935 5,409
255 72 187 1,114 1,277
4,383 1,314

1,837 1,592 1,935 5,371
209 60 196 1,150 1,310
4,335 1,357

1,957 1,584 2,013 5,465
202 58
212 1,304 1,349
4,368 1,331

Total outlays

14,100 14,870 17,839 18,825 18,729 19,191 19,368 19,352 19,912

* Current Values converted to 1974-75 dollars using the Gross Non-Farm Product Implicit Price Deflator (using September Quarter 1980 National Accounts). Deflator used for 1980-81 was based on 1979-80 plus 10.5% (see Budget Speech 1980-81, page 64).
t fncludes Allowance for Wage and Salary Increases (Non-Defence) 0[$69 million at 1974-75 prices
COMMONWEALTH GOVERNMENT BUDGET SECTOR OUTLAYS AT CONSTANT 1974-75 DOLLARS* PERCENTAGE CHANGES 1972-73 TO 1980-81
Annual

Between

Purpose

1972-73 1975-76

1980-81

and

and

1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 estimate 1975-76 1980-81

Defence Education Health Social Security and Welfare Housing
Urban and Regional Development Culture and Recreation Economic Services
General Public Service
Payments to or for the States, the Northern Territory and Local Government Authorities
Public Debt Interest

-4.7 +70.4 +6.4 +4.0 +21.3 + 157.4 + 19.9
-1.1 + 13.5
.1.1 -7.2

+ 1.0 +59.4 + 11.4 +22.8 + 71.2 +116.0 +22.8 +29.9 +6.0
+ 10.1 +2.5

2.0 1.9 +98.2 + 16.7 -31.1 -7.1 8.0 24.9 -3.S
+3.2 -6.1

+6.1 +5.2 22.4 + 14.4 -12.0 44.4 -8.3 -29.9 +0.6
+4.1 +31.4

+0.4 -0.2
--2.1 +7.6 -IS.0 -43.6
6.5 -7.2 -2.0

+2.2 -D.2
0.2
+1.5 -29.6
-34.S
0 -3.0
-0.5

+6.5 +3.5 +7.8 + 11.3

+S.7
-S.5
0 -0.7 -18.0 -16.7 +4.8 +3.2 +2.6

+6.5 -O.S
+4.0 + 1.8 -3.3 -3.3
+8.2 + 13.4
+3.0

-5.6
+ 166.5 + 134.8 +49.0
+43.2 +416.2 +35.4
-3.5
+16.1

+22.6 -2.9
-20.8
+26.2 -58.2 -83.5 -2.8 -26.2
+7.8

-1.1 +3.3

+0.8 +12.4 +14.3 -1.9 -10.6 +59.6

Total outlays

+5.5 +20.0 +5.5 -0.5 +2.5 +0.9 -0.1 +2.9 +33.5 +5.8

* Current Values converted to 1974-75 dollars using the Gross Non-Farm Product Implicit Price Deflator (using September Quarter 1980 National Accounts). Deflator used for 1980-81 was based on 1979-80 plus 10.5% (see Budget Speech 1980-81, p. 64).
t Includes Allowance for Wage and Salary Increases (Non-Defence) of$69 million at 1974-7S Prices.
Compiled at request by the statistics group of the legislative research service from information contained in Budget Speech, InO-81 and in quarterly estimates of national income and expenditure, September quarter 1980, published by the Australian Bu rcau of Statistics.

Mr BAUME-These tables demonstrate the way in which government expenditures have proceeded since 1972-73. The tables also include a statement of percentage change in relation to each area of government spending-from defence and education across the whole range of government spending. They show that overall, in real terms after accounting for inflation, in the last five years

there has been a 5.8 per cent increase in total Federal Government spending; that is, Budget outlays. That is not a particularly substantial rise; it is a rise that has nonetheless been the subject of sub-
stantial criticism from many people who have said that a rise of 5.8 per cent over five years does not in effect represent the small government to which the present Government is committed. That may
be so.

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1981

If there is a real rise of that order over that time. I do not want to keep harking back to this

it could well be argued that that does not repexcept to dramatise the difference in political

resent a sufficiently strong attempt to diminish the philosophy and the consequential impact on the

inevitable growth of the public sector under a nation, but under the previous Government we

government that is committed to giving the prisaw an enormous rise of 33.5 per cent in its total

vate sector more room to expand. However, we spending in only three years but at the same time

should see that 5.8 per cent growth over five years there was only a relatively modest rise of about 24

in the context of the 33.5 per cent rise in real per cent in the revenues raised by that Govern-

terms in only three years under the Labor ment. Many people say that a 24 per cent rise in

Government. [n other words, the enormous rise of tax revenues in only three years is substantial, and

something like an average of 11 per cent a year in I would agree with them. The reality is that those

real terms under the Labor Government has been increases in revenues went nowhere near meeting

replaced by an average growth of something like the 33.5 per cent increase in expenditures, with

one per cent a year under the present Governthe result that there has been a huge borrowing

ment. That certainly indicates a dramatic change program. Over the past five years we have had to

in the rate of advance of the public sector; pay the bill for that enormous gap. Fortunately

nonetheless, it does still represent an advance.

we have now narrowed that gap, so we can hope

It seems to me to be important when we look at measures that have recently been taken by the Federal Government to diminish public expenditure- -from recent statements it seems there were attempts yesterday to encourage the State governments to diminish their rate of expansion-to see that the areas in which the Federal Government has been expanding have tended to be limited to two, both of which are really external involvements. Payments to or for the States and the Northern Territory and the local government authorities have increased by

that this huge public debt interest bill ultimately can be diminished. When one recognises that there is almost as much being spent on public debt interest as on the federal funding of education, one realises how enormous the amount is. The whole of the genera] public services provided by the Federal Government, cost no more than the public debt interest that has to be paid, not simply as a consequence of higher interest rates but because of a reckless style of government which involved spending far more than the revenues were capable of meeting.

14.3 per cent in real terms after accounting for Fortunately, as the result of continuing re-

inflation over the period of the present Governstraint on expenditure and only a 5.8 per cent rise

ment's term of office. That compares with a 12.4 during the last five years, whilst revenues have

per cent rise under the previous Government. been continuing to rise at a faster rate than that

There is certainly a diminution in the rate of rise we have managed to narrow the gap. That enables

but there is no doubt a continuing rise in funding members of the Labor Party to say, in a very criti-

to the States.

cal sense, that the rate of tax rise under the

Of course the other and most horrendous figure is the 59.6 per cent increase in the cost of public
debt interest. That strikes me as a matter of im-
mense moment to which this House-and the nation-ought to address itself. It is a pity that when a government sets out to finance enormous
programs by borrowing so many people fail to realise that those borrowings have to be paid for, that interest has to be paid on them and that the cost to the nation and to taxpayers is not only enormous but also it is continuing. Public debt
interest, which in real terms in 1975-76 when this

present Government has been enormous and dis-
gracefuL They say: 'How can you claim to be small government people when you have increased taxes as you have?' The reality is that
the tax rises have had to take place not to pay the current bill but to pay the bill, as I just estab-
lished, that was generated under the previous Government. I think it is worthwhile to point out to the House exactly where these rises in expenditure have taken place. Honourablemembers will
see the difference in philosophy between the two parties.

Government came into office was only $834m, is Honourable members will sce that under the

now up to $1.3 billion. One can say that looks disLabor Government expenditure on defence fell

turbing; here is a government committed to small by 5.6 per cent in real terms. It is interesting that

government facing such an enormous increase in the Opposition spokesman on defence, the

the public debt interest. It seems to me that it is honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes), is in

self-evident that we must have these huge rises in the House at the moment. He may find it very

borrowings, and therefore in public debt interest interesting that under the Government which he

payments, when governments do not sufficiently supported-he now pretends to be a strong advo-

match their expenditures with their revenUes.

cate for expanding our defence efIort-there was,

1982 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

in fact, a 5.6 per cent reduction in real spending on defence. Under the present Government there has been a 22.6 per cent increase.
Let us look at the dramatic impact of the enormous changes that took place in education under the Labor Government. I found some of these changes quite attractive. I think many people would find some of them attractive. What we have to recognise is exactly who paid for them and whether some of them were so radical and quick that they caused more disruption than they provided benefit. One wonders whether the young people of Australia ended up better educated as a result of this enormous 166.5 per cent increase in real terms in Federal spending on education in those three years.
Mr Coleman-No. MrDean-No. Mr BAUME-As my colleagues say in unison, the answer is no. Regrettably, that is tr).le. Honourable members will recall the enormous increase in unemployment that took place under the Labor Government. The number of people in work actually fell while the number of people looking for jobs rose. That is a very different situation from the one which exists at the moment where the number of people in jobs is rising. The education system which was so strongly boosted by the Labor Government provided no base whatsoever, no preparation, for young people to playa full and adequate role in society. For example, an enormous shortage of skilled workers developed at that time, largely, I suspect, as a result of the massive disadvantages at which the employers were placed, particularly the small businessmen of Australia, who were obliged to put people off rather than employ people. In that context I should mention that in the last two years, under the present Government, there has been an increase of 300,000 in the number of people at work in Australia. I now turn to the area of health. We can really ask whether under the previous Government there was a massive increase in the health of Australians-whether there was, in fact, a 134.8 per cent increase in the state of health of this nation under the previous Government. We have heard from those opposite how the present policies are appalling. We have heard the enormous criticism of our attempts to rein in this massive rate of rise in health expenditure. What we found under the Labor Government was a 134.8 per cent increase in health expenditure with no offsetting basic increase in the health of this nation. What we saw was a diversion of resources in a most unfortunate way which I hope the present

sensible attempts to redirect that money will diminish. There is no doubt that it is crazy that in areas such as New South Wales hundreds of empty hospital beds are maintained at public expense, simply because there is no will on behalf--
Mr Scholes-You do not care about people. That is true.
Ml' BAUME-Mr Deputy Speaker, I would be grateful if the argument could be contained.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. J. D, M. Dobie)-Order! The honourable member for Corio knows he should not interject during a speech.
Mr Scholes-I suggest you also talk to the people on your side and not be so biased.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member knows that he should not speak while the Chair is speaking.
Mr BAUME-I now hope that more light and less heat will be generated in this chamber and that we will not have that kind of interruption. The reality is that the reckless increase of 134.8 per cent in health expenditure resulted in some people getting a better deal-I would not deny that some people who needed a better deal got it-but I can state without any fear of contradiction that the volume of wasted resources, wasted taxpayers' money, that was involved in maintaining empty hospital beds throughout this nation cost something like $150 a day. It is an indictment of any government that would be prepared to hand out such an amount of taxpayers' money without any recognition or concern about whether that money is being properly spent. In the hospital system the evidence dramatisescertainly the number of empty beds dramatises-'-- the fact that a large amount of the money was being monstrously wasted. That, of course, is apart from the rip-offs and ramps which have been rampant within some sections of the health community and which have been paid for by the taxpayers of Australia. Under the present Government the expenditure on health has gone down by about 21 per cent from that enormous increase under Labor. That does not mean that expenditure on health has been slashed.- In fact, the spending on health in real terms in the current Budget is still double the 1972-73 level-double the level it was at before Labor came into power. Yet we are being massively criticised for the sorts of restraints which have reduced the rate of rise' over the last eight years to only a doubling. It seems to me there is no doubt that there is plenty of scope for the sort of activity that the Ministel' -

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1983

for Health (Mr MacKellar) has been so widely
criticised for.
We are told that we are a heartless government in respect of social security. Let me say that under this Government there has been a 22.6 per cent increase in social security and welfare payments in real terms after accounting for inflation. There is no doubt that under the previous Government there was a 49 per cent increase. I would imagine that a large amount of that was involved in the reduction of the means test in respect of pensions for people aged over 70 years. In other words, there was an offsetting increased taxation benefit to the Government which is not shown in these figures. These figures overstate the total cost to revenue of the Labor Government's so-called generosity to the aged and other people in receipt of benefits. We can go through the list it has been incorporated in Hansard-to see exactly where there have been rises and why there should be these substantial cuts.
Nevertheless, I would like to make a couple of points in respect of recent changes where, I believe, the Government has erred. I believe it is most unfortunate that indexation of tax will be abandoned after the end of the next financial year. It seems to me a distressing success for the Labor Party that this has happened because when indexation was first introduced it was the Labor Party in this House and outside it that said that indexation was a hoax; that indexation was not something which would bring any benefits at all; that it was a figment, in terms of benefits, of the Government's imagination. When we decided to withdraw it the Labor Party suddenly found the benefits of indexation. No doubt members of the Opposition will continue to cry crocodile tears in here about tax indexation. They have never proposed it themselves in any campaign. They would not touch it with a barge pole because indexation of taxation keeps governments honest. There is no way that any Labor government would want to be kept honest. In the current year half tax indexation, which is to continue next financial year, as was promised in the policy speech, will bring a reduction of about $500m in the full financial year in people's tax.
Unfortunately, as a result of the deceptive campaign mounted by the people opposite, the people of Australia are unaware of the real benefits of indexation. That is why I proposed to the Government-I am very disappointed that the Government has not accepted the proposal-that benefits, instead of being adjusted on a regular basis in people's pay packets, be indexed at the end of the year when people put in their tax returns. In that way people would be able to see

their indexation adjustment. That would make indexation meaningful. It would dramatise why indexation is something very significant. Yet unfortunately we have given way to the deceptive propositions of honourable members opposite. Apparently we have conceded that indexation has to go and instead the Government will have dis-- cretionary adjustments to taxation scales which are 'preferable'. In my terms they are not prefer-- able. I would much rather see the Government being forced to increase its tax rates if in fact it wants to increase taxes. Certainly the automatic indexation would not diminish any government's capacity to reduce tax, if it so wished, by more than the amount indicated by indexation guidelines.

Whilst 1 totally support the general thrust of the Government's recent policiesJ certainly recognise its need to reduce and to limit expenditure in many areas-I find it immensely disappointing that we have given way to what strikes me as being political pressure in the area of indexation. This is most unfortunate. I think it would be very much a part of true Liberal principles if indexation, keeping governments honest, were more strongly adhered to and we did not give way to the dishonest and deceptive pressure from the Australian Labor Party, which-l repeat-has never at any stage supported tax indexation.

Mr HOWE (Batman) (9.11 ) The Govern-

ment, in its revisions to its taxation policies, its an-

nouncement of changes in its health system and its

review of Commonwealth functions the activi-

tie~ of .the so-called razor gang---has forfeited any

claIm It may have had to a sense of national re-

sponsibility. It has finally made it clear that it is no

longer a Liberal

government in the tradition Government, but is rather

aofrMeaecntizoiensa~ay

government which has based its policies on a mix-

ture of opportunism and extremist attitudes

which reflect its total subservience to the interests

?f corporate capital. It is a government which, in

Its desperate desire to retain power, is prepared to

destroy the federation, remove all constraints on

corporate power, sell out to international interests

not only the most profitable sections of the

government sector but also almost all of

Australia's natural resources. In the process it is

hell-bent on reducing the living standards of ordi-

nary Australians.

In the package of measures introduced last
week we have seen the strongest and most ideological attack on the state made by any conservative government since the war. Indeed the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has arguably been the first Prime Minister since Federation to see

1984 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

the interests of the capital and the state as antithetical. Compare his most recent speeches with the words of Menzies spoken at the founding meeting of the Liberal Party in the early 1940s. Menzies said:
The State and private enterprise are regarded as partners in the common purpose of improving the material conditions of the community . . . From plans of State action designed to secure full employment and social security, private enterprise stands vastly to gain, conversely . . . the State will be greatly aided by vigorous, healthy and enlightened private enterprise.
Against this notion of partnership which might exist between the state and capital we have the view of this Ministry which constantly argues for the reduction of the state's role in the area of management and regulation of the economy. It should be added also that this Government is the most clearly class biased government in Australia's history. Again it contradicts the self-image of the Liberal Party. W. H. Anderson, speaking for the Liberals in 1954, stated:
We reject the conception of class. It is anti-democratic and outmoded. In this new industrial age rigid class concepts are absurd. This age, with its changes, with its opportunities and its mobility, obliterates the old distinctions of a fixed and static society.
The Prime Minister again and again in his rhetoric has referred to the phrase 'all Australians'. But it would be a one eyed coalition supporter who could possibly believe that this Government was governing for all Australians. In my view it would not be unfair to suggest that it is aiming to ensure that the greatest sacrifices are not made by the very poor and certainly not by the very rich, but by ordinary wage and salary earners-the working people of this country.
It is in the area of health policy that one can see most clearly reflected the thrust of this Government's policies. These policies can be criticised on a number of grounds. Firstly, they could be criticised for the superficiality of the analysis on which they are based despite the undoubted attention which has been given to the area of health policy by the Fraser Government with its inquiries and large numbers of separate health schemes. Secondly, they could be criticised because they reflect in the area of health an abdication by the Federal Government of a responsibility which should be borne by a national government interested in uniform health standards throughout the Commonwealth. Thirdly, they should be criticised because they will result in an increased burden in health costs for the ordinary wage and salary earner and a compounding of inequities between different groups of the population.
I turn firstly to the policy basis for the changes. The principal focus of the Government's concern

about health since it was elected in 1975 has been to reduce the burden on the Commonwealth Government of the costs of health care. The fact that there has been a 26 per cent increase, as was pointed out by the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume), indicates how much it has failed in that regard. Of course, it would be quite wrong to imagine that it ever had any real interest in actually reducing the costs of health care to people in the community.
The Government has had a preoccupation since it was first elected with the desire to reduce taxation especially for people on higher incomes but also for electoral reasons for middle income earners. It has been singularly unsuccessful in achieving this latter objective, as is indicated by its removal of the last vestiges of tax indexation as part of its package of measures. Thus it has sought drastically to reduce the costs of health from the Commonwealth Budget. However, the Government's lack of interest in health policy as such has meant that it has never understood or been prepared to come to terms with the underlying causes of the increases in health expenditure which have been atllicting every advanced country, especially those countries which have retained fee for service medicine.
The fundamental problem, as Dr Sax saw in his report, is that the system is designed to reward the doctor. He pointed out that without seeking a shift of power within the health industry which removed the incentive for the doctor to expand the use of medical services no effective deescalation in health costs could be achieved. He said that the doctor was the gate-keeper of the system. These latest changes will enhance even further the role of the fee for service doctors within the health system. They will do nothing to encourage the doctor to work towards a reduction of health costs.
Similarly, the latest changes not only seek to maintain the position of the medical practitioner within the community and the hospital settingthe Jamison recommendation that private practice be phased out in public hospitals was ignored-but will also enhance the role of private hospitals that are to be given higher subsidies for surgical beds enabling that part of .the system to expand even though the public sector will be forced to contract. This will mean an expansion in bed numbers and not a reduction. Increased overall costs to both the Commonwealth taxpayer and the overall health system will be generated.
In turn this situation will be exploited by foreign hospital corporations, such as the Hospital

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1985

Corporation of America Pty Ltd, which is escapThe National Acoustic Laboratories will be trans-

ing restrictions placed upon it in the United States ferred to the private sector. There will be cut-

in search of profitable operations in Australia. backs in the national roads safety program.

They will provide a competitive alternative to public hospitals because they will not be forced to take the chronically ill, bear the costs of high technology medicine or carry the costs of training the doctors and nursing staff who will work in their hospitals. Thus the capital investment represented by public medicine will be privately appropriated for profit by these unwelcome visitors who will make no real contribution to the Australian health system.

That is an absolutely appalling picture. What it suggests is that the Government is riot willing to provide any national leadership in the whole area of public health. It has vacated the field at a time in which every other country in the developed world is in fact accelerating its activities in this area. Australia has been involved in a number of international discussions in the International Labour Organisation and in working committees in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation

The lack of interest in health policy is finally illustrated by the way in which the Government has ignored the issue of preventive medicine in its rhetoric concerning the patients taking more responsibility for their own health care. In my view this is the most reprehensible aspect of government policies. It was in the area of preventive medicine that the Sax report on health costs saw the greatest potential for long term saving. Yet

and Development on these matters of environmental and occupational health. We are one of the few countries-we may be the only country in the developed world--which is not moving to establish legislation in these areas of regulation and control. What the hell are we saying internationally about our responsibilities in these areas when one looks at what we are not doing in this country?

the Federal Government is opting out of this area. The reality is that the National Health Bill is

very much related to the incidence of accidents,

The following measures indicate the extent of sickness and disease and much of the causes are

the Government's abdication in the field of prerelated to environmental factors, transport sys-

ventive health. The inclusion of community tems and the safety of the environment in factor-

health centres and the dental health scheme along ies and offices. The Government is not only saving

with high technology hospitals in the area of genmoney by failing to place emphasis on preventive

eral funding to become the prime responsibility of health but also it is causing needless suffering.

the States will almost certainly mean that they will be areas which will miss out on funding. Yet, both the Community Health Program and the dental programs are absolutely fundamental to preventive health, and the community health centres are crucial to caring for people in a com-
munity setting.

Secondly, I turn briefly to health and the new federalism. In making these changes the Commonwealth is shifting, as I have suggested, responsibility to the States. In the area of preventive health the States have some legislation and machinery but no one would suggest that the efforts of the States in these areas are entirely satisfac-

The supposedly mobile dental health clinics in Melbourne can rarely move, so great are the dental problems of kids in low income areas. There is no area of health in Australia more neglected than dental health. Yet, the Government, in this mad cost-cutting exercise, is abdicating its responsibility. Both the National Safety Committee on Occupational Health and the national Committee on Occupational Safety and Health in Commonwealth Government Employment will be abolished. The functions of the industrial working environment division are to be scaled down, with residual functions to be transferred to the Depart-

tory. However, the main new burden which they will have to take up is the costs associated with hospitals, community health programs and the dental program. The Government is endeavouring in these measures to do two things: Firstly, to force the States to take the political responsibility for rationalising the hospital system and, secondly, to encourage the expansion of a private health system, particularly private hospitals. The States will be forced either to introduce double taxation or, alternatively, to introduce the user pays principle and bring in charging for in-patient and out-patient care in public hospitals.

ment of Industrial Relations. The CommonThe principal criticism which I make of these

wealth Pathology Laboratories will be transferred changes is that they represent an abdication of re-

to the States. The staffing levels in areas such as sponsibility on the part of the national Govern-

those that deal with environmental health, toximent to form national health policy. It is surely in

cology, food standards, preventive medicine, nuthe interests of Australians wherever they may be

trition and epidermology are to be rationalised. that a national approach be taken to the problems

1986 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

of health policy and health costs. Many of the compared with what the costs were of administer-

problems we face that are the causes of ill health ing the Medibank scheme. There are otherprob-

flow from aspects of society which are reflected lems but these seem to impinge on the proposed

across the nation rather than being concentrated changes most of all. However one may judge

in any particular area. In all areas which have Medibank, it attempted to tackle these problems

been left to the States .without any co-ordination and it solved some of them. There is ample evi-

by the Federal Government we have a situation dence to suggest that as the scheme became

where statistics cannot be compared and thus no stabilised so were its costs. Dragging us back to

overall evaluation of the problem is possible.

the 1950s will not solve any of the problems of the

health system. Again, we will have people unin-

The third area that I mention briefly is that of sured and hospitals and doctors faced with the

the distribution of costs and benefits in relation to problems of bad debts, and the people concerned

these changes which the Government is making. faced with threats, humiliation and bad health.

Finally, we have a situation where there will be an Again, we will have a situation where those on

increased burden in health costs and a compound- $11,000 a year will pay the same as those on

ing of present inequities. The present Govern- $41,000 a year. This Government has done little

ment has continually claimed that Medibank was to reduce the cost of health; rather it has transfer-

responsible for the rapid escalation of costs bered the burden on to the backs of individuals, par-

tween 1971-72 to 1976-77. Upon this assumption ticularly those on low incomes.

it is argued that the user pays principle would lower costs. However, statistics collected by the Health Insurance Commission clearly show that of all the patients seen, bulk billed patientsthose who did not pay directly-claimed on average fewer services than those not bulk billed. In fact, research during this period shows that doctor-initiated diagnostic services and specialists referrals showed a record increase. Yet, once again the actions of this Government are based on an erroneous assumption. Thus the result of the changes will be to push people into private health funds.

Finally, I say a word about the impact of these changes on my electorate. The Batman electorate includes three community health centres which have been extremely important in terms of providing primary health care. Two of them have doctors and a number of ancillary services which have saved, I suggest, hundreds of thousands of dollars in terms of the care that would be necessary if the people visiting those centres were placed in an institutionalised setting. One can only have considerable concern about what the effects of these change will be on the future of community health centres which I believe form a basis of pri-

What then are some of the implications that we mary medicine throughout the nation.

can expect? Well, there is no need to speculate. We have seen all the results before. In 1952-53-we need to go back that far-the Menzies Government introduced the voluntary contributory health scheme in connection with hospital and medical benefits by making Commonwealth Government benefits available only to those who were voluntarily insured. The scheme, albeit modified, was retained through the 1950s and 1960s until criticism became so frequent and comprehensive that an inquiry and changes were forced. Yet, this Government wants to push the health system of this country back to this period

One has to be concerned about the mobile dental service because again the costs of dental care are very much greater if the problems are not detected in early age. The experience of mobile dental clinics in my electorate and in different parts of Melbourne has indicated that children's teeth generally are in an appalling condition throughout large areas of Melbourne and, I suggest, throughout large areas of Australia. We are simply not detecting these problems because low income families particularly cannot afford the high cost of dental care.

despite this experience.

Again we have in my electorate a number of

major public hospitals-some of Melbourne's

Well, what were the problems experienced? most important public hospitals. I know from

The Nimmo report of 1969 outlined some of visiting hospitals, such as the Austin Hospital and

these: Firstly, the whole complexity of a volunthe Preston and Northcote Community Hospital,

tary health system; secondly, the contributions that they are already suffering from cost con-

were beyond the capacity of some people to pay straints. Those who are suffering are not the fat

and involved hardship for others; and, thirdly, a cats in the system but the patients and the people

higher proportion of contributions were absorbed who provide patient care. They are the people

in operating costs. The administrative costs of who are working many hours of overtime and

operating a voluntary health system are massive finding it harder to survive within a situation of

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1987

cost constraint. It is not the top administrators or expenditure is seriously undertaken, but also it is

the top specialists who are struggling.

fundamental to any consideration of making a

Finally, in my electorate we have three of Melbourne's major psychiatric hospitals: Plenty, Mont Park and Larundel. There is no area, perhaps apart from dental health, that is more neglected in Australia than the area of psychiatric health. Anyone who saw the program, I think on Nationwide last night, which described the conditions in Royal Park hospital, which are replicated in the other psychiatric hospitals I referred to, would know that psychiatric health in this country is an area of sheer scandal. The lack of resources going to psychiatric hospitals and community programs for people with psychiatric problems is totally inadequate. I hope that rather

worthwhile reduction in taxation. Crucial to the control of in1lation, to the health and welfare of our domestic and exporting industries and to the creation of increasing employment opportunities, is a reduction in taxation. Crippling taxation is a disincentive _which inhibits business confidence and expansion, inhibits effective suppression of tax evasion and which dampens the enthusiasm of the private sector to produce more, to expand and to provide increasing job opportunities. The Treasurer has made it abundantly clear, if that was needed, that taxation relief is possible only if inroads into government expenditure can be effectively made.

than the Government vacating the field of health, The honourable member for Braddon (Mr

it will expand its involvement and take over subGroom) recently made some perceptive and per-

stantial responsibility for the funding of psychitinent observations about the course the Govern-

atric hospitals and for care related to psychiatric ment has charted, and I find myself in agreement

illness. I am quite sure that until that happens we with much of his argument. He very wisely cau-

will not have the high standards of psychiatric tioned the Government against ad hockery, about

hospitals that we ought to have in this country. responding to pressure from vocal interest groups

That concerns one of the gravest inequities in the to arrive at the most expedient political decision

health system. It certainly has not been dealt with which might be the antithesis of the wisest and

by this Government, or indeed by any Commonmost proper decision. Indeed there was criticism

wealth government in Australia. I hope that in the that the Whitlam Government at times did seem

future an Australian Labor Party government will to become alert to the danger and folly of its econ-

turn its attention to that extremely important omic course, and now and again it evidenced a dis-

issue.

position to alter that course, to take some hard de-

Mr ADERMANN (Fisher) (9.31)-Tonight we are considering Appropriation Bill (No.3) 1980-81 and Appropriation Bill (No.4) 1980-81 in which Parliament is asked to appropriate moneys and which comprise the Additional Estimates for 1980-81. As the Treasurer (Mr Howard) indicated, the Additional Appropriations sought total $520.9m. The Parliament has been told that the Additional Appropriations are offset to some extent by some not inconsiderable savings in appropriations that were made under previous appropriation Bills-to the extent of $147.6m. It was most pleasing to receive the assurance that present expectations are that the Budget estimates will not blowout; they will be within one per cent of those estimates, and that the Government will continue adherence to its policy of maintaining maximum expenditure restraint. Indeed the work of the committee of the

cisions and to halt the slide into national bankruptcy. However, when vocal pressure groups struck up a chorus of protest that Government quickly abandoned its good intentions and economic decline continued. Whilst I think that is a very fair and accurate criticism, this present Government will be no less deserving of criticism unless it heeds very carefully the admonitions of the honourable member for Braddon. Government is never easy. The responsible course, the willingness to face up to hard but necessary options, is not often the politically popular course. But a government does not serve the nation or its people, nor has it any moral
entitlement to seek continued mandates to government if it is incapable or unwilling to take those hard decisions in the achievement of economic stability and to tackle responsibly the ills of inflation and unemployment.

Cabinet headed by the Minister for Industry and The alternative which the Opposition would

Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) seems to me to be ofTer shows that it has learnt nothing from its dis-

particularly important in its continuing examinastrous brief occupancy of the Treasury benches.

ation of expenditure and formulation of proposals That alternative shows that deficits, repressive

to reduce such expenditure. Not only will the incentive-destroying taxation, savage inflation

credibility of the Government be under a cloud and burgeoning unemployment would be the leg-

unless there is continued restraint and unless an acy of any Labor government under its present

examination of ways to achieve reductions in leadership group. Indeed the honourable member

1988 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

for Batman (Mr Howe) is on record on page 1391 of Hansard as saying a short timeago that we cannot reduce public expenditure. He spoke of extraordinary growth in the welfare system which he, by his own exposition, would expand very much further. There are many in need-the aged, infirm and those in abject poverty--who must be able to look to the Government for assistance. However, recognising that any system of welfare is financed by the taxpayers, a government knows that there are continual pressures for diverse and considerable expansion of all areas of social welfare. Even under the most repressive taxation evident in some socialist-governed countries, the system becomes altogether too heavy to maintain and sustain. There is never a limit to demands and expectations for wider and more generous social welfare benefits, but there is a very definite limit on a nation's financial capacity to satisfy fully those demands and expectations.
The Government's perception of the true welfare of the needy, disadvantaged, aged and infirm is not always to be measured in pure quantitative terms. Indeed the Government has a responsibility to ensure that relief and social security support is directed to the areas of greatest need. It has to ensure that social security is exactly that; social security for those who are in real need of security, not a system of welfare payments distributed widely in response to vocal demands and expectations. A huge, thinly spread social welfare expenditure provides security to none and becomes a political exercise which creates more problems than it solves. Aid must go to those in need who have no capacity to redress their misery, pain and distress. It would be wonderful indeed if we were so affluent that we could look on welfare payments as everybody's right, but that is not real life. Social security is a real and serious responsibility of any government, not the least this Government.
But perhaps no area requires greater consideration, scrutiny and responsibility to ensure that expenditure is directed to areas of real need, because no area of expenditure can expand so alarmingly and uncontrollably if care is not exercised. I repeat, it is very simple to end up with a huge social welfare bill, spread thinly over almost every citizen, yet achieve nothing in relieving distress and need. It is nothing new to hear from the Opposition day after day demands for massive increases in every area of benefit and welfare imaginable-demands which, if they were all taken up, would bankrupt the nation and in the net result achieve nothing. There are, in truth, areas of need and distress in this nation where more needs to be done. But the Government

would do well to examine its total welfare program for there are areas of expenditure where it is difficult to accept that the criterion of need does properly operate. It is not just a matter of indexing every benefit, it is not just a matter of comparing the total welfare expenditure as between governments and of one year against another. We are referring to social security. That is what the aim ought to be; social security, security for those in need. That security and those needs should be redressed to the fullest extent that the nation can afford. I am far from convinced that that is what we have, despite the level of expenditure. But I am convinced that we should set our sights on social security, not socialist welfare.
In looking at the areas of education and health, I am quite amazed at the apparently endless demands for the Government to pay for the lot and the individual to pay for nothing. What is wrong with expecting a person to make a contribution to his own education or that of the family that he has brought into the world, and his own health care according to his capacity so to do? No one, because of poverty or adversity, should be denied educational opportunity or health care. Governments have an important responsibility to redress those disadvantages. In every other case why should we not have some responsibility ourselves, rather than expecting the Government to shell out, assume total responsibility and totally judge our needs and our requirements?
I believe the family allowances scheme which was instituted by this Government was one of its fmest and best initiatives. It has been of tremendous assistance to many families. Many mothers have benefited in their battle to raise and to provide for their families. It is true that it has not been indexed. There is probably a real case for adjustment. Family allowances are paid to all, irrespective of need or circumstances. I wonder why an affluent family should be in receipt of a benefit which it does not need, when it would suffer no disadvantage if it did not receive. thatbenefit. An income means test or some other fair measure which ensures that the family allowance reaches families in which there is need and in which it renders the support it is aimed to provide surely should be considered. We could then see family allowances being of real benefit to those who need help. We could then afford to index or to increase the allowances to continue to meet
that need.
What we now have is a massive universal benefit, unrelated to need, which is static because we cannot afford to increase it. We, therefore, provide insufficient help to those who need it and

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1989

continue to provide unnecessary benefit to those well able to contribute to their own desires and their own needs. Even if we were unable to cut a dollar from our total welfare expenditure, if some of these suggestions were investigated and adopted we would have the satisfaction of knowing that those in need were receiving maximum help and that those who put their hand out in the hope that the Government would accept responsibilities that they are well able to shoulder were not receiving help. We would not be reducing the measure of help that we could direct to areas of
real need.
In this nation there is a very widely held disquiet that the Government is taking over responsibilities for everyone, that there is positive encouragement for everyone to abrogate responsibility and expect a benign welfare system to care for us, our families, our education, our health, our future and so on. A nation is in a parlous and unhealthy state if there is not some expectation that we contribute according to our capacity to do so and that we take some responsibility for our own welfare, security, insurance, future and well-being. If a government departs from that general philosophy, it is sailing in an unchartered sea and could well sink under the weight of a welfare system it can neither manage nor afford.

It is no wonder that we see divisions which we do not want or need. It is no wonder that there is division between the haves and the have-nots, between the country and the city and between the farmer and the militant trade unions.
Just consider for a moment that a militant trade union says our productivity and affluence are such that we work fewer hours and receive more pay and more benefits. How sympathetic is the primary producer whose costs are rising and whose prices are not whose hours of work do not diminish, who suffers drought and adversity but still carries on and then finds that his brother militant trade unions, with the benefits enjoyed by them, prevent him from exporting his wheat, his lambs or from moving his produce because of some industrial dispute further to advance the demands of the unionists for more and more. That is not a bash at unions, nor is it a denial of man's right to better conditions for himself and his family. Surely it illustrates very clearly factors that do divide our nation and not the issues which the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) says are divisive. The Australian Council of Trade Unions cannot remove itself from any responsibility for what it is so ready to condemn. There is an injunction in the Bible, which are words of wisdom which time has reinforced. It states:

Prosperity, improved standards of living depend on our willingness to work and contribute. If every improvement in productivity is immediately offset by a 12.5 per cent reduction in the number of hours of work, how can we possibly attain improved prosperity, better living standards and greater security? It does not seem to sink in that benefits should be shared by all Australians, not just by a vocal militant section only. It is all very well for some to say that productivity allows them to work five hours less a week. Productivity and prosperity receive a great contribution which benefits us all because of the labours of many people who have no hope of reducing their working hours, even to 50 or 60 hours a week, let alone reducing them to 35 hours a week.
In our great rural areas there are men, their wives and their families who work hard and without limitation of hours. They have no weekends off, no holiday payor loadings but they work to provide food and fibre which everyone of us needs. Our standards of living and our prosperity owe much to those people. Yet, they often receive little thought or little thanks in the scramble for more money and for less work. I do not, for a moment, say that we should not expect better conditions and more leisure time if we can afford them, so long as those benefits are not selfishly won at the expense and to the disregard of others.

If man does not work, neither shall he also eat.
For all of our manoeuvring and cleverness, that injunction will remain very relevant in this age and in every age. We must be very conscious that our own grasping and self-centredness could cause our fellow men and women to be put out of work. We can no more wash our hands of that result than Pilate could wash away his transgressions or his involvement in Christ's crucifixion.
As we consider these appropriation Bills, we can then ponder the course we are on and the words of the Treasurer. We can well ask: 'What do we expect of government?' Surely the answer is that we expect responsibility in economic management which will provide the stability and environment in which we can gain the rewards for our labour, where we can expect proper provision for the defence of our nation and the benefits we enjoy as citizens of that nation, where poverty, need and infirmity do not get pushed under the carpet but are addressed and redressed, where government and bureaucratic intrusion into our homes and our family lives are minimised. They are some of the expectations which I think we are entitled to hold. The Government can meet those expectations only if it responsibly manages the economy, takes the responsible decisions and does not sway before vocal pressure groups, restrains its own growth and its spending and equitably

1990 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

levies upon its citizens reasonable contributions by way of taxation, not to satisfy any hunger for growth, power or even permanency, but to provide the sort of environment I hope I have described.
I commend the Government for its management, for its restraints and for its compassion. It has shown all in very great measure. We now have a more stable base because inflation has been tackled. The economic situation is much healthier and confidence has been very substantially restored. What we have gained, we applaud. We must not relax or rest on our oars, because I believe the next years are crucial. We could very easily lose all our gains if we diminish our vigilance. I support the course that the Government is on. I look forward to further work by the Cabinet committee and to other recommendations that it will bring down. These recommendations have to be considered carefully and not rejected just because they are hard options. The review must be a continuing and not intermittent one.
One statement made by my friend and colleague, the Minister for Industry and Commerce did give me cause for worry. I thought it was uncharitable of a man who is not usually uncharitable to talk of the reductions in the Public Service as a blessing because there will not be so many snouts in the trough on pay day. The reason I am concerned is not that we ought not to take action to reduce the size of the Public Service; I applaud that action. One thing we have to be sure of is that the reductions are made throughout the Public Service and are not made at the lower levels where people serve the public and where service is given to the public. I am concerned because the top echelon of the Public Service may insulate itself by various means from being retrenched or from suffering the effects of reductions. Cuts have to be made right across the board. I think this is something that we should watch very carefully because it is so easy, when we talk of reductions in the Public Service and when those reductions are in the hands of the Public Service, to find that those reductions are made at the lower end and that service to the public suffers. The Government will not be vigilant and its credibility will not be increased unless it follows it through in that way.
I look to the Government to tackle the inequities and anomalies in our taxation system, not just to patch up loopholes or amend an Act which now seems to be nothing but a multitude of complex amendments. I look to the Government to address itself to the review of all aspects of taxation and its mix and to pursue its stated intention to reduce taxation and to restore incentives which

oppressive or inequitable taxation removes. I believe the Government has made a good start on that. I believe the Government is sincere and is determined to maintain that most important commitment. I support the measures that the Government has taken. I have much pleasure in supporting the Appropriation Bills which are before us in the Parliament. I commend them to the House.
Mr UREN (Reid) (9.51)-The honourable member for Fisher eMr Adermann) said that the Government was sincere. I have no doubt that Adolf Hitler also was sincere. I am sick to death of the mealy-mouthed sincerity of honourable members on the other side of the House when they know that over the past five and a half years wealth has been transferred from the great bulk of the Australian people to the very wealthy elite. For the past five and a half years under this Fraser-Anthony Government the living standards of the majority of the Australian people have been eroded. The real disposable income, the spending power, of most people has fallen in those five and a half years. Low and middle income earners now have less security and less capacity than they had five and a half years ago to protect themselves and their dependants against misfortune and to improve their well-being. Both the quality and quantity of essential social serviccs on which a growing number of people are dependent have been reduced. These include health services, education services, welfare services and urban amenities such as area improvement programs, public housing and urban public transport.
For the past five and a half years the FraserAnthony Government has pursued deliberate policies which have aggravated the problem of unemployment, the problem of poverty, the problem of homelessness and the problem of inequity. For the past five and a half years this conservative Government has presided over a major structural upheaval in the Australian economy and has dislocated hundreds of thousands of people from their places of work and their places ofliving. The past five Budgets of the Fraser-Anthony Government have brought about a massive transfer of wealth and power away from the majority of the Australian people towards a very privileged elite and in favour basically of the corporate sector which dominates the Australian economy. That corporate sector is predominantly foreign controlled and foreign owned. Those transfers of wealth and power have been at the expense of the security of the Australian people-their income security, their job security, the security of Australian ownership and control of enterprises, the security of Australian natural resources for future generations and above all the defence security of

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1991

self-reliance which is gained by Australia promoting a viable and diversified range of manufacturing industries and insisting on its right to an independent voice in foreign affairs.
The Fraser-Anthony Government has let Australia be taken down the road of dependence and vulnerability. As a nation Australia has become more dependent on a one-sided resourcebased economy and more vulnerable to fluctuations in the price of resource exports and in the supply of manufactured imports. The thrust of the Fraser-Anthony Government's policies over the past five and a half years has been contrary to the historical evolution of national government in Australia since Federation and especially since the Second WorId War under both Liberal and Labor governments.
The thrust of this conservative Government's policies is contrary to the expectations of the majority of the Australian people for a national government which promotes security for the people, a national government which promotes cohesion in the community, a national government which promotes checks and balances against the law of the jungle mentality of the corporate sector in order to protect the welfare of the community as a whole and a national government which responsibly seeks to promote fairness and justice, freedom and equity. But this Government of latter day tories in division among themselves is polarising the Australian community by its callousness, by its confrontationist approach and by the arrogance of its leadership.
Last week's outrageous announcement by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) of the proposals of the so-called razor gang clearly signalled this Government's intention to persist in its antipeople course further to erode the living standards of low and middle income earners, further to transfer wealth and power to the corporate sec.. tor, further to dismantle the regulatory machinery of national government, and further to transfer national government responsibilities to the States and individuals. Neither of these groups has sufficient financial capacity to carry the burdens imposed on them by the withdrawal of the Federal Government from its national responsibilities.
I want to discuss four aspects of the razor gang's proposals. Might I say that the term 'razor gang' is a violent one. The action of the razor gang is a violent action by Ministers who believe in violence and ruthlessness. They have been ruthless in their actions against the little people of this country. First I refer to the blatant ideological

nature of the proposals themselves and the rhetoric of the Prime Minister in announcing them. Secondly I refer to the financial restrictiveness of the proposals and the hardship they will cause. Thirdly I refer to the structural fragmentation that the proposals will bring about in FederalState relations, between the public and private sectors and between the monopoly and competitive sectors of private enterprise. Fourthly I refer to the political polarisation that these divisive proposals will aggravate.
The Prime Minister's statement last week was the most blatant statement of conservative ideology that I have heard in this place in nearly 23 years. It is an outmoded and futile ideology which betrays the liberal principles of the party that still supports the Prime Minister and betrays the fairmindedness of the great majority of the Australian people-the disadvantaged, the working people, the small business sector and the small farmers. It is monetarism gone mad. It is an ideology of and for the wealthy corporate sector to justify the accumulation of wealth and power in the hands of the few, to justify the withdrawal of government from its social responsibilities of securing the well-being of the whole community, to justify the sellout by this Government of Australia's natural resources to the foreign controlled corporate sector.
The financial restrictions involved in the razor gang's proposals, together with the cumulative cutbacks of the past five Budgets, together with the abolition of public health insurance, together with the real cutback in funds to the States mean long term hardship for the great majority of Australian people. The Government seeks to justify the hardship by its rhetoric of the survival of the fittest and its intention to reduce big government. We are told that the deserving poor will be looked after because of the savings to government and the market efficiencies which will result from application of the user pays approach.
This Government defines only a small group of people as disadvantaged or needy whilst its policies create the conditions which make a larger number of people more insecure and demand that they pay the social costs of providing for the needy while the corporate sector accrues more and more wealth. In this way income is redistributed from the needy to the very needy while the bulk of national wealth is transferred to a very wealthy elite. One example of this occurring is in the public housing sector. In 1974-75, which was the last full year of the Labor Government's administration we were spending in that public sector 3.9 per cent of budgetary expenditure. This year the allocation is down to less than one per

1992 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

cent of expenditure. In the public housing sector Government is supposed to be a government

this year some $200m will be spent. In constant which operates in the private interest.

money terms the Government would have to spend $700m this year to equal the money spent in that sector in 1974-75. In other words, in real terms there has been a cut of something like $500m in expenditure in the public housing sector alon~. In the public housing sector this trend is clear.
This Government charges public housing tenants a market rent which imposes hardship on many. It redistributes the rental payments to provide rebates to the very needy to build and to maintain public housing stocks. Under such conditions the quality and quantity of public housing must decline while the housing needs of the people .increase. As a result of the rapid promotion of the investment of public sector housing funds in resource development projects, funds are being squeezed in the public sector housing area as well as in the private sector housing area. I will
examine some Of these figures. I have given some
figUres in regard to public housin% sector, but what is occurring in the private housmg sector?

This Government's policies are directed at the major jugular vein of the whole housing industry. The housing industry is doomed to destruction under the policy of this present Government. It is one of the sacrifices in the development of our resources. The situation is so strange that while the Government is developing resource centres such
as those at Gladstone in Queensland, the Hunter Valley or Lithgow in New South Wales and the Latrobe Valley and Portland in Victoria-places which will boom at the expense of some of the older more stable regions-the housing problem will be so acute that those areas will not be able to be serviced with private sector money. Therefore, at present most people are living under appalling conditions. In an area such as Gladstone, even before this present boom, at least one-fifth of the population was living in caravans or temporary accommodation. People trying to get accommodation consisting of a couple of rooms have to pay up to $100 a week in rertt. Of course this is a result of this Government's policies.

There has been an enormous involvement in resource development in this country. Resource development is the major growth area. This has occurred to such. an extent that at present foreign companies working in the Australian market are drawing at least one-third of their capital on the
a Australian market. Also interest rates on setni"
government authority loans, which are up to record level of between 13.4 per cent and 13.9 per cent, are competing with those offered by the housing finance organisations. Normally, interest on housing loans in the private sector should be in
the vicinity of 11 t per cent for 10ans of $30,000 re-
payable over 25 years. In this situation people investing money have to make up their minds whether to put the money in banksj building

Fewer and fewer people can afford to purchase their own homes. They are thrown out into the private rental market and, with increasing petrol
prices, health and education costs and the higher costs for goods and services, their saving capacity is reduced. In a growing number of cases people on lower middle incomes have an intolerable choice. If they seek to have children they cannot afford a honte. If they seek to give their children a tertiary education they cannot afford adequate health cover. The list of such choices could be made longer. Tlie point is that a much larger groUp of people than that identified by this Government as needy is in need of increased social services.

societies or into semi-government authority loans which in fact are helping to build power stations, which in turn support the corporate sector.

The structural changes resulting from the razor gang's proposals will bring about the fragmentation of the Federation into a group ofcompeting

It is comfilon sense that people will put theit States. Some of these States may be resource rich

money where they wil1 get the greatest return. while others ate resource poor. Some may be bet-

Under this Governmefit's policy they will m.ake ter placed than others to provide hospitals and

their investment either in debentures-foreign health care services and other social facilities. It

cotporations are dding that in relation to resource may be that the so-called States of Western

development-or into semi-government authority Australia and Queensland might be wealthy and

loans which are supporting the resource developable to provide certain services and social facili-

ment. In fact the ihterest rate dn Australian savties. We know that under this Government's new

ings bonds has been raised but in fact, at the policy of anti big government it is withdrawing

present, more money is floWing out of Australian from assistance to the States. The only way we

savings bonds than is flowing into them. The can solve those problems is if the national

interest rate on those is 12t per cent. How will Government co-operates with State and local

people be able to get sufficient money to proceed governments; then we may be able to solve and

with housing in the private sector? After all, this overcome these problems.

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1993

Some States will make progress and some price and quality competition in the domestic

people living in those States may have a better market, fostering production of components and

standard of living than others. I suggest that in the cars in artificially small production runs at high

States of Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania cost, and forcing the consumer to foot the bill; or

the people will suffer a great deal. The State of whether to embark on a program of pre-

New South Wales will probably do much better announced gradual cuts in protection which

than those other three States I have talked about. would not only force the car and component in-

We should not have a country in which we play dustries to compete and to innovate more but also

off one State or individual group or township or would enable them to grasp opportunities for

region against another. As a national government closer international co-operation, rationalisation,

we should be seeking the best co-operation at all cost-effective mass production, and the develop-

levels of government. We should be trying to ment of more fuel-efficient cars.

bring the States together in the national interest.

We should be working with the States and with Australia is well endowed with many resources

local government in a spirit of co-operation. We to manufacture metal products and is well placed

should be seeking the security of the people. The near the rapidly growing Asian market. It is there-

only way in which a national government can fore far from a foregone conclusion that con-

really succeed is when it makes people feel secure. tinued high protection is necessary to secure jobs

This Government's role is not to make people sein the car industry. Indeed, it is possible that with

cure. It is a class conscious, elite government. The a well conceived and rationally implemented

Prime Minister is the most class conscious Prime 1iberalisation program the number of jobs in Aus-

Minister I have known in all the years I have been tralian car making could increase, not necessarily

in politics. His role has been to divert wealth away in car assembly and not in the labour-intensive

from the great bulk of the Australian people to a parts of the production process but in the making

very powerful elite. I am talking here not just .and exporting of metal-intensive and technically

about the needy but also about the great majority more complex parts of a car, for example, engine

of the Australian people. I say quite clearly that blocks, gear boxes and panels. These jobs would

they are the ones who will suffer under this be more productive and secure. They and many

Government. That violent group of people, and I additional jobs in prospering car distribution and

use the word advisedly, calling itself the razor servicing activities in the long run would produce

gang has taken ruthless action against the best higher incomes.

interests of the overwhelming majority of the

Australian people.

If we look at the history of the car industry in

Mr CARLTON (Mackellar) (10.11)-1 have to say that the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) is always consistent in the House. He always pursues a consistently wrong set of assumptions, and his remarks about the motivations of the Government do not find any echo in the motivations of those in the party room of the Liberal and National Country parties. If people in the Government parties held the motivations of which he accused them the Australian people would not have elected governments other than those of the honourable member's persuasion for some three-quarters of the time since Federation. What he said was a grave reflection not on the Liberal and National Country parties but on the judgement of the Australian people over successive elections since Federation.

recent years we find that since 1964 the tariff on completely built-up units in the car industry has risen from 35 per cent to 57.5 per cent. The level of fully built-up imports has risen from less than 5 per cent to a level which has had to be contained by a quota to 20 per cent of sales. If there were not a quota the level would go higher than that. Australian car production as a share of the world's car production has fallen by half. Australia no longer builds any car at anything like efficient levels of scale. It approached those levels before 1964; it no longer does so. The industry's competitiveness in export markets has declined since the early 19705. What that means in simple terms is that if we buy a car at a cost of about $8,000 at the retail level in Australia, we are paying at least $3,000 more than we should for that car. The extra $3,000 paid by motorists-there is an input in every other in-

Tonight I want to talk about industry policy dustry in the country-is caused by this protec-

and in particular about motor industry policy. tion of the manufacturing part of the car industry.

The Australian Government will soon have to That is also done at a cost to employment in the

make a decision on the long term future of tariff servicing and distributive trades. Clearly, if

and quota protection of the Australian car induspeople have to pay $8,000 for a $5,000 car, they

try. The decision really will boil down to a quesare not going to buy as many new cars. There will

tion of whether to continue limiting international not be as many servicing and distributive facilities

1994 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

needed, and employment in that side of the indusof manufacturing industry and at the expense of

try will decline, and indeed has declined.

the whole employment spectrum.

The question is this: Where do we go from here? if the manufacturing and component side of the Australian car industry cannot continue to prosper without a level of assistance higher than 57+ per cent duty, plus a quota which restricts the input component to 20 per cent, what will it ask for? Will it ask for yet higher levels of protection? What will happen if people have to pay $3,500 extra on every $5,000 car? What would happen to the $3,000 or $3,500 if it were spent elsewhere in the Australian economy? The situation is analagous in many ways to the argument over new technology. We can always prove that, in any particular function, when new technology is introduced jobs are lost. Everybody knows that is the case in a particular function. But everybody who has any sense also knows that if we fail to introduce that new technology then jobs are lost over all industries because .our industry becomes less competitive internationally, we sell less overseas, our prices go up, and employment is lost.
So it is with the question of protection. Whilst it can be argued that increasing the level of protection in the motor manufacturing industry might slow down the decline of employment in car manufacturing-one wonders how much more this protection would have to increase it is obvious to anybody who has studied the overall situation that the end result of that will be an overall decline in jobs over the whole economy. I submit in all sincerity that the continuing increases in protection to the motor manufacturing industry are draining jobs in the whole of the Australian economy, that by conceptrating on this particular
area--~
Dr Theophanous--What kind of logic is that? It does not make sense.
Mr CARLTONLook at the nonsense of it. There is 57+ per cent duty, plus a quota, where imports are denied above 20 per cent of total sales. The absolute level of protection overall on a car is 70 per cent plus. Now, is that sense? In order to preserve employment in that inefficient industry there will be requests to increase the level of protection beyond that absurd level. Let everybody ask what the drain on employment in the rest of the manufacturing industry might be. Every other industry has its input costs increased by this tariff on the car industry. Everybody uses cars. Everybody who pays an extra $3,000 on a $8,000 car is paying the cost of m;tintaining the still declining employment in the manufacturing sector of the car industry at the expense of the rest

I urge the Government to look favourably at the draft report on the car industry by the Industries Assistance Commission. It makes modest proposals which will have the overall effect of increasing employment in the Australian economy and reducing by some $2,000 or $3,000 the cost of cars to consumers. That is an extraordinarily important objective. Let everybody who is outside the car industry-perhaps in the rest of the manufacturing industry which is protected to only one-third of the extent of the car industry; everybody in the mining industry who is supporting the car industry; everybody in the rural industries who is supporting the car industry; and everybody in the service industry who is paying $3,000 extra :or a car-question whether this absurd policy should continue and all urge the Government to change this policy and free the whole of the Australian economy from this albatross.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (10.21)-1 have been informed that I can speak only for about five minutes. I do not know what I can cover in that time. It is with considerable sadness and anger that I participate in this debate. I am saddened because we have witnessed in the last few days the nail in the coffin of traditionalliberalism. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) has used his power ruthlessly to push through a series of policies which his sycophantic followers try to tell us constitute liberal philosophy. In fact, the Prime Minister has presented to this House a bastardised liberalism, a grotesque distortion of traditional liberal principles which the Prime Minister and his followers tried to sell us as a genuine philosophy. Yet the principles on which this so-called philosophy are based are totally lacking in cohesion and rationality. They are the product of an obsessive personality. The bankrupt system which the Federal Liberal Party uses in choosing its Ministers has now resulted in an unbalanced personality imposing his will over. all his Ministers who live in fear and trepidation lest their fate be even worse than that of the honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock).
I have made these strong comments about the Prime Minister because it is clear that he has taken certain liberal ideas out of context and has used them as slogans to impose whatever ultraconservative policies suit his vested interests. Thus, for example, today he tried to tell us that it was important to retain the Industrial Relations Bureau because of its role in protecting the rights

Appropriation Bill (No.3)

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1995

of the individual. Yet this is the same Prime Minrelated areas unless revenue is generated to pay

ister who scrapped the Prices Justification Trifor them. Yet the only alternative way of raising

bunal and emasculated the Trade Practices Commoney besides taxing companies and individuals is

mission. Were not these bodies intended to from the profits of publicly owned enterprises. If

protect the individual from rapacious companies? the Government were simply concerned with

The Prime Minister's use of slogans becomes most obsessive when he talks about the public sector and the private sector. We are given Mickey Mouse economics about how the private sector must be given room to expand by reducing the public sector. Perhaps this theory could be de-
scribed as the gas chamber theory of the economy.
r ask honourable members to imagine a chamber
filled with gases; the private sector gas and the

monetarist matters it could balance its Budgets by expanding the public participation in this productive sector of the state. It could join in joint projects with private enterprise in resources and
other profit-making areas so that a decent share of the wealth goes back to the people to pay for services and other functions of the public sector. [ wanted to say something more about this matter but apparently my time has run out.

public sector gas. According to the Treasurer (Mr Question put:

Howard), if we reduce the amount of public secThat the words proposed to be omitted (Mr Willis's

tor gas the private sector gas will increase to fill amendment) stand part of the question.

the chamber. Someone ought to tell the Treasurer that an economy is not a machine and that we are dealing with people, their desires and their aspirations. The trouble with talk about these abstract

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

59

entities-the public and private sectors-is that it

Noes

. 40

is simply fiction to refer to them as unified enti-

ties. For example, the so-called public sector can

Majority

19

be divided into at least five areas which perform

separate functions and relate to the market place,

AYES

to which the Treasurer is fond of referring, in

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D.

entirely separate ways.

Baumc,M.E.

Hyde,J.M. Jarman, A. \V. Jull,D.F.

I wish to say something about these different public, or state sector areas to illuminate the actions of the razor gang and show the obsessiveness to which I referred earlier. Firstly, there

Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M.
Braithwaite, R. A.
Brown,N.A.
Bungey, M. H.

Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar. M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M.

is the so-called productive sector of the state. It is productive in the sense that it provides a service

Burr, M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald

McVeigh, D. T. MacpMe,I.M. Moore,I.C.

which people pay for directly. Examples are Telecom Australia and Trans-Australia Airlines. In this way the state can be said to be engaged in a market replacing function. The state provides a service, people pay for it on the basis of how much

Cameron, Bwcn Cameron, Ian
Carlton, I. I. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P.
Cowan,D.B.
Dean,A.G.

Newman, K. E. NixoD,P.I. O'Keefe, F. L. Porter, J. R. Rocher, A. C.
Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E.

they use and it is run at sufficient profit to fund future capital works and expenses. This is the area of the public sector which the razor gang has been

Dobie, J. D. M. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W. C.

Shack,P.D.
Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. Mce. Spender, J. M.

obsessed with eradicating. Any public sector func-

Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H.

tion which makes a profit must be wiped out in Han, Steele

Street, A. A. Tambling,G.E.J. Thomson, D. S.

the view of the razor gang. Thus we have proposals to sell off profitable sections of Telecom

Harris,G.McD. Hodges, I. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M.

Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.I. Wilson,I.B.C.

and TAA in an attempt to ensure that no profit Howard, I. W.

goes to the public purse from enterprises which

are wholly or partly publicly owned. The ob-

NOES

session which this Government has with selling off profitable sections of public enterprise went so far that even small concerns making several thousand dollars a year were scrapped for the sake of pushing this principle to its absurd limits.
Honourable members opposite talk about the

Armitage, J. L.
Beazley, K. C.
Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell,G.
Cass,M.H.
Charles, D. E.

Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J.
Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Klugman, R. E.
McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les

need to balance Budgets and to ensure that no moneys are spent in education, social welfare and

Child,I. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D.

Mildren, J. B.
Milton,P. Morris,P.F.

1996 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Adjournment

NOES
Cunningham, B. T. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Holding, A. C. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G.
Scholes, G. G. D. Scott,J. L. Theophanous, A. C. West,S.J. WilIis,R.
Youog,M.J.

PAIRS

Drummond, P. H. Connolly, D. M.

Darling, E. E. Innes, V. E.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Debate interrupted.

ADJOURNMENT Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER~~Order! It being past 10.30 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr Thomson-I require that the question be put forthwith without debate.
Question resolved in the negative.

APPROPRIATION BILL (No.3) 1980-81 Second Reading
Consideration resumed. Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.

Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Thomson) read a third time.

APPROPRIATION BILL (No.4) 1980-81 Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 1 April, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.

Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Thomson) read a third time.

ADJOURNMENT Alleged Breach of Public Service Code of Conduct-Tax Avoidance-International Year of Disabled Persons-Member for Macarthur Motion (by Mr Thomson) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.

Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (l0.38)-In answer to a question placed on notice by me on 26 March 1981 relating to a possible breach of the Public Service Code of Conduct by a senior officer of the Department of Health, the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) in providing the following information made four points. The first was that Dr D. J. McKay, head of the Bacterial Products Section of the National Biological Standards Laboratory, attended a scientific conference in the United States of America in October 1980. The second point was that the Minister understands-his words-that all Dr McKay's expenses and fares were paid by Johnson and Johnon Pty Ltd. The third point was that Johnson and Johnson manufactured 80 per cent of the tampons sold in Australia. The fourth point was that Dr McKay, shortly after his return, supervised the Department's research into the toxic shock syndrome.. Potentially, at least, there does seem to be a possible conflict of interest. I draw attention to the principles in the Code of Conduct for public servants. Principle 3, which is the general provIsion, states:
An officer should avoid situations in which his private interest whether necessary or otherwise, might reasonably be thought to conflict with his public duty.
Principle 8 states:
An office holder should not:
(c) Except as may be permitted under the rules applicable to his office, accept any gift, hospitality or concessional travel offered in connection with the discharge of the duties of his office.
It does seem to me that there are, therefore, real signs of a conflict of interest in this situation. The Minister denies any conflict of interest. The reason for so denying that conflict of interest was provided in his answer, as follows:
The association of tampons with the toxic shock syndrome has been recognised only recently and was not a matter of concern in Australia at all when the invitation to the USA was accepted in April 1980.
It seems to me that this excuse is almost wholly specious. I say that firstly because toxic shock and tampons were discussed in the Australian Press as early as February 1980 and in the United States Press in 1979. Johnson and Johnson certainly was aware of the connection when the conference was planned. Indeed one might suggest that the conference was probably designed to soften up any possible government investigation into a matter affecting its reputation and profitability.
Dr McKay should have been aware of the scientific debate that was taking place. Even if he was unaware of that debate in April 1980, Dr McKay and his Department must have become

Adjournment

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1997

aware of the toxic syndrome debate between that date and the conference in October. The Department of Health referred to the issue in official literature published in July 1980. Therefore, clearly there was an opportunity to reconsider the wisdom of the trip and refer it along the lines recommended in the guidelines. Honourable members may be aware that the guidelines provide for disclosing and referring actual or potential conflicts of interest.
It seems to me that unless the Minister can provide some satisfactory answers to the following questions then he seems to have condoned a breach of these recent but proper guidelines for the conduct of public servants. First, is it normal departmental practice to accept all expenses paid trips to further scientific knowledge? Secondly, did the Minister actually confirm that Johnson and Johnson paid for the trip? The phrase he used is 'it is understood'. Thirdly, was the trip referred to the Oversea Visits Committee, which is a method of providing a check on conflict of interest in these situations? Fourthly, was Dr McKay away for longer than the time needed to travel over and back for the conference on 16 and 17 October 1980? Finally, are there disclosures on the Department's conflict of interest declarations register? It seems to me that it is necessary for the Minister to provide somewhat more satisfactory answers to that series of questions than we have been given to date in this House.
Mr FALCONER (Casey) (l0.42)-On 30 April, last Thursday, the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) incorporated in Hansard a list of names of persons who were registered in Victoria as having assigned debts to others. The honourable member was drawing attention to a practice of using assignment of debts for the purpose of avoiding taxation obligations. A constituent of mine included in the list, Dr Bertram Wainer, contacted me by telephone and asserted very strongly that he had been done an injustice by having his name so included. He was concerned that his action had been misrepresented under parliamentary privilege. He stated that his assignment of debts was not for the purpose alleged by the honourable member for Gellibrand and asked whether some action could be taken to set the record straight. I suggested to Dr Wainer that if he supplied me with a statement setting out his defence I would be happy to read is into Hansard on his behalf. He wrote the following letter:
Dear Mr Falconer,
Further to our phone conversation of 1/5/81, I have arranged for the barrister who drew up the assignment of debt

agreement to confirm the nature of my instructions to him. I enclose a copy of that letter.
This should make it clear that Mr Willis distorted my position in his statement to Parliament on 30/4/81, and as a result I have had my reputation damaged unjustly.
I rang Mr Willis twice on Friday to explain the true situation to him although I was able to speak to his secretary only. I then sent him a telegram in which I indicated that his assumptions concerning my sale of debt were wrong. I pointed out that a simple enquiry to me or a more thorough investigation by himself would have protected my reputation and saved him some embarrassment.
If, when you have read the enclosed letter, you are satisfied that I have not attempted to avoid tax in the manner described by Mr Willis, I would be grateful if you would put the records straight by so informing Parliament.
1 would like to quote verbatim the text of the letter which has been supplied by Dr Wainer's legal adviser. It states:
We refer to our instructions in this matter with respect to the debts due to you by Katanne Nominees Pty Ltd, in the amount of $53,833 and Bewaine Nominees Pty Ltd, in the amount of $159,830 which were assigned by you to Jan Richardson on the 11th June, 1980 and the consequent steps thereon including steps taken to register such Assignment with the Registrar General in order to comply with requirements of the Instruments Act. We confirm that the book debts were not in any way related to the gaining or deriving of income by either yourself or any other entity either through business activities or through the conduct of any professional practice. We also confirm that the Assignment or Transfer of t~e book debts was in no way actuated or predicted by any desire to avoid or minimise liability to income tax.
We confirm that the Assignment was effected for the purpose of preserving certain family assets from attack by a Judgment Creditor who was the successful litigant in libel action against you. Fortunately the Judgement Creditor was prepared to wait until you realised certain other assets and were in sufficient funds to satisfy the sums due to him.
I point out that there are some dangers in assuming that all assignments of debts are for the purpose of avoiding tax, although it would appear to be a reasonable assumption where the assignment is between husband and wife. An assignment of debts can be used for purposes other than an avoidance or minimisation of taxation liabilities. It may be only in a minority of cases but it means that each case about which an allegation is made ought to be thoroughly checked out. I give a hypothetical example. Mr A owes $10,000 to Mr B, Mr A is owed $20,000 by Mr C but is having trouble collecting the debt. Mr A then says to Mr B: 'Will you take over the debt of $20,000 owed to me in settlement of my debt to you of $10,000?' Mr B then takes a calculated business risk on being able to collect the $20,000 and accepts assignment of that debt in settlement of the $10,000 he is owed. I raise this matter in fairness to a constituent who was named under parliamentary privilege, who has asked me as his member to ensure that his version is set straight in the parliamentary record.

1998 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Adjournment

Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (10.46)-1 wish to draw attention to the appalling lack of response by the Federal Government to the fact that 1981 is the International Year of Disabled Persons, or IYDP. The Government has been strong in rhetoric in support of IYDP but slow in action. I would like to give an example of one case of inaction. Concern has been expressed by some of my constituents about the continuation of the funding of the Education Program for Infants and Children, known as EPIC. The Education Program for Infants and Children is a structured early intervention teaching program to accelerate the development of intellectually handicapped children so that they can achieve their maximum potential and remain within the normal range of activities. The program was first approved in 1975 with the support of Commonwealth funding and since that date has grown to be a highly regarded and successful venture.
r sincerely hope that it is not the intention of
the Government to use the cut throat and despicable recommendations of the razor gang as an excuse for cutting the funds for EPIC. Intellectually disabled children do not have the same opportunities as other groups in the community to speak up for themselves and to apply pressure to government. It is essential that educational facilities be provided for these children at an early age. The funding for EPIC runs out at the end of June. The Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) has refused to guarantee a continuation of that funding.
It is appalling that in the International Year of Disabled Persons the Minister cannot give that guarantee. He has refused to do so despite an undertaking given to the honourable member for Chifley (Mr Armitage) by the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) that 'in recognition of the needs of disabled persons, the Government has decided to introduce a special program under which aids to daily living will be available to the disabled'. An amount of $700,000 has been allocated by the Department of Health for wheelchairs, electrolarynxes, medical wigs and other aids to daily living for the disabled for the period April to June 1981. This program has not yet been implemented. I understand that the Department is developing administrative procedures with a view to introducing the new program later this year. It is not surprising that disabled people are beginning to wonder whether the Government has any real regard for their problems and needs. It would appear that the Government has lost sight of the fact that the Australian Bureau of Statistics has estimated that at anyone time nearly 50 per cent of Australian people are

physically or intellectually handicapped. In tliis International Year of Disabled Persons I call on the Government to honour its obligations to disabled people in general and, in particular, I call on the Minister for Social Security to ensure that the funding for the Education Program for Infants and Children be continued after 30 June 1981.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (IO.SO)-The bulk of last week's personally insulting speech about me by the honourable member for Kalgoorlie (Mr Campbell) does not merit a reply. But there are some matters of fact that require correction in case someone mistakenly considers the honourable member for Kalgoorlie to be an authority whose unsubstantiated assertions are worthy of repetition. The honourable member alleged that I earned a rare accolade-I underline that expression-as a journalist in that my file at John Fairfax and Son Ltd was marked 'never to be re-employed' .
This is wrong on two scores. Firstly, like all senior Fairfax employees who leave to go to rival newspaper groups the understanding was that I would not be re-employed by any editor within the group without reference to the general manager of the Fairfax organisation. This is the universal rule. I left the senior position of investment editor of the Australian Financial Review as a super A grade journalist to go to the Bulletin magazine as finance editor under, I might say, the distinguished editorship of the honourable member for Wentworth (Mr Coleman). I went on a contract, I might say, at a higher salary than that paid for the super A grade position that I had held at the Fairfax organisation. As a result, I was in the same category for re-employment as, I understand, all former senior journalists at Fairfax.
Today I checked with the general manager of John Fairfax and Sons Ltd on that matter. I have never seen my file but I now know that no examination of my file would support the allegation of the honourable member for Kalgoorlie or its implications. If the honourable member has seen my personal file perhaps he would let me know whether this is true because I believe what the general manager says. So, there is no rare accolade.
There was a rare accolade in another respect. I was on the State executive of my union for some time while employed at John Fairfax. After I went to the Bulletin as finance editor I gave detailed evidence for that union-the Australian Journalists Association-before the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission, which evidence helped result in a major increase in journalists' wages. I was an active, energetic and

Adjournment

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1999

successful member of that union. I was a sufficiently senior journalist in Australia to end up earning more disposable income in real terms than I now receive as a member of parliament. I hope that the honourable member for Kalgoorlie is held in sufficiently high esteem by his former trade or profession for this to be true of him also. If so, I certainly will not be seeking to denigrate him for any success he may have had.
I advise the House of another fact. When the honourable member for Kalgoorlie had completed his first unsuccessful attempt to blackguard me last Thursday night he come over to the seat next to mine in this place and, in the hearing of the honourable member for Bradfield (Mr Connolly), said in a threatening tone: 'You'll keep; you are scurrilous'. I do not intend to take this thuggery further. All I wish to point out to the honourable member for Kalgoorlie is that this kind of behaviour will not serve his best interests in this House, nor will this kind of behaviour ever serve to intimidate me. Mr Deputy Speaker, I thank you for the opportunity to deny some of the details of the matter raised by the honourable member. I believe the rest of his speech-I could hardly say 'stands'-slips into the mire on its own.
Mr CAMPBELL (Kalgoorlie) (10.54)-In reference to the rare accolade on the file of the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) I think inevitably truth will out on that issue. I do not intend to pursue that any further. I was given the information on very good authority. Obviously, I had not seen the file. But I was told about the matter on very good authority and I was prepared to believe that there was some substance to it. However, on the matter of the conversation I had with the honourable member, it started off in good humour. It degenerated a little. Certainly, the terms of the conversation I had with him were not those stated by the honourable member. As to the honourable member for Bradfield (Mr Connolly), I suspect he has faulty hearing. But if we were to put the matter to the test and if the public were asked to choose between the word of the honourable member and mine I suggest that I might come off very well indeed.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
House adjourned at 10.55 p.m.
NOTICE
Notice was given amending Notice No. 72, General Business, to read:

72 Mr B. O. Jones: To move-That this House(1) is concerned at the failure of the Government to com-
prehend the economic significance of recent developments in biotechnology; (2) draws the attention of the Government to the March 1980 report to the British Government entitled Biotechnology made by a joint working party of the Advisory Council for Applied Research and Development (ACARD), the Advisory Board for the Research Councils, and the Royal Society, chaired by Dr Alfred Spinks, CBE, FRS, and the report to the Prime Minister of France entitled La Biotechnologie, Demain? made by Jean-Claude Pelissolo on behalf of the General Delegation on Scientific and Technological Research, and the various reports made to the US. Administration by the National Institute of Health, and the 1980 report of the Australian Academy of Science entitled Recombinant DNA: An Australian Perspective, and (3) calls on the Government to set up a Joint Parliamentary Committee on Science and Technology, with terms of reference, inter alia, which would empower it to investigate the significance for biotechnology in Australia, including(a) its economic potential in manufacturing, (b) its economic potential as a supplier of raw
materials, (c) its employment impact on the pharmaceutical
and chemical industries, and (d) related ethical problems such as the implications
of genetic engineering, aging and cloning.
PAPERS The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 5 May 1981:
By command of His Excellency the Governor-General: Audit Act-Report of the Auditor-General upon audits,
examinations and inspections carried out under the Audit and other Acts, dated 30 March 1981-Erratum slip to paper presented on 31 March 19,81. Pursuant to statute: Air Navigation Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 77. Australian National University Act-StatutesNo. 146-Enrolment, Courses and Degrees Amendment
No.13. No. 147-Academic and Ceremonial Dress Amendment
No.9. Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation Act-
Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 78. Lands Acquisition Act-Statements (2) of lands acquired
by agreement authorized under sub-section 7 (I). Parliament Act-Proposal, together with site plans, for the
construction within the Parliamentary Zone of car parks and security lighting. Public Service Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 79. Seat of Government (Administration) Act-Regulations 1981-No.9 (Motor Traffic Ordinance).

2000 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Drought Assistance
(Question No. 335)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 4 December 1980:
(1) What were the Commonwealth/State drought financial arrangements in (a) 1964 and (b) 1977 and what are they at present.
(2) What are the measures of assistance provided by each State as at 1December 1980.
(3) What criteria are applied by each State in assessing eligibility for drought assistance.
(4) What criteria are applied by the Commonwealth in giving approval for State measures of drought assistance.
(5) What is the usual delay in the time taken for a farmer or grazier to be granted carry-on finance and the remainder of the concessions referred to in part (2) in (a) New South Wales (b) Queensland and (c) Western Australia.
(6) Has the New South Wales Government pressed the Commonwealth Government to introduce an unemployment scheme for areas affected by drought; if so what was the Government's response.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) (a) There were no Commonwealth/State drought financial arrangements in 1964.
(b) Commonwealth assistance to the States in respect of drought relief has been provided under the natural disaster relief arrangements since 1970-71. Under these arrangements the States receive Commonwealth financial assistance for expenditure incurred on relief and restoration measures in cases of drought and other natural disasters such as cyclones, floods, storms and bushfires. The arrangements recognise the States' primary responsibility for the administration, provision and funding of relief measures, the Commonwealth's role being confined to providing financial support when the cost of relief assistance goes beyond amounts originally set to reflect a State's financial capacity.
Under the arrangements operative in 1977, the Commonwealth met the full cost of expenditure incurred by each State on specified relief and restoration measures in respect of

major disasters once such expenditure exceeded, in total, established annual base amounts for each State. These arrangements which had applied since 1970-71, were modified in 1978-79 by doubling the States' annual base expenditure amounts and by providing for eligible expenditure in excess of those amounts to be funded on a $3 Commonwealth to $1 State basis. The changes made were designed to take account of the effects of inflation and the considerably wider range of measures eligible for Commonwealth assistance since the basic arrangements were first introduced.
Further details relating to the arrangements are contained in 1977-78 Budget Paper No.7 (pp 87-89) and 1980-81 Budget Paper No.7 (pp 79-80).
(2) I am unable to give full details of the measures of drought relief assistance provided by each State, since it is open to the States, in line with their overall responsibility for the provision and administration of natural disaster relief, to provide whatever forms of assistance they regard as appropriate, and the States need not inform the Commonwealth of measures unless eligibility for Commonwealth assistance is sought. However, those measures of assistance provided by each State which attract Commonwealth assistance under the natural disaster relief arrangements are set out in the followingtable.
(3) and (5) As the Commonwealth is not involved in the detailed administration of relief assistance provided by the States, the information requested is not available.
(4) Many factors are taken into account in considering requests from the States for changes to existing drought relief measures and for the introduction of new measures. Requests are not assessed against rigid criteria but are considered on a case-by-case basis taking into account the whole drought situation. Relevant factors include the length and severity of the drought, the effectiveness and equity of the proposed measures (including their compatibility with sound farm management), and the cost they would place on the community.
(6) The New South Wales Government sought Commonwealth agreement to the inclusion, as an eligible measure under the natural disaster relief arrangements, of an unemployment relief scheme in drought-affected areas. The request was not agreed to; the Commonwealth already provides assistance to the unemployed through unemployment benefits, and drought relief assistance provided through carry-on finance for primary producers has effects flowing through to other sectors thereby assisting to maintain activity and employment. It remained open to the New South Wales Government to provide additional assistance if it so decided.

DROUGHT RELIEF MEASURES AVAILABLE UNDER THE NATURAL DISASTER RELIEF ARRANGEMENTS AS AT 1 FEBRUARY 1981*

Measure

New South Wales Victoria

Queensland

South Australia

Western Australia Tasmania

CODcessionalloans Ca) Carry-on loans to primary producers

Maxium of $20,000 (increasing (0 S40,000 one year after area in-
itially drought declared), repay-
able over up to 7 years, including discretional repay~ ment holiday of up to 2 years, at 4%rate of interest

Maximum of
$15,000 repayable over up to 7 years at 4% rate of interest for first year then subject to review annually

Maximum of $20,000 for each property ($30,000 in special circum~ stances), repayable over up to 7 years, including discretional repayment holiday of up to 3 years, at 5% rate of interest

Maximum of $15,000 repayable over up to 10 years, including discretional repayment holiday of up to 2 years, at 5% rate of interest

Maximum of $20,000 ($30,000 for farmers experiencing drought during the years 1976-80), repayable over up to 7 years including discretional repayment holiday of up to 2 years, at 4% rate of interest

Maximum of $20,000 at 5% rate of interest during the first six months of drought reducing to 3% if drought exceeds 6 months and subject to further review

Answers to Questions

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2001

Measure

New South Wales Victoria

Queensland

South Australia

Western Australia Tasmania

(b) Restocking loans to primary producers
(e) Loans for purchase of fodder
(d) Loans for supply of water (e) Carry-on loans for small businesses

Maximum of $30,000, repayable over 7 years, in~ eluding discretional repaym.ent holiday of up to 2 years, at 4% rate of interest
Loans to dairy companies, repayable over up to 5 yeats, to finance fodder for their suppliers. (No maximum advance to companies but the same limit ali on carry-on loans to primary producers applies for each supplier)

Included in carry-on loans

Maximum of 520,000 for each
property ($40,000
in exceptional circumstances), repayable over 7 years, including
discretional repay-
ment holiday of up to 3 years, at 5% rate ofinteresl

Two-thirds of cost to local authorities of augmentation of town water supplies. Similar
terms and con-
ditions as apply to carry-on loans for primary producers Maximum of $40,000 for each applicant; similar terms and conditions as apply to primary producers

Included in carry-on loans

Maximum limit at
discretion of State,
repayable over up
to 10 years, induding discretional re~
payment holiday of up to 5 years, at 4% rate of interest; terms subject to periodic review; available only for
purcha,<;e of rams
and ewes. Limited
assistance for other restocking is ineluded in carry-on loans

Maximum of $40,000 for each
applicant; similar
terms and conditions as apply to
primary producers

lncluded in carry-on loans

Freight concessions

(a) Stock movement--
(b) Fodder

Rail: 60% con-
cession; Road: 60% concession of approved standard rates or actual cost (whichever is less) for total distance travelled, provided journey exceeds 30 km; rail to be used in preference to
road As above

Rail: 50% concession; Road: 50% concession of transport costs less first 60 km. Applies to and from agistment only
As above

Rail: 75% concession; Road: 75% concession up to maximum of
50c/km per loaded
cattle deck
Rail: As above; Road: 75% concession of loaded cost up to maximum of 12c/t/km (hired carrier)

Rail and Road: 50% concession. Applies to and from agistment only. (Road to be used only where rail not available)
As above

Rail and Road: 50% concession. Applies to and from agistment only
Rail: 50% concession (maximum $IO/t on hay); Road: Concessions of wheat 6cft/km, and hay 50% of equivalent rail cost up to maximum of $1O/t. 100% conceSSIon on transport of donated hay and grain

50% concession, Applies to and from agistment only
As above

2002 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Measure

New South Wales Victoria

Queensland

South Australia

Western Australia Tasmania

(c) Water to primary producers
(d) Water to State, local or semfgovernment authorities (e) Machinery and equipment Stock slaughter subsidy to primary producers Stock disposal subsidy to State, local or semi-government authorities Other Subsidies Water
Other

Private vehicle: SO% concession of assessed operating costs, as agreed between Commonwealth and State for transport to properties; Carrier (where no suitable private vehicle available): SO% concession of approved standard freight rates for journeys involved
$IS/head for cattle more than S months old and owned for at least 3 months $l/head for cattle; ISc/head for sheep
Subsidies to local authorities and certain other or~ gamsations for the costs of providing emergency water supplies to primary producers based on existing facilities and reasonable additional costs (not major capital works)

100% concession of transport costs to central distribution points
$10/head for cattle more than S months old and owned for at least 2 months $I/head of stock slaughter subsidy available to primary producers may be retained by local authorities to cover expenses Subsidies for cost of providing communal water bores

75% concession up to maximum Sc/t/km for cartage including onto property
7S% concession of transport costs to town water supply 50% concession on cost of transport of machinery and equipment essential to drought relief to affected farms or where fodder available $\0/head for cattle more than 5 months old and owned for at least 3 months $l/head for cattle
75% concession on cost of purchasing water for town water supplies
25% concession on contract droving charges or $IS/day if using family or hired labour

50% concession of transport costs to central distribution points
$\o/head for cattle more than 5 months old and owned for at least 2 months $l/head for cattle; ISc/head for sheep

As above

100% concession of transport costs to central distribution points, within 40km of affected farms

$\0/head for cattle more than S months old and owned for at least 2 months $I/head for cattle; ISc/head for sheep

Subsidies for cost of equipping any sources of water, obtaining water from standpipes, development of emergency stock water sources. Details are subject to Commonwealth/State agreement

Subsidies to Shires 50% concession on

for cost of works cost of agistment of

assisting farmers to breeding stock;

clear fence lines, 50% subsidy on

dams and water cost of grain for

catchments filled feeding breeding

with soil due to stock (maximum

wind erosion. Deof 20c per breeding

tails are subject to ewe, or its

Commonwealth/State equivalent, per

agreement

week)

- The relief measures eligible for Commonwealth assistance in relation to drought are not uniform among the States, reflecting the fact that the States, in line with their overall responsibility for natural disaster relief, propose to the Commonwealth specific measures of assistance considered appropriate for the conditions prevailing in their own areas. Certain measures shown in this table are approved measures for Commonwealth assistance under the natural disaster relief arrangements for the present drought only.
.. Freight concessions for stock movement apply to movements to and from agistment, to forced sale or slaughter and to restocking movements unless otherwise specified.

Arcata Investments Pty Ltd
(Question No. 453)
Mr Willis asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the sale by the Receiver for Cambridge Credit Corporation Limited of a property on

the Gold Coast for $350,000 which was re-sold one month later for $650,000.
(2) If so, is it a fact that (a) the 1979 annual report of the company to which the Receiver sold the property, namely Arcata Investments Pty Limited, showed that it had a paid up capital of only $2 and an excess of liabilities over assets of more than $1 million, (b) directors stated that the company was unable to meet its liabilities and (c) a demand for payment had been received from a secured creditor.

Answers to Questions

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2003

(3) Were documents filed with the Commissioner for Corporate Affairs in New South Wales relating to Arcata Investments Pty Limited by the accounting firm Hungerfords, of which tbe Receivers of Cambridge Credit Corporation Limited are partners.
(4) Is there a possible conflict of interest in this situation.
(5) Is he concerned that the Receiver would enter into such a transaction with a company in such a dangerous financial position and enable that company to make an immediate profit of $300,000 when than additional sum could have been obtained for the Cambridge creditors by the sale only one month later to a reputable company.
(6) Will these practices be prevented by the operation of the new Companies and Securities legislation; if not, will he amend the Bill to ensure that these practices do not occur in future.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1)-(6) I understand that both the companies referred to by the honourable member are incorporated in New South Wales. As such they come within the responsibility of the New South Wales Attorney-General. I have asked my Department to draw this question and my answer to the attention of the New South Wales Corporate Affairs Commission. I would also draw the honourable member's attention to an answer given by the New South Wales Attorney-General.
Psychiatric Hospitals and Nursing Homes
(Question No. 502)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
For the last year for which figures are available, what was the cost to State Governments of (a) acute pscyhiatric hospitals (term as used in the Jamison Report) anti (b) State Government nursing homes.
Mr MacKellar--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Acute psychiatric hospitals and State Government nursing homes are outside the Commonwealth/State hospital costsharing arrangements and therefore the Commonwealth has no direct financial data available on their cost of operation. However, State authorities have provided the following information.
The net costs of operation for 1979-80, after allowing for the payment of nursing home benefits by the Commonwealth and the insurance organisations, and for personal contributions by patients, are-

State

Psychiatric hospitals

Nursing homes

(b) Approximate figures only.
(c) Separate figure for acute psychiatric hospitals not available as they form part of mental health services institutions or wards in public hospitals.
Underwater Sensor Devices
(Question No. 506)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 February 1981:
(I) Over what period was Operation Flowerless conducted and when did it conclude.
(2) How many (a) Australian and (b) United States of America ships and personnel were involved.
(3) Were facilities on Christmas Island used in the operation; if so, what were they and what functions did they perform.
(4) Were facilities in Western Australia used in Operation Flowerless; if so what were they and what functions did they perform.
(5) As a result of Operation Flowerless have any underwater sensor systems been established on (a) Christmas Island, (b) the west coast of Australia, (c) any other portion of Australian territory or within (d) Australia's exclusive economic zone (or fishing zone) and (e) Australian territorial waters.
(6) If not directly a result of Operation Flowerless are there nevertheless underwater sensor devices and/or connected shore stations on Australian territory or in waters under Australian control; if so, where and what purpose do they serve.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Project Flowerless, a scientific research project, started in 1971 and finished in 1978.
(2) (a) Three RAN ships were involved. It is difficult to determine the number of Australian personnel involved during the seven year life of the project. In addition to the ships' companies, it is estimated that a total of 110 man years of scientific effort was involved.
(b) No USA ships were involved, but three US oceanographers, on scientific exchange to the RAN Research Laboratories, were involved for brief periods on the project.
(3) Yes. A vacant building was used to house instruments; other small buildings were used for storage and workshops and other logistic support such as transport and accommodation.

New South Wales Victoria
Queensland South Australia
Western Australia Tasmania

$000'5 106,277(a)
25,000(b) 34,344 21,081 8,482
not available(c)

$OOO's
6,942 24,200
1l,074 2,621 12,956
5,590

Commonwealth nursing home benefits paid on account of patients in State Government nursing homes in 1979-80 totalled $78 million.
Notes-(a) Figure includes $83,144,029 for psychiatric hospitals and $23,133,047 for mental retardation hospitalsAcute and long stay patients are accommodated in both psychiatric and mental retardation hospitals.

(4) No.
(5) and (6) For obvious security reasons I will not provide answers that would confirm or deny whether Australia has underwater sensor systems for operational purposes. For equally sound reasons I would not provide an answer to the Honourable Member's Question 6. Suffice to say that if such systems were in operation they would be under Australian control, and would be serving Australia's defence interests.
Question 5 (a), specifically concerning Christmas Island, raises however the issue of claims over the past year or so about US involvement in Operation Flowerless and of a military installation on Christmas Island. These claims are without foundation. I will state now that there is no underwater sensor system at Christmas Island.

2004 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Visit by United States Nuclear Powered Submarines

(Question No. 508)

Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence

upon notice, on 24 February 1981:

'

(1) What were the names and dates on which United States of America nuclear powered submarines visited HMAS Stirling in (a) 1978, (b) 1979, and (c) 1980.

(2) Is he able to state how many USA nuclear powered attack submarines have operated in the Indian Ocean: if so, how many.

(3) Is he also able to state whether, and if so where and on what dates, any of these submarines which visited HMAS Stirling called on other ports in the Indian Ocean region in (a) 1978, (b) 1979, and (c) 1980.

Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) (a) There were no visits to HMAS Stirling by nuclear powered submarines during 1978.

(b) and (c) The following visits took place in 1979 and 1980.

Name of submarine

Dates ofvisits

USSTunny
US Pintado
USSHaddock
US Los Angeles
US Guardfish USSPuffer
US Baton Rouge
USSTautog USSGroton .. USSPermit
USSOmaha .. US Philadelphia

19-27 April 1979
20-25 October 1979 26-1 April 1980 1-7 Apri11980
19-26 May 1980 18-25 July 1980 25-30 July 1980 13-19 August 1980 6-11 September 1980 11-16 September 1980 10-17 November 1980 23-29 December 1980

(2) and (3) The honourable member's questions relate to the operations outside Australian waters of the warships of one of Australia's allies. I suggest that he dircct his inquiries to
the appropriate United States authorities.

Nugan Hand Bank
(Question No. 660)
Mr Willis asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 3 March 1981:
(l) Has th~ Nugan Hand Bank or any of its employees ever approached hiS Department with regard to gaining or substantiating applications by foreigners for Australian residency; if so,
(a) how many times did the Bank approach his Department,and
(b) when were these approaches made?
(2) What grounds were given in support of the applications?
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes, in regard to the substantiating of applications,
(a) three
(b) March 1979 (one case), May 1979 (two cases).
(2) In each case the approach by Nugan Hand Ltd consisted of a letter to the effect that a certain amount of money

was held as a fixed deposit by a client of that company and that Nugan Hand Ltd understood that the amount was to be used for investment purposes in Australia.
Movement of Soviet Naval Ships
(Question No. 671)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 3 March 1981:
What is the reason that he is unable to provide detailed information on (a) the movement of Soviet naval ships in the North, West and South Pacific and (b) the movement of Naval vessels in the Persian Gulf, the Gulf of Oman, the Gulf of Aden, the Arabian Sea, the Red Sea, the Eastern Mediterranean and the Black Sea referred to in parts (2) and (3) of the tables accompanying his answer to question No. 66 (Hansard, 25 February 1981, pagc 198).
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
It has been possible to compile and release information on Soviet naval movements in the Indian Ocean in some detail because of the nature of that area. Transit through well defined entry and exit routes, port calls and other sightings during prolonged deploymcnt or passage, give maritime authorities relatively ready access to information about the Soviet naval presence in the area.
(a) Information on the movement of Soviet naval ships in the North and West Pacific comes to us primarily from friendly nations and is provided to us under the understanding that its composition be protected. I am sure that the honourable member will appreciate the sensitivity of such undertakings. My answer to the honourable member's question No. 66 addressed the South Pacific situation. There was no Soviet naval activity there during the period in question.
(b) Because of arrangements of the kind referred to in (a), it is not possible to provide the honourable member with a detailed analysis of Soviet naval activity specifically within the Persian Gulf, Gulf of Oman, Gulf of Aden and the Arabian Sea. However, the information previously provided on Indian Ocean activity, because of the geography of the area, takes in naval ship movements in these peripheral waters. Soviet naval movements in the Eastern Mediterranean and the Black Sea, being of less direct strategic concern to Australia, arc not analysed in detail by my Department.
Television Services for the Hearing Impaired
(Question No. 749)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 10 March 1981:
(1) Was the Department of Social Security represented at a mecting concerning Television Services for the Hearing Impaired held on 10 October 1980.
(2) If so, what follow-up action has been taken by the Department to implement the recommendations of that meeting that (a) special funding be provided and a National Captioning Centre be set up, (b) decoders be provided for eligible hearing-impaired individuals through the Department of Social Security'S Rehabilitation Service, (c) research be initiated into problems and options for the introduction of a captioning service and (d) a policy rcgarding the standardisation of a video text technique be adopted.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

Answers to Questions

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2005

(1) Yes.
(2) No formal recommendations were adopted at the meeting which took the form of exploratory discussions concerning captioned television for the hearing impaired.
In answer to the specific questions:
(a) See the answer of the Minister for Communications to Question No. 744.
(b) Before any decoders could be usefully supplied, it would first be necessary for a uniform closed captioned television system to be adopted. Once such a system was established, the Commonwealth Rehabilitation Service (CRS) would be in a position to consider providing decoding devices to eligible disabled persons who, having been accepted for treatment and training by the CRS, are assessed as requiring such a device in order to improve their capacity for independent living. However, it must be emphasised that the CRS does not have the charter to provide such devices to the community generally.
(c) and (d) See the answer of the Minister for Communications to Question No. 744.

Commonwealth Office Space
(Question No. 783)
Mr Uren asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
Further to his answer to question No. 178 (Hansard, 24 February 1981, page 74) what is the proportion of office space occupied by the Commonwealth, whether leased or owned, in the central business district in (a) Sydney, (b) Melbourne, (c) Brisbane, (d) Adelaide, (e) Perth and (f) Hobart.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL OFFICE SPACE LOCATED IN CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS
(As at March 1981)

Sydney

12.8

Melbourne

18.7

Brisbane

5.4

Adelaide

4.1

Perth

3.6

Hobart

1.5

(Note: Figures are for office space used by civil departments and the Department of Defence. Statutory authorities are not included.)

Fremantle Class Patrol Boat
(Question No. 838)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 12 March 1981:
(1) Did his Department inform the Defence Sub-Committee on the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence on 25 July 1979 that the lead Fremantle Class Patrol Boat would be commissioned in July 1979 and delivered in Australia in November 1979 and that the 14 follow-on craft were scheduled to be delivered progressively between October 1980 and February 1985.
(2) If so, when was the lead craft (a) commissioned, (b) delivered in Australia and (c) accepted for effective service.
(3) Have any of the follow-on craft been delivered; if so, on what dates.

Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes. However on 20 September 1979 I advised the House that HMAS Fremantle would be late and would not arrive in Australia until 1980.
(2) (a) 17 March 1980; (b) 11 August 1980; (c) 8 April 1980.
(3) Yes; HMAS Warrnamboolon 13 March 1981.

Government Procurement Policies

(Question No. 847)

Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 24 March 1981:

(1) Has his attention been drawn to the ABC radio

program PM of 11 February 1981, in which the recipients of a

national award to small businessmen were critical of Govern-

ment procurement policies.

.

(2) Will he make a commitment to implement any form of positive discrimination in favour of small business in his Department's future procurement activity, given the potential contribution of small business, both to the alleviation of unemployment and to the economy generally.

Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) Yes.

(2) Defence purchases are made in accord with the Government's procurement policies which are administered by the Minister for Administrative Services the Hon. Kevin Newman, M.P. Accordingly, I am unable to make a unilateral commitment to implement any form of positive discrimination in favour of small business through the Department of Defence's future procurement activity. However, I would point out that the Government has taken a number of positive measures to assist Australian industry through Government procurement including the adoption of its policy ofpreference to Australian made goods. I also understand that the Department of Administrative Services is consulting with the small businessman reported in the PM radio program of 11 February 1981.

Department of Employment and Youth Affairs: Apprentices
(Question No. 880)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
(1) How many employers have taken advantage of the Government's offer of a $1,000 bonus to employ additional apprentices.
(2) How many new apprentices have been employed under this scheme.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) As at the end of February 1981, a total of 9,738 employer claims had been approved for payment of the $1,000 rebate.
(2) The number of apprentices in respect of whom the $1,000 rebate has been approved for payment totalled 11,761 at the end of February 1981.
(A difference exists between these two figures because some employers engaged more than one additional new apprentice

2006 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Answers to Questions

under the scheme. Thus, a single employer claim could involve payment in respect of several additional apprentices.)
Cultural and Sporting Exchanges
(Question No. 902)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 25 March 1981:
What sum was expended by the Commonwealth Government in support of Australian cultural and sporting exchanges from 1970 to 1980.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Total Commonwealth Government expenditure in support of Australian cultural and sporting exchanges from 1970 to 1980 was $22,445,000.
Development in the Dandenong Ranges, Victoria
(Question No. 929)
Mr Milton asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 26 March 1981:
(I) Does the development now proceeding in the Dandenong Ranges, Victoria, represent a threat to a valuable remnant of the National Estate.
(2) If so, will he call for an environmental impact statement on the effect of the development work.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Australian Heritage Commission has entered a number of places in the Dandenong Ranges in the Register of the National Estate. However, the development now proceeding is within the jurisdiction of the Victorian Government and is therefore unaffected by this listing made by the Australian Heritage Commission.
(2) I am unaware of any proposed Commonwealth Government action in the Dandenong Ranges which would fall within the ambit of the Commonwealth Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act and which would necessitate the preparation of an environmental impact statement.
Department of Trade and Resources: Television Advertising
(Question No. 933)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(l) What sum was spent on television advertising by his Department and Instrumentalities under his control in 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred during the months of (a) December 1979 and (b) January 1980.
Mr Anthony--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Department of Trade and Resources and Instrumentalities under my control did not incur any expenditure on television advertising during 1979-80.

Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs: Television Advertising
(Question No. 949)
Mr Mountford asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(1) What sum was spent on television advertising by his Department and instrumentalities under his control in 1979-80.
(2) What proportion of this expenditure was incurred during the months of (a) December 1979 and (b) January 1980.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Nil.
(2) Not applicable.
Disarmament
(Question No. 958)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(l) Has the United Nations Secretary-General Waldheim proposed an allocation of 0.1 per cent of defence budgets to work on arms control and disarmament.
(2) If so, is he able to say which nations have declared an acceptance of this principle.
(3) Will his Department have a Disarmament Section to help increase Australia's contribution to the UN Committee on Disarmament, to prepare proposals for an extended nuclear free zone in our hemisphere and to inform the public on conflict and peace studies.
(4) What contributions has Australia made to techniques of verification of nuclear, chemical and other disarmament.
(5) Has the Government assessed the value of P'eace Studies Centres in Scandinavia, Holland and other middle powers.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) In his statement on23 May 1978 at the opening meeting of the first special session of the United Nations General Assembly to be devoted to disarmament, the UN Secretary General suggested in general terms that as a purpose and goal the world should devote to national and international disarmament efforts one million dollars for every thousand million currently spent on arms.
(2) So far as I am aware, no state has specifically declared that it will accept this suggestion.
(3) The Department of Foreign Affairs has aN uc1ear Policy and Disarmament Branch which is responsible for assisting in the formulation of recommendations on the Government's policy in all arms control and disarmament matters, on preventing the spread of nuclear weapons, and on Australian participation in international organisations dealing with nuclear and arms control subjects, including proposals for nuclear weapons free zones.
The Department of Foreign Affairs seeks to encourage public understanding of foreign policy issues, including arms control and disarmament subjects. Each year the Department arranges for wide distribution of the annual report of the Australian delegation to the Committee on Disarmament after the report has been presented to the Parliament.
(4) The Government is firmly of the view that effective means of verification are essential to any arms control or disarmament measures.

Answers to Questions

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2007

During consideration of the nuclear test ban treaty item in the Committee on Disarmament last year, the Australian delegation proposed that the Committee on Disarmament could begin addressing the technical and operational aspects of an international seismic detection network even before it addressed the more substantive aspects of the treaty itself. This proposal was designed to minimise any possible delay between the conclusion of a multilateral treaty and the creation of the institutional framework which would be necessary to support the verification procedures. The Australian delegation put forward an outline covering the legal basis for an international seismic monitoring system, the administrative and financial aspects for such a system, as well as the problems relating to access and to distribution of information. Also in the field of verification, Australia has played an active part in the work of the Committee on Disarmament's ad hoc Group of Scientific Experts, which is charged with considering international cooperative measures to detect and identify seismic events.
The Australian delegation to the Committee on Disarmament has also played an active role in the Committee's consideration of a convention banning chemical weapons, where we have stressed the importance of making provision in a convention for strict and workable verification procedures. An Australian scientist has participated in the meetings of the Committee's working group on chemical weapons, which is considering the issue of verification.
(5) The Government gives strong support to the goal of disarmament and maintains a continuing interest in the contribution of Peace Studies Centres and other bodies which are active in the disarmament field.
Prohibited Imports
(Question No. 969)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 31 March 1981:
(1) Further to his answer to a question without notice from the member for Griffith on 26 March, 1981 (Hansard, page 957) concerning a parcel sent to the Premier of Queensland, did the Premier, his office, or any agent of the Premier, contact him, any official of the Bureau of Customs, his Department, the Prime Minister or any official of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet to (a) complain about the interview by Customs officials, (b) request any course of action, and (c) inquire into whether prosecution would be made.
(2) Has prosecution been recommended; if so, will prosecution proceed.
(3) Ifit will not proceed, why not.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) (b) (c) Neither I nor any officer of my Department has received any complaint about the interview by Customs officials, request for any course of action or inquiry into whether prosecution would be made. I am not aware of any representations to the Prime Minister or any official of the Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet.
(2) and (3) Prosecution has not been recommended. No evidence has been found to suggest that the Premier of Queensland was in any way responsible. Inquiries are still proceeding into the circumstances of the shipment of seeds to Australia.
Immigration: East Timorese
(Question No. 986)
Mr Howe asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:

(1) How many persons who were part of the agreed list of 600 have been permitted to migrate to Australia from East Timor.
(2) What barriers exist to prevent the remaining persons coming to Australia during 1981.
(3) Is he considering any extension of the list to cover the original 2,668 persons nominated.
(4) Will he send a special delegation to Dili to facilitate the completion of the family reunion scheme.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) 343 Timorese from the list agreed in 1978 between the Australian and Indonesian Governments have arrived in Australia to date.
(2) The remaining persons on the agreed list will be granted entry visas for Australia following lodgement of applications at the Australian Embassy in Jakarta and satisfactory completion of health and character screening. It is understood that those remaining in Timor may be experiencing difficulties in securing permission to leave for Jakarta, and others who have successfully obtained entry visas for Australia are still awaiting the grant of exit permits by the local authorities.
(3) Relatives of Australian residents not included in the agreed list are eligible for consideration under normal family reunion or other migration policies. More than 200 Timorese not on the agreed list have arrived from Indonesia. In addition, more than 650 relatives have arrived under specially relaxed entry rules applying some years ago and about 2,000 otherwise ineligible Timorese are expected to qualify under the special humanitarian program which I announced last October. This program provides for the entry of relatives of Australian residents who were outside Timor at the end of September 1980.
(4) There are some difficulties in the way of sending a special migration mission to Dili to process applications from the remaining persons on the agreed list. Applicants could present themselves for consideration only with the cooperation of the local authorities and permission to move within and from Indonesia is similarly within the control of the Indonesian Government. I emphasise that movement of Timorese on the agreed list to Australia resumed last year and is continuing.

Appointments to Statutory Authorities Under the Minister for Industry and Commerce
(Question No. 1008)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
What are the (a) names, (b) dates and terms of appointment and (c) salaries of all persons appointed to the Boards and Commissions of Statutory Authorities under his jurisdiction.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

AUSTRALIAN TOURIST COMMISSION

Name

Date of appoint-
ment

Term Salary

Captain R. J. Ritchie, CBE. (Chairman)

1.7.79

2 years

$ 10,675

2008 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Name
Mr M. R. H. Matthews (Deputy Chairman)
Mr F. N. Bennett (Departmental Representative)
Mr D. C. Beresford Mr E. E. Falk, OBE. Mr J. M. Gothe Mr P. A. Graham Mr N. J. Semmens Miss L. Zafiris

Date of appoinl-
menl

Term Salary

$

1.7.80 2 years

5,725

5.9.79 In accordance with

S6 (9) of the ATC

Act an officer of the

Commonwealth

Public Service holds

office during the

pleasure of the

Governor-General

1.7.79 2 years

4,300

1.7.79 2 years

4,300

1.7.80 2 years

4,300

1.7.80 2 years

4,300

1.7.80 2 years

4,300

1.7.79 2 years

4,300

Appointments to Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Defence
(Question No. 1013)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 1 April 1981:
What are the (a) names, (b) dates and terms of appointment and (c) salaries of all persons appointed to the Boards and Commissions of Statutory Authorities under his jurisdiction.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is contained in the following table:

STATUTORY BODIES

Appointee

Appointment date Term

Remuneration

Chairman RADMD. W. Leach, CBE., M.V.O.
Members CDRED.J.Orr CMDR J. H. Speed, D.S.C. LCDR V. W. Powell - .

RAN ReliefTrust Fund-Trustees
June 1980
May 1981 June 1980 July 1979

continuous
continuous continuous continuous

Chairman RADMD. W. Leach, CBE., M.V.O.
Members CDRE D. J. Orr
CAPT D. M. Coulson, RAN MrT.J.Keely
WOMTH J. H. R. Wilton Secretary
CMDR R. Bushnell

RAN Central Canteens Board
June 1980
May 1981 March 1981 September 1977 June 1980
May 1981

continuous
continuous continuous continuous continuous
continuous

Chairman Mr C. Keon-Cohen
Members AVM B. H. Collings, A.F.C.
Mr C. B. Campbell

RAAF Veterans Residences Trust
May 1964
March 1981 January 1978

continuous
continuous continuous

Chairman AVM B. H. Collings, A.F.C.
Members Mr C. B. Campbell, M.B.E., LL.B. Mr B. Gerrard PAC J. S. Elliot, A.M. Mrs D. R. H. Hillmen WOFF A. L. Miller
Chairman BRIG1. W. R. Brumfield, D.S.O.
Members Col (Ret) C. C. Hall Mr C. B. Hazen

RAAF Welfare Trust J<'und
March 1981
February 1977 December 1955 July 1974 July 1974 November 1980 Australian Military Forces ReliefTrust Fund
February 1980
August 1970 July 1977

continuous
continuous continuous continuous continuous continuous
Not exceeding two years but may be reappointed
continuous continuous

Answers to Questions

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2009

Appointee

Appointment date Term

Remuneration

Australian Services Council for Canteens (ASCO)

Chairman AVM R. E. Trebilco
Members MAJGEN J. C. Hughes, D.S.O., M.C. MAJGEN A L. Morrison, AO., D.S.O., M.B.E. MAJGEN D. F. W. Engel, OBE. RADM D. W. Leach, CBE., M.V.O. CDRE D. D. Miller CDRE I. McL. Crawford AVM B. H. Collings, A.F.C. AIRCDRE R. R. Y. Candy, A.M. MrG.J.Betts Mr A. G. Taylor . . . . .

April 1981
March 1981 April 1981 July 1976 January 1980 January 1980 March 1981 April 1981 June 1980 March 1976 July 1977

Not specified
Not specified Not specified - Not specified Not specified Not specified Not specified Not specified Not specified Not specified Not specified

$5,725 $4,300

Chairman Mr G. J. Betts
Members Mr A G. Taylor
MrH.E.Kay
CMDR H. C. W. Morey
COL F. P. Scott, D.S.O.
AIRCDRE R. R. Y. Candy, A.M.
MrD.A.Hort
Mr G. L. Bartlett . . . . .

ASCO Board ofManagement
January 1977
January 1977 June 1977 January 1980 May 1979 April 1980 March 1976 June 1976

Not specified
Not specified Not specified Not specified Not specified Not specified Not specified Not specified

The Services Canteens Trust Fund-Trustees

Chairman MAJGEN R. R. Gordon, CBE., D.S.O., E.D.
Members GPOFF C. G. Stevenson, M.B.E. Mr C. R. Eggleston Mr J. A K. Wicks Miss D. M. Langley, M.B.E. CAPT T. E. Nave, OBE., R.N. (Ret) CDRE D. H. D. Smyth, AO., R.A.N. (Ret)

February 1973
July 1947 March 1976 July 1947 September 1975 July 1976 January 1976

Not specified
Not specified Not specified Not specified Not specified Not specified Not specified

Chairman Mr R. C. Davey
Members Mr R. B. Finnegan
AIRCDRE J. A Jacobs
BRIG I. R. W. Brumfield, D.S.O.
CDRE D. J. Orr

DFRDB Authority July 1976 July 1980 January 1980 February 1980 May 1981'

. 7years
Not exceeding 2 years but may be reappointed Not exceeding 2 years but may be reappointed Not exceeding 2 years but may be reappointed Not exceeding.2 years but may be reappointed

Chairman Mr R. C. Davey
Members MrJ.Ford Mr R. B. Finnegan
AIRCDRE J. A Jacobs
BRIG I. R. W. Brumfield, D.S.O.
CDRE D. J. Orr

DFRBBoard
July 1976 January 1978 July 1980 January 1980 February 1980 May 1981

7 years
Not specified Not exceeding 2 years but may be reappointed Not exceeding 2 years but may be reappointed Not exceeding 2 years but may be reappointed Not exceeding 2 years but may be reappointed

2010 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Housing Costs, Western Australia
(Question No. 1038)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 2 April 1981 :
(1) What is the average cost of building a house at (a) Kununurra, (b) Karratha, (c) Carnarvon, (d) South Hedland and (e) Broome, Western Australia.
(2) What is the average price of a block of residential land in each of these places.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Too few private houses are constructed in these areas to allow a reliable estimate to be made of the differences in average building costs. Costs wiII vary considerably with the design, inclusions, equipment provided and so on. The table below shows recent tender prices for standard State Housing Commission of Western Australia (SHC) houses.

Location'

Average housecost*

Kununurra Karratha
Carnarvon South Hedland
Broome

$ 50,100 36,800 34,600 35,500 45,700

* Standard SHC 3 bedroom rental welfare house of mi~i
mum internal standard of fittings. Does not include air conditioning, shutters, carport or garage, and other items which might be included in privately built houses. Excludes land costs.

(2)-

Location

Average price*

Kununurra Karratha
Carnarvon
South Hedland Broome

$ 12,000 20,000 10,000 13,000 12,000

- SHC and ?epartment of Lands and Surveys data. Averages based mamly on prices paid for single residential blocks at recent auctions. It should be noted that these average prices
do not reflect the considerable variation in the price of land in an area.

Antarctic Service: Salaries

(Question No. 1046)

Mr Holding asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:

(1) What regulation is used in requesting an applicant employed by the Government to take a lower salary while in the employment of the Antarctic Division.

(2) Who was responsible for implementing this regulation, what was the reason and from what date did it take effect.

(3) Who has the final authority to implement this regulation to pay lower salaries.

(4) Has this regulation resulted from restrictions to

Government budgetary support to the Antarctic Division' if

so, what are the details.

'

(5) Has his attention been drawn to the hardship this practice can cause to successful applicants for positions stationed in Antarctica, in particular during the period they are employed by the Division before their departure to Antarctica.
(6) Have there been any instances in each of the last 2 years where successful applicants have been paid at the salary rate applying to their previous position, even though that rate is higher than the salary for the position held in the Antarctic Division; if so, how often has this occurred and what was the reason in each case.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Salary scales for Antarctic expeditioners are set by the Public Service Board. The scales are shown in advertisements in the National press and persons accepting employment do so on the basis of the advertised salaries. A person who normally received a salary higher than the range quoted may be appointed to a salary at the top of the range.
(2) The Antarctic Division must conform to usual Public Service practice.
(3) The Public Service Board has the final authority as regards pay and conditions ofservice.
(4) This policy has always obtained. It has not come about because of any budgetary restrictions.
(5) The Antarctic Division is aware that the salary paid in Australia before and after duty in Antarctica may cause some difficulty. Advertisements calling for applications to join Antarctic expeditions clearly state the salary scales which apply to each employment category, both in Australia and in Antarctica. It can be pointed out that an expeditioner maintaining a home elsewhere is paid an allowance while stationed at the Antarctic Division Headquarters in Australia.
(6) There have been four cases in the last two years where Antarctic expeditioners have been paid at the former salary rates although this was higher than the advertis~d rate. This situation only occurs when no other suitable applicant is available and only when the Public Service Board is satisfied that such employment is in the national interest. The four men concerned were permanent Government employees, were well qualified and experienced in categories where difficulties
to in recruiting were experienced. To secure their services which
were critical the expeditions the offers of employment included maintaining their substantive salaries. These arrangements had the approval of the Public Service Board.
It should be noted that officers who accept duty in Antarctica do so voluntarily.
Rodeos
(Question No.IOS7)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for the Capital Territory, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) Was he correctly reported in the Canberra Times of 15 March 1981, which stated that he claimed that the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals was satisfied with the controls applied to the conduct of rodeos.
(2) Is there a discrepancy between his reported comments and those of the President of the RSPCA (ACT) Inc. reported in the Canberra Times of 29 March 1981 where she is reported to have stated unequivocally that the RSPCA (ACT) Inc., is opposed to the holding of rodeos and that to the organisation rodeos are an unnecessary form of entertainment where suffering is likely to be caused; if so, what is the rea~OI). for the discrepancy.

Answers to Questions

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2011

Mr Hodgman--The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) The facts are that I was interviewed by the media, including the Canberra Times at Gold Creek in March 1981. Acting on the advice given to me-which I had personally confirmed-I stated that the National Rodeo would operate under the very strict rules of the Australian Rough Riders' Association which called for the rodeo stockist to invite the local RSPCA to inspect the stock to be used and the conditions under which they were kept and maintained. I was assured that the stockist for the Gold Creek National Rodeo-who is a highly respected and most experienced stockist-would be in contact with the Canberra RSPCA well before the rodeo and that the condition of the stock would meet the approval of that organisation.
I further stated that, as a horseman of many years standing, and an animal lover, I believed the rules of the Australian Rough Riders' Association to be the strictest in the world.
At no stage during the interview did I comment on the view of the RSPCA on rodeos generally. What I did say was that I was satisfied that the RSPCA would, itself, be satisfied with the condition of the stock to be used in the National Rodeo and the conditions under which they would be kept and maintained prior to and during the actual rodeo. It was pointed out, and this was reported in some of the media, that qualified and experienced veterinary surgeons would be in attendance during the rodeo; that no cruelty would be tolerated; and lastly, that the Australian Rough Riders' Association rules provided for heavy fines to be imposed in the event of even the smallest technical infringement by any rider or competitor.
The only other comment I would like to make is that I believe rodeos do form part of our national history and heritage and, properly conducted, I believe they are acceptable to and supported by a very substantial number of citizens of this country.
United States Navy: Home Porting at Cockburn Sound
(Question No. 1064)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the article headed 'Defence to decide on new fighter by October' in the Australian Financial Review, of31 March 1981, page 7.
(2) If so; with respect to the statement regarding the defence briefing of journalists being part of a new program to provide more information on Defence activities and issues, (a) how often will these press briefings be held and (b) what is contained in the rest of this program.
(3) Did his Department attempt to defuse expectation that United States of America home porting at Cockburn Sound, WA, was likely in the near future; if so, (a) in what terms was this done and (b) does he fully endorse the position taken by his Department.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2) (a) Briefings will be conducted, at least fot a trial period, at monthly intervals.
(b) The description of the defence briefing as 'part of a new program' is that of the newspaper, not the Department of Defence. The briefings are simply one initiative in the continuing process of informingthe public of Defelice activities.

(3) The briefing was intended to clarify the status of the home porting proposals:
(a) by re-affirming that the initiative for further discussions rested with the Government of the United States.
(b) Yes.
Productivity ofPublic Sector
(Question No. 10(5)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 7 Apri11981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the report by the Bureau of Industry Economics entitled 'Features of the Australian Service Sector'.
(2) If so, is he concerned by the findings of the report that conventional measuring techniques appear to understate service sector productivity by as much as 53 per cent.
(3) Is this reported error reflected across the broad spectrum of service sector industry and in particular does it extend to services provided by the public sector.
(4) If the Government has under-estimated the productivity of the public sector, will it take steps to re-order its manpower priorities which currently discriminate against the Government's own employees.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2), (3) and (4) The Bureau ofIndustry Economics' report 'Features of the Australian Service Sector' considers two measures of labour productivity. Using the conventional measure of labour productivity, labour input is assumed to be number of persons employed. The alternative measure uses hours worked as the labour input component. The Bureau's report indicated that, using the alternative measure, labour productivity growth was higher for all sectors. For the service sector, all industries at the ASIC division level showed higher productivity using the alternative measure. The higher productivity was in the main, a result of the increased incidence of part-time work over the period considered, 1966-67 to 1976-77. To the extent that part time work has increased in the public sector, it could be anticipated that labour productivity in the public sector would be higher using the alternative measure.
Commonwealth Offices in Whyalla, South Australia
(Question No. 1074)
Mr Wallis asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) Are there any plans to construct Commonwealth offices in Whyalla, South Australia, to accommodate the various Commonwealth Government departments operating there.
(2) If so, when is it anticipated that the plans will be put into effect.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Timing for implementation will be determined within overall priorities established in accordance with budgetary considerations.

2012 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Australian National Line
(Question No. 1077)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 Apri11981:
(1) What has been the annual profit or loss of the Australian National Line since 1972-73.
(2) Where a percentage dividend was paid by the Australian Shipping Commission to the Government, in which years was it paid and what was the quantum of that dividend.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The annual profits or losses of the Australian National Line since 1972-73 have been:
1972-73-$2,613,362 1973-74-$1,692,754 1974-75-$9,952,801 loss 1975-76-$9,440,020 loss 1976-77-$3,889,000 1977-78-$5,692,000 1978-79-$4,708,000 loss 1979-80-$7,989,000 loss
(2) The Australian Shipping Commission, since 1956, has paid dividends as follows:
($'000) 1956-57866 1957-58-1,952 1958-59-1,971 1959-60-1,971 1960-61-1,971 1961-62-1,971 1962-63-1,971 1963-64-1,971 1964-65-1,546 1965-66-2,151 1966-67-2,151 1967-68-2,151 1968-69-1,075
Australian National Railways
(Question No. 1079)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
What were the average annual rate increases of the Australian National Railways Commission for (a) bulk movements of (i) coal and coke (ii) grains and (iii) iron ore and (b) general containerised cargo since 1972/73.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) Bulk Movements

Commodity

Date of Percentage increase increase

(i) Coal and Coke (Coal, Leigh 1.12.74

42.1

Creek to Port Augusta)

1.7.76

4.3

12.12.77

29.6

1.7.78

12.8

1.7.79

25.9

1.7.80

9.3

Being equivalent to an average annual rate increase of 14.6%.

(ii) Grain " . . . . . . 1.6.74

10.0

1.12.74

15.0

1.2.77

7.5

Commodity

Date of Percentage increase increase

1.11.78

4.5

1.11. 79

10.0

1.12.80

17.0

Being equivalent to an average annual rate increase of 7.8%.

Note: Increases in grain rates prior to 1.7.75 relate to the former South Australian Railways. No grain was carried on former Commonwealth Railways lines.
(iii) Iron Ore: No iron ore has been transported on Australian National Railways Commission lines since the cessation of traffic between Frances Creek and Darwin in December 1974.
(b) General Containerised Cargo: Increases in these charges varied between routes. The following are indicative of the level of increases applied.

Date ofincrease

Percentage increase
AdelaideMelbourne

Percentage increase
AdelaidePerth

1.9.73 1.8.74 1.7.75 1.2.76 1.8.76 29.8.77 1.3.78 1.9.78 1.3.79 1.9.79 1.3.80 1.9.80 1.3.81

5

5

5

IS

20

10

10

7

7

2.5

5

5

3

3

4

5

5

5

8

8

8

5

5

Being equivalent to an average annual rate increase between Adelaide and Melbourne of 7.5% and between Adelaide and Perth of 12.2%. Note: These increases in charges for general containerised cargo relate to Intersystem traffic, rates for which are determined in consultation with other rail systems under the auspices of the Railways of Australia Committee.

East West Airlines: Concession Air Fares
(Question No. 1086)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 7 April 1981 :
(1) Has his attention been drawn to recent news reports that East West Airlines is granting old age pensioners a concession air fare of 40 per cent discount.
(2) Has he approved this discounted air fare; if so, on what date was approval given.
(3) Is the discount which is being granted a social discount and is he able to state whether the East West Airlines passenger or the population of Australia at large is to incur the dilution of revenue.
(4) Did the Holcroft Inquiry Report indicate that the cost of social discount should be borne by the Australian population at large.
(5) If so, has he instructed the officers of his Department at the next investigation of East West Airlines's costs (for an increase in air fares) to disregard the dilution of revenue in calculating the new air fare.

Answers to Questions

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2013

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) On 27 February 1981, I approved the introduction by East West Airlines of a 'Golden Pairs' concession fare under the following conditions, proposed by the airline
the fare is only available to two persons aged 60 years or over travelling together
Apex rules and conditions would apply, which includes a seven day prepayment period in the case of East West Airlines
travel must take place during the period 8 March to 23 August 1981
the fare is available on all East West Airlines routes except Norfolk Island
the fare is sold at a 40 per cent discount as compared with 30 per cent on the normal Apex fare.
(3) The discount is offered by the airline as a commercial discount. The airline advised at the time of its application to introduce the fare that it did not anticipate any dilution of existing revenue as travelin the age group involved is minimal, so that few existing passengers would be qualified to transfer to the new fare category from other fare types.
(4) As the honourable member will be aware, the Holcroft Inquiry addresses the provision of social discounts in paragraph 16.14 (page 244 of volume 1) of its report. The paragraph reads as follows:
The regulatory authority must prescribe those discounts which favour particular classes of travel at the expense of other travellers.
16.14 These discounts, which are referred to as 'social discounts' are not seen as an imposition by the regulatory authority but are a recognition of certain customary practices by the community. The classes of traveller to be favoured by these discounts and the extent of the discount should be defined. These discounts should be strictly limited to those travellers for whom the community has accepted the need for concessions.
(5) The impact of this fare, along with all other factors affecting East West's costs and revenue will be examined in the normal manner.
Departmental Air Travel: Department ofPrime Minister and Cabinet
(Question No. 1126)
Mrs Darling asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 7 April 1981:
(1) How many travel warrants have been issued for his Departmental officers' air travel to and from Canberra during (a) 1976-77, (b) 1977-78, (c) 1978-79, (d) 1979-80 and (e) 1980 to 31 March 1981.
(2) What was the total cost of this travel.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) Records maintained in my Department are not in a form which provides the particular detail sought and 1 am not prepared to authorise use of the resources which would be required to identify that detail. Departmental records show:
Travel warrants for all domestic air travel, ie. not just for travel to and from Canberra, numbered:
1,250 in 1976-77; 2,340 in 1977-78; 1,150 in 1978-79; 950 in 1979-80; 900 in 1980-81 (to 31 March 1981).

Expenditure on air fares for travel within Australia incurred by my Department from 1 June 1976 to 31 March 1981 amounted to $496,931.
The above figures include travel by non-departmental staff, eg, consultants and members of committees of inquiry and task forces.
Upgrading of Federal Highway
(Question No. 1182)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 8 April 1981:
What is the estimated date of completion of the (a) 8 km of upgrading of the Federal Highway referred to in his answer to Question No. 601 (Hansard, 2 April 1981, page 1328), (b) upgrading of the Federal Highway to Collector, NSW, and (c) Federal Highway to the ACT border.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) Of the 8 km of the Federal Highway referred to in Question No. 601 (Hansard, 2 April 1981, page 1328), the 6 km to Roses Lagoon will be completed by June 1981 and remaining 2 km to Willow Tree Creek involving bridge works, will be completed by June 1982.
(b) December 1984.
(c) Although duplication of the carriageway may not be provided throughout, major upgrading works to the ACT border will be completed by December 1988.
Curfew at Eagle Farm Airport, Brisbane
(Question No. 1191)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 8 April 1981 :
(1) Is the Government considering lifting the curfew at Eagle Farm Airport, Brisbane, Queensland.
(2) In what ways will the redevelopment of the airport affect the curfew.
(3) Are there continual violations of the curfew both in the evening and early in the mornings.
(4) What are the penalties for curfew violations.
(5) What are the procedures for reporting violations.
(6) What checks are made on aircraft landing or taking off close to curfew times.
(7) How many violations of curfew have been reported in each year from 1976-77 to 1979-80 and during the period 1 July 1980 to 7 April 1981.
(8) How many reported violations have been (a) investigated and (b) confirmed.
(9) What penalties have been imposed in these cases of curfew violation.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No.
(2) The curfews will remain on the runways at the existing site. The runways at the redeveloped site will not be curfewed.
(3) No-a violation is defined as an unapproved take-off or landing outside the conditions of the curfew.
(4) There are no penalties for unapproved operations.
(5) and (6) A list of operations by aircraft subject to the curfew and operating between 11 pm and 6 am is maintained and checked at regular intervals by the Department of

2014 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Answers to Questions

Transport. If an unapproved operation occurs an explanation is sought from the operator.
(7) There is no evidence of any unapproved operations for the period I July 1976 to 31 December 1977. For the period 1 January 1978 to 30 June 1978 there was one unapproved operation. For the period 1 July 1978 to 30 June 1979 there was one unapproved operation. For the period 1 July 1979 to 30 June 1980 there were no unapproved operations. For the period I July 1980 to 7 April 1981 there was one unapproved operation.
(8) (al All flights by aircraft subject to the curfew and operating during the curfew are investigated. (b) Three.
(9) No penalties have been imposed.
Recruitment: Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 1285)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
Were any staff of his Department or statutory authorities under his aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No.
Recruitment: Department of Finance
(Question No. 1294)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Were any staff of the Department of Finance or statutory authorities under the Minister's aegis recruited through private employment agencies in 1979-80; if so, for what position and at what cost.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
No.
Industrial Action: Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 1380)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(I) How many officers or employees in his Department have been (a) on strike and (b) engaged in go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions, in each of the last 2 years.
(2) How manymanhours were involved in these actions.
(3) Were any officers or employees on strike action paid by the Commonwealth during the strike; if so, on what occasions.
(4) Were any pay reductions or disciplinary actions taken in respect of officers or employees on go slow, work to regulations or other restrictive work actions; if so, on what occasions.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
As information for the March 1981 quarter is not yet available the information given below relates to my Department as

specified in the Administrative Arrangements Orders for the calendar years 1979 and 1980.
(1) 1979 (a) 337, (b) Nil; 1980 (a) 329, (b) 91.
(2)(a) Estimated manhours lost due to strike action:
1979-1,000 I 980-Nil
(b) Estimated manhours lost due to other industrial action:' 1979-1,500 1980-2,600
(3) No.
(4) One officer was stood down for various periods between 27 July and 2 August 1979. Pay was deducted for each occasion.
Overseas Travel: Department of Primary Industry
(Question No. 1446)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) How many officers and employees of his Department travelled overseas on official business during 1979-80.
(2) What was the total cost of the travel, including fares, accommodation, allowances, etc.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1)42.
(2) Cost to the Department was $163,518.
Head Office, Department of Foreign Affairs
(Question No. 1497)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister of Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Are any sections of the Head Office of his Department not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many staff in each.
Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so, when.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
There are no sections of Head Office of my Department located in areas other than Canberra.
Head Office, Department of Science and Technology
(Question No. 1510)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Are any sections of the Head Office of his Department not located in Canberra; if so, what are the sections and how many staff are in each.
(2) Is it planned to relocate these sections in Canberra; if so, when.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) In general the Head Office elements of my Department are located in Canberra. However the Head Office of the Bureau of Meteorolgy is in Melbourne and the Headquarters of

Answers to Questions

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2015

the Antarctic Division is in Hobart. Part of the Working Environment Division is in Melbourne.
(2) The remaining elements of the Working Environment Division are under notice to transfer to Canberra this year. There is no plan to relocate any other elements.
Recycling of Paper: Department of Trade and Resources
(Question No. 1571)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
Has any action been taken by his Department to re-cycle paper; if so, what action.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Cleaning contracts for my Department which include waste paper collection are under the control of the Minister for Administrative Services to which this question should be directed.

Inspection of Vessels at Australian Ports
(Question No. 1649)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
How many vessels at each Australian port:
(a) have been inspected under the Grain (Export) Regulations; and
(b) have required treatment for: (i) rodent infestation (ii) insect infestation (iii) both rodent and insect infestation; and
(iv) other reasons
during the period 1 January 1979 to 31 December 1980.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The table below details the number of ships inspected under the Exports (Grain) Regulations for the period I January 1979 to 31 December 1980 by port; the number requiring treatment for:
(i) rodent infestation (ii) insect infestation (iii) both rodent and insect infestation; and (iv) the removal of previous cargo residues and
contaminants.

Port
Gladstone Brisbane Newcastle Sydney Geelong Portland Adelaide Ardrossan Port Giles Wallaroo Port Pirie Port Lincoln Thevenard Esperance Albany Bunbury Fremantle/Kwinana Geraldton
Total

Treated for

Total in-
spected Rodents

Rodents and
Insects insects

49

6

178

35

136

20

134

30

215

36

60

8

64

29

32

6

12

4

55

14

76

16

49

14

68

22

43

16

76

8

30

11

135

40

97

39

1,509

2

354

Other reasons
5 12 12 34 64 12 15 9 4 23 30 17 10 6 8 2 17 3
283

Armed Services Use ofTrained Dogs
(Question No. 1655)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
(1) How many dogs and of what breeds, were being trained or used by the Armed Services as at 30 June 1980.
(2) For what duties were they being used.
(3) What salary and special allowances are paid to dog handlers.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) RAN-13 German Shepherd; Army-32 German Shepherd, 1 Doberman Pinscher; RAAF-150 German Shepherd.
(2) RAN-Physical Security Patrol Duties; ArmyPhysical Security Patrol Duties/Explosive Detection Duties (Mine Dogs); RAAF-Physical Security patrol Duties.
(3) RAN-Leading Seaman Level 4-$11967 pa plus $1551.6 pa service allowance (No special allowance); Army-Guard Dog Handlers-There is not a specific employment category for Army Security Guards/dog handler and pay raies are those which applied prior to their training and employment in the role. The salary range extends from Private on Pay Levell ($11240) to Sergeant on Pay Level 4

2016 REPRESENTATIVES 5 May 1981

Answers to Questions

($14822). There is no special allowance; Mine Dog Handlers-These may be on one of three grades:
(a) Sapper Pay Level 4-$13,076
(b) PrivatePayLeveI4-$13,314
(c) Corporal Pay Level 4-$ 13,698
Mine dog handlers are paid an unpredictable Explosives Allowance at the rate of $15 per incident up to a maximum of $90.00 per month. This allowance is under review; RAAF: RAAF dog handlers (Security Guards) are on Pay Level 3 and their salaries range from Aircraftsman ($12464) to Sergeant ($13574). No special allowances are paid.
Foot and Mouth Disease
(Question No. 1660)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Did any Royal Australian Navy vessels load foodstuff in New Zealand immediately after the public announcement by the New Zealand Government of an infection in pigs which might have been foot and mouth disease.
(2) If so, (a) did the victualling include any dairy or meat products, (b) what checks were made by Defence officials with the Department of Health prior to such victualling and (c) what was the route of the vesselleaving New Zealand.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes; HMAS Jervis Bay and HMAS Vampire.
(2) (a) Yes.
(b) The High Commission in Wellington was consulted before foodstuffs were embarked. In addition, Australian Quarantine officials were informed of the facts on the ships' return. Full clearance was given.
(c) Both ships departed Wellington and returned direct to Australia.
Armed Services Accommodation Blocks
(Question No. 166)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What accommodation blocks for the Armed Services constructed during the last five years do not have fire detection systems.
(2) Are there plans to instal such systems in these blocks.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Accommodation blocks at the following establishments constructed during the last five years, do not have fire detection systems:
a. Army-Infantry Centre, Singleton Officer Cadet School, Portsea No. I Military Hospital, Yeronga.
b. RAAF-RAAF Edinburgh, RAAF Pt. Cook, RAAF Kingswood.
(2) There are no plans to instal fire detectors' in these blocks.
Fire Extinguishers
(Question No. 1662)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

What action has been taken by his Department concerning the finding by the Department of Housing and Construction reported in the 1979-80 Annual Report of the Commonwealth Fire Board, that self-contained automatic halon gas fire extinguishers installed in fume cupboards where acid chemicals are used deteriorate rapidly.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I understand that the Commonwealth Fire Board, which includes a representative from my Department, has not completed its investigation of revised specifications for fume cupboards.
Until the Commonwealth Fire Board's overall findings on the matter are known, my Department is not proposing to take unilateral action.
Brisbane International Airport
(Question No. 1683)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 Apri11981:
What action has been taken on the undertaking by the former Minister for Transport that the Government would give early special consideration to cost recovery aspects of the development costs of Brisbane International Airport (Hansard 22 November 1979, page 3402).
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The aviation industry sought and was given an undertaking that Government would not consider the cost recovery aspccts of the redevelopment of Brisbane Airport until industry had expressed its views on this matter.
Detailed and lengthy discussions have been held with the industry on the matter. At the conclusion of these discussions, however, it was decided to adhere to the traditional method of cost recovery in respect of the redevelopment of Brisbane Airport.
Immigration: Forged Trade Qualification Documents
(Question No. 1739)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
What was the country in which the alleged migration racket involving forged trade qualification documents was centred as reported on page 53 of Review' 80 published by his Department.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The country referred to was Korea.
Cost to Commonwealth of Visits to Norfolk Island
(Question No. 1862)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
What were the costs to the Commonwealth of the visit of (a) the Director, Australian Heritage Commission and (b) 2 officers of the Australian War Memorial to Norfolk Island in January and March 1980 respectively.

Answers to Questions

5 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2017

Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) The cost to the Commonwealth of the visit of the Director, Australian Heritage Commission to Norfolk Island in January 1980 was $644.88.
(b) The cost to the Commonwealth of the visit of 2 officers of the Australian War Memorial to Norfolk Island in March 1980 was $1,166.30.
Export Meat Inspection Service
(Questiou No. 1897)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Primary industry, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) Is it a fact that the Commonwealth Government presently meets half the costs of the export meat inspection service.
(2) Will the Government be extending this service to assist the Australian Federation of Islamic Councils (a) if their present attempts to enter the Australian meat exporting business are successful and (b) in their efforts to introduce halal slaughtering standards.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) It is Government policy to recover 50 per cent of the cost of export inspection of meat by way of charges imposed on the meat industry. Recoveries in 1980-81 will fall substantially short of 50 per cent. Notwithstanding that, it has been decided to hold charges at present levels pending attempts to rationalise Commonwealth and State meat inspection arrangements and charges.
(2) (a) Export inspection is a mandatory requirement in all meat establishments which are registered for export. All export slaughter establishments bear export inspection charges on a uniform basis.
(b) The export meat inspection service has no involvement with religious ritual slaughter. Thus, there is no question of

meat inspection charging arrangements being applied to Islamic halal slaughter procedures.
Coastal Surveillance
(Question No. 1916)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Do the contracts let by his Department for coastal surveillance flights allow the contractor to assign or sub-let the contract to another operator.
(2) If so, is this arrangement subject to approval. (3) If it is subject to approval, who gives the approval and under what authority is it given. (4) Do the contracts allow the contractor to amortise the full cost of the aircraft he uses over the period of the contract. (5) Will he make available to Members of the House all contracts entered into by the Government for coastal surveillance.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes. (2) Yes. (3) The Secretary to the Department of Transport in terms of the contract. (4) Contracts arranged to date were awarded following public invitation of tenders with selection being made on a best value for money basis. The rate of amortisation of capital costs varies from contract to contract, being a commercial judgment by the tendeters at time of submission of their offers. (5) No. The contracts contain commercially confidential break-downs of contractors unit rates. All contracts provide for services to be performed as detailed in the invitation to tender in accordance with the conditions also detailed therein. Copies of the tender invitation documents can be made available to interested members.


