House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 123, 1981 Wednesday, 27 May 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2653

Wednesday, 27 May 1981

Plant Variety Rights

Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2.15 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
I. Uphold the principle that the seeds and cuttings of plants are a public resource and a common heritage to all and that accordingly seeds should be freely available to all, freely multipliable, able to be sold, exchanged, exported and -imported by anyone who wishes. This is seen as a matter of national food security.

Trans-Australia Airlines

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of

Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Pet-

ition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully

showeth:

.

Many Australians depend almost exc1usiv~ly upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services,

2. Recognize that plant breeding is a highly co-operative venture often involving private enterprise at the very last stages after basic seed collection, storage, and research has been publicly funded.

3. In view of the aforementioned paragraphs, recognise that

any system giving 'property' or ownership rights over seeds to

individuals, organisations or enterprises is inappropriate and

unjust.

-

The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in:
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airlines services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray _that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-AustraIiaAiriines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Armitage, Mrs Child, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Milton and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.

4. Recognise that legislation establishing plant patenting schemes overseas has had serious adverse effects namely:
(i) a slowing-down of scientific information exchange and exchanges in basic plant breeding materials, that is, germ plasm,
(ii) subordination and/or curtailment of public breeding programmes,
(iii) farmer unrest at seed prices, (iv) monopoly control of Seed production and sales has
passed into the hands of giant petrochemical and drug corporations also marketing crop chemicals, (v) increased uniformity of crop varieties leading to a vulnerability to pest and disease attack.
S. Reject any proposal to legislate for any system such as the drafted Plant Variety Rights Act, which gives exclusive ownership rights over seeds to individuals, organisations or enterprises.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

Women's Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should:
Take action as it deems appropriate to ensure the continuing effectiveness of the Women's Services, i.e., Women's Refuges, Women's Health Centres and Women's Rape Crisis Centres. In particular that:
1. National funding under Special Purposes Grant (Section 96 of Constitution) for a new category called Women's Services to be administered federally under one department.
2. That as an interim measure, current funding of administrative arrangements remain in force.
3. Such Special Purposes Grant funding to be on a guaranteed triennial basis which must take into account inflation and indexation rises.
4. Definite Government policy commitment to a substantial injection of funds to consolidate existing services and develop new ones. That such funds be distributed in such a way as to ensure equitable national distribution of these resources.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Plant Variety Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth, do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
(1) Note that legislation establishing plant variety rights in other countries has had adverse effects, namely:
(a) Virtual monopoly control of seed production has passed into the hands of a few large international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation.
(b) The varieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and will not grow without the aid of artificial fertilisers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers.
(c) The genetic-diversity of crops has been eroded, rendering them vulnerable to disease and other environmental threats.

by Dr Blewett, Mrs Child and Mr West. Petitions received.

(2) Recognise the maintenance of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and

2654 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Petitions

promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to prevent exclusive control over plant genetic material from falling into private hands.
(3) Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gardeners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden produce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment of plant variety rights in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Milton.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Ex-Servicemen's & Women's Pension Association is a body formed for the express purpose of obtaining a Service Pension for all Ex-Service Personnel at Sixty years of age for Men and Fifty-five years of age for Women regardless of where they served during the 1939-45 war.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should give urgent consideration to a favourable decision to the granting of the Service Pension to all Ex-Service Personnel who served their Country in time of need and who did not serve overseas through no fault of their own. The Service Pension is presently only granted to Returned Ex-S~rvice Personnel.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child and Mr Street.
Petitions received.
Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully calls for:
The immediate and unconditional withdrawal of any proposals to deny Unemployment Benefits to unemployed people under 18 years old.
That the level of benefits for all unemployed people, and ineluding people receiving sickness benefits and pensions, be raised to at least 120 per cent of the poverty line.
That future employment policies be devoted to job creation and the restoration of full employment rather than the evasion of this responsibility by hiding the unemployed in short term training and education schemes.
Public acknowledgment of the fact that unemployment is the result of insufficient jobs and not the fault of any minority group, the education system or the unemployed themselves.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fisher and Mr Street.
Petitions received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(1) That sand mining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.

(2) That Moreton Island is included on the list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
(3) That the Queensland Government has recently renewed mining leases against the advice of conservationists and a State Government sponsored Public Enquiry.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys and Mr MeVeigh.
Petitions received.
Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizen~ of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. The hotel industry in Australia is long-established and a valuable part of the community of this nation, providing places where the people may partake of the three basic needs of life: a place to eat, a place to drink, a place to sleep.
2. The hotel industry is accepted throughout the nation as occupying an important place in the social and economic activities of Australia.
3. The hotel industry is almost entirely within the private sector and makes a large contribution to the government in taxes of various kinds.
4. The hotel industry has a need to sustain an appropriate level of turnover and growth, to make profit, and to sustain and improve the level of employment.
5. The hotel industry of Australia is gravely concerned at published reports that the Government intends to increase excise charges on beer in the forthcoming Budget.
6. Sales of beer constitute the major source of income of most of the industry's 5,811 hotels in Australia.
7. The very steep rises in beer excise in 1975 and 1978 severely retarded the growth of the Australian hotel industry.
8. Any further increases in excise on beer in the 1981 Budget would further retard the industry at a time when growth is essential to maintaining economic viability and the ability to serve the constantly growing needs of the community.
9. Such is its significance as a community reqUirement, beer occupies a place on the Consumer Price Index, and any alteration to its cost to the community would have an inflationary effect.
10. Any increase in excise would result in and force the hotel industry to pass on such increases to the consumer by way of higher prices for beer.
II. Higher excise would be only the starting point for an upward spiral in beer prices because of the presence of other factors, such as State Licence Fee taxes, which are directly linked to excise rates.
12. The hotel industry of Australia already is gravely handicapped by heavy excise and other tax imposts, its growth is at a standstill; and, inevitably must decline if beer excise is increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives:

Petitions

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2655

(I) Recognise the importance and place of the Australian Hotel industry in the social and economic life of the nation.
(2) Accept that the viability of the hotel industry is essential to the maintenance of employment opportunities and stability of the industry is essential to enable it to continue to provide for the hotel needs of the nation in this period of growing popUlation and increasing tourism.
And further, that Honourable Members of the House of Representatives resist and reject any move to increase excise on beer.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon and Mr Porter.
Petitions received.
Toxic Shock Syndrome
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned by the threats to women's health and lives posed by Toxic Shock Syndrome, and urge the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
(l) Tampons, sanitary napkins, vaginal deodorants and similar sanitary products to be re-classified under Therapeutic Agents (not under 'Cosmetics' as at present), in order to bring them under the scrutiny of the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee. We believe manufacture must be under the strictest hygienic conditions.
(2) After re-classification, we urge an immediate government-funded inquiry into all aspects of manufacture and content of these products. This must lead to: (i) contents of product and instructions for correct usage to be shown on packaging; (ii) removal of synthetic fibres, chemicals or ingredients that are potentially or actually harmful to users.
(3) Allocation of extra funding for ongoing research by the National Health and Medical Research Council into these products, results of this research to be made public to ensure all health workers and potential users are fully informed. This campaign of public education would necessitate multilingual distribution of the information where appropriate.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert possible threats posed to women's health by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Anti-discrimination Legislation
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament in Canberra assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That the right to work without discrimination on any ground including, inter alia, discrimination on grounds of race, ethnic origin, pregnancy, marital status, sex and/or sexual preference, is a fundamental human right; and
That it is both the duty and the responsibility of society to fully support those denied work and therefore those who are unemployed as a result of society's inability to provide full paid employment should be guaranteed an adequate income without discrimination on any ground, including inter alia discrimination on grounds of race, ethnic origin, marital status, sex and/or sexual preference, or pregnancy.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That appropriate and adequate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in Commonwealth employment, in employment of persons by statutory bodies and quasi-governmental organisations, in employment of individuals under federal awards, and in employment of all persons in areas over which Commonwealth and Australian Capital Territory equal opportunity legislation should have jurisdiction; and
That appropriate laws be formulated and passed to outlaw discrimination in the provision of unemployment benefits to all persons without regard to race, ethnic origin, marital status and/or sex.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Connolly.
Petition received.
Family Law Act
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That allegations have been made by litigants that unjust decisions in relation to ancillary matters are being made at the Family Court of Australia.
We call on the Government to amend Section 79 (I) of the Family Law Act to allow all Family Courts to be open and publication of details of proceedings permitted, provided names of parties and other identifying information is prohibited from disclosure.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Connolly.
Petition received.
Privacy and Personal Information
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembed. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
Paragraphs 107 and 108 of the Privacy and Personal Information discussion paper number 14, brought down by the Law Reform Commission in June 1980, undermines the family unit and the authority of parents, which is the Christian basis of our society, by proposing that 'between 12 and 16 years, a child should be entitled to object to disclosure of information to a parent'.
It is your petitioners' sincere belief that:
(a) an adolescent between the ages of 12 and 16 is not at a mature enough stage of life to decide whether or not the disclosure of information to a parent will be in the best interests of the adolescent.
(b) as a record keeper has no responsibility for the child, and as his moral standards may be different to those of a parent, he should not be permitted to come between child and parent.
(c) a parent has a unique position which may enable him/her to perceive a situation that the record keeper does not. The parent must therefore be aware of the problem if remedial action is to be taken, and has the right to guide the child in the direction he/she feels fit.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
That the Members of the House of Representatives will reject the recommendation of the Law Reform Commission and find some other means to protect children from the excessive abuse of some parents.

2656 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Petitions

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dobie.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. the proposal to introduce fees for higher and second degrees will mean that access to post-graduate and recurrent education will be limited to the rich; Australian research and ability to cope with technological change will suffer; this proposal must be seen as a step in the direction of the introduction of fees for all tertiary students.
2. the proposed introduction of a loans scheme for students will mean graduating with a heavy debt or being denied a tertiary education ifloans are refused because a student is seen as a "poor risk" (particularly affecting women and those doing non-vocational courses); only the rich will be able to get a tertiary education without course restrictions and the burden of indebtedness.
3. in regard to the proposal to restrict eligibility for TEAS and the foreshadowing of reviewing TEAS levels only in the light of the availability of loans, it should be noted that any further downgrading of TEAS, which is already inadequate, can only further limit access to education.
4. the proposed restriction of Adult Secondary Assistance to those needing qualifications for employment will severely restrict access to a full high school education and necessary bridging education to tertiary education for those who left school early.
5. the proposal not to fund 30 Colleges of Advanced Education if they are not rationalised is an attack on teacher education. This attack will create teacher shortages in the mid 1980s, restrict access to education now and endanger the future quality of teaching available to Australian children.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
(i) post-secondary tuition fees not to be introduced for any courses or for any category of students.
(ii) that the TEAS scheme be extended so as to more fully meet the real financial needs of students.
(iii) that a comprehensive loans scheme not be introduced.
(iv) that there be no restriction of Adult Secondary Assistance.
(v) that the proposal not to fund 30 CAEs unless they are rationalised be rescinded.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fisher.
Petition received.
Proposed Sale of Belconnen Mall and Canberra Retail Markets
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
The decision of the Liberal Government to sell the Belconnen Mall and the Canberra Fruit and Vegetable Retail Markets is contrary to the interests of the people of Canberra.
Sale of the Belconnen Mall and the Fruit and Vegetable Markets would inevitably result in-

(a) the creation of a monopoly in the ownership of the major retail outlets in Canberra, and
(b) an increase in the cost of living in Canberra.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright the proposal to sell the Belconnen Mall and the Fruit and Vegetable Markets.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fry.
Petition received.
Great Barrier Reef: Oil Exploration
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of citizens of the Commonwealth submits:
That otT shore oil exploration within the Great Barrier Reef Region constitutes a serious threat to the richest and most varied living system on earth.
Your petitioners request that your Honourable House will:
I. Declare the whole Great Barrier Reef Region a Marine Park under the Federal Government's Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975,
2. Prohibit oil exploration within the Great Barrier Reef Region (as defined by the 1975 Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act),
3. Retain full Federal Government control over the whole Great Barrier Reef Region,
4. Provide the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority with staff and resources sufficient for effective management of the Region.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Steele Hall.
Petition received.
Indirect Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Any proposal for a broad-based indirect tax, value-added tax, etc. would:
(a) have an inflationary effect on the economy, depressing to an even greater degree than at present the low levels of consumer spending.
(b) involve every stage of the production, distribution and consumption process, i.e. manufacturer-wholesaler; wholesaler-retailer and retailer-consumer levels.
(c) be complicated and expensive to administer, particularly for the small businessman and little shops who will undoubtedly suffer cash-flow problems; be forced to set up new systems and to get equipment to do the government's work for them.
(d) be an iniquitous and insidious impost inasmuch as both low and middle-income earners would be hit hardest by its introduction and, by building taxes into prices, the Government would be concealing the source of taxation, unlike taxation based on income, which is a more visible and more obviously equitable impost.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to reject any proposal for any tax which would apply a surcharge to goods and services in this manner.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.

Petitions

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2657

Petition received.
Public Hospital Funding
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(1) That the Federal Government's shifting of responsibility for funding of public hospitals onto the State Governments has placed a disproportionate and onerous burden onto lower income groups, but particularly on large families; single income families; the chronically ill; those with recurrent illnesses and those on fixed incomes.
(2) That included in the undesirable effects on the public hospital system in Queensland will be-
(i) long waiting times for non-urgent surgery;
(ii) long waiting periods in out-patients;
(iii) services, e.g. x-ray and pathology will be reduced;
(iv) staff will be reduced;
(v) possible abolition of teaching hospitals and centralisation of training facilities for doctors and nurses;
(vi) closing down of small country hospitals.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will request the Government to re-examine its public hospital funding arrangements, the impact of these arrangements on lower income groups mentioned in (1) aboye and increase funding to the States to ensure that the undesIrable effects mentioned in (2) above do not occur.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Health Insurance
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
(1) That Federal Government proposals to shift the cost of health insurance onto the individual has placed a disproportionate and unfair financial burden on lower income groups, but particularly on large families; single income families; the chronically ill; those with recurrent illnesses and those on fixed incomes.
(2) That an estimated 15-20 per cent of Australians will not be able to afford insurance and will be forced to undertake extensive travel to avail themselves of outpatient services, the quality of which will be drastically reduced because of staff cuts.
(3) That doctors, who at this moment are awaitin~ a fee increase, will inevitably become more and more expensive.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government (i) will re-examine the effects of health proposals and of the necessity for compulsory health insurance ~n lower income groups who do not presently meet the descnption of disadvantaged, and (ii) redefine the criteria determining the genuinely needy and disadvantaged to encompass the categories of persons mentioned in (1) above.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

Labelling of Cosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of Cosmetic Companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were subject to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:
Legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:
(1 ) whether a product contains any animal derivative, if so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.
(2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound wilI ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-
(1) That merchant seamen have in the past served in theatres of war; they have been decorated for valor following war action; they have been prisoners of war and should therefore be entitled to similar pension rigltts and medical benefits as regular servicemen.
(2) That by being denied the entitlements, such as pension and medical benefits, which other war veterans receive, they are thereby being discriminated against.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act (1920). Section 100 (d) (iv) to take account of war-related service by merchant seamen during World War 2.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Women's Centres
To the Honourable Speaker and Honourable Members of the House of Representatives assembled. This petition of concerned citizens:
Earnestly request that the funding of the Women's Health Centres and Rape Crisis Centres be increased to allow these centres to adequately provide the services vitally needed by the women of NSW. Further to this end that funding be granted to allow new greatly needed Women's Health Centres and Rape Crisis Centres to be established.
We abhor the continued cuts in funding that have occurred over the past three years and which is creating a situation whereby the centres are facing the likelihood of no longer being able to function.

2658 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Petitions

We submit that the deficit incurred by the cuts be made good by the Federal Government and to this end we submit this petition.
And we your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray for the granting of our plea.
by Mr Kerin.
Petition received.
Health Care
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal of Commonwealth Medical Benefits for the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test for free public hospital care;
That the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
That the public hospital system and community health programmes will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce a system of health care based on ability to pay, and access to health care based on medical need.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon.
Petition received.
Women's Refuges
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should take action as it deems appropriate to ensure the continuing effectiveness of the Women's Refuge Programme. In particular that:
(I) Realistic funding levels be introduced to maintain existing services offered by women's refuges.
(2) That the needs for Child Care in Women's Refuges be acknowledged by a specific and adequate allocation of funds for this purpose.
(3) That funding be allocated for the purpose of assisting women and children to establish themselves in the community on leaving refuges.
(4) That funding be allocated for refuges to address themselves to areas of special needs of migrant women in refuges.
(5) That funding be made available for the establishment of new women's refuges.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.
Soviet Passenger Cruise Vessels
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfu\ly showeth:
Owing to an overwhelming and continuous demand by the Australian people for a cruise service within the economic scope of the working man and his family, we request the

Government to lift the ban placed on Soviet Passenger Cruise Vessels entering Australian Ports.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Income Tax
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfu\ly showeth that:
(1) Present income tax laws discriminate against singleincome families.
(2) It is unfair that families should pay more tax, the more unequally their total income is divided between spouses.
(3) All marriages should be recognised as partnerships by allowing spouses to divide their joint income for taxation purposes.
(4) The family, which is the natural and fundamental unit of society, should be an economic unit in tax laws.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament will reform income tax laws to allow the joint income of husband and wife to be equally divided between them for taxation purposes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Wilson.
Petition received.
Excise on Beer
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Parramatta respectfully showeth:
That beer is the drink of the working man and that any increase in the excise on beer will place it in the luxury bracket and beyond the means of ordinary people. Australians are already the highest beer taxed people in the world; further increases in beer prices will both barm the brewing industry and fuelinflatioll.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government not proceed with any proposals it may have to increase the excise on beer in the 1981/82 Federal Budget as such a move would be unacceptable to all beer drinking voters.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr John Brown.
Petition received.
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully showeth:
1. That we are gravely concerned at the lack of Children's Services within the City of Northcote.
2. That we are dismayed at the refusal of the Department of Social Security (Child Care Division) to fund a Family Day Care Programme within the City of Northcote.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will ensure adequate funds for Children's Services will be made available so that Family Day Care may be provided within the City of Northcote.

Petitions

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2659

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howe. Petition received,
Two-Airline Policy
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the present two airline domestic policy of the Commonwealth Government.
That this policy has resulted in expensive air fares and poor service and discourages tourists from the Eastern States visiting WA and vice versa.

PROPOSED SALE OF BELCONNEN MALL AND CANBERRA RETAIL MARKETS
Motion (by Mr Fry) put:

That the contents of the petition protesting against the sale of the Belconnen Shopping Mall and the Retail Market Trust be referred to the Joint Parliamentary Committee on the Australian Capital Territory for consideration.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

46

Noes

63

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition and formulate an Airline Policy providing for greater competition so that prices and service are determined by free market forces.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr McLean. Petition received.
Television Reception in Ballarat
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Ballarat respectfully showeth:
That television reception for Melbourne channels is extremely poor in some areas of Ballarat. Interference is common, and choice of viewing is often limited to the ABC and one local commercial station.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that a UHF relay facility be provided for the people of Ballarat.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mildren.
Petition received.

Majority

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. BoweD, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Free,R. V. Fry,K.L. Hawke,R.J.L. Hayden, W. G. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Hurford, C. J.

AYES

17
Innes, U.E. Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Los (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating,P.J. Kelly,R.J. Kent,L. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Los (Teller) Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott,J.L. Theophanous, A. C. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young, M. J.

Wollongong: Multicultural Broadcasting
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the electors and residents within the City of Wollongong (State of New South Wales) respectfully showeth that:
(I) despite promises from the Government Radio 2EA did not begin transmission in Wollongong until 1979;
(2) Wollongong has one of the largest migrant populations in Australia, in that over half the population are born overseas or have one or more parents born overseas;
(3) we cannot receive Channel 0; (4) the cost of privately installing UHF aerials is prohibitive for many migrants in this city.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives use its powers to ensure that a repeater transmitter be opened in Wollongong on both UHF and VHF bands.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrWest. Petition received.

NOES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Carlton, J. J. Chapman,H.G.P. Coleman, W.P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Edwards, H. R. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Fraser, Malcolm Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. MoD.

Jull,D.F. Katter,R.C. L1oyd,B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie. A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh,D. T. Macphee,l. M. Millar,P.e. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A.

2660 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

NOES
Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W. Hunt, R. J. D. Hyde, J.M. Jarmlln,A. W.

Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R. L White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

Question so resolved in the negative.

EXCISE ON BEER
Notice of Motion
Mr CHARLES JONES (Newcastle)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That the House requests the Treasurer and the Government to take note of the thousands of protest letters, including over 2,000 received by the member for Newcastle, demanding ihat the excise on beer not be increased.
I seek leave to table two boxes of letters I have received in support of the notice of motion.
Mr SPEAKER-If the honourable gentleman were tabling beer, I think he would be given leave. Is leave granted for the tabling of the letters? There being no objection, leave is granted.

DISTINGUISHED VISITORS
Mr SPEAKER-I notice that two former members of this House are in the Speaker's Gallery. They are making their first return visit to this place. I indicate to them that I will not acknowledge them every time they come to this place, but on this occasion I acknowledge the presence of Bert James and Vince Martin.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

SALES TAX: RIDING EQUIPMENT
Mr KENT-Is the Treasurer aware that all accessories used by jockeys, such as saddles, riding boots and stirrups, are exempt from sales tax, whereas riding whips have a sales tax of 15 per cent imposed on them? In view of the fact that riding whips have been produced successfully over the last 12 years for the Australian and overseas markets by the very popular former jockey, Mr Peter Bakos, will the Minister waive the 15 per cent sales tax which is strangling this small but unique Australian business?
Mr HOWARD-In a large number of areas that are affected by the sales tax law, on the surface there would appear to be something amounting to an anomaly in the treatment of certain items. I can only say to the honourable gentleman that I will look at this matter in the traditional fashion, along with the other requests that I get at

the rate of about five or six a week; that is, in the context of the Budget.
TELECOM AUSTRALIA: INDUSTRIAL DISPUTE
Mr PORTERThe Minister for Communications will be aware of the conflicting advice being given to Telecom Australia employees by their employers, the unions and the Press reports of the Government's view. Will the Minister inform the House of the Government's position in relation to the current dispute?
Mr SINCLAIR-Negotiations have been conducted over an extended period between Telecom, Australia Post and the unions to which the honourable gentleman's question refers. There have been proceedings, which have now been adjourned until Friday morning, before Commissioner Clarkson. The suggestion from the hearing on Monday was that there should be a reference by the unions of the matters in dispute to an anomalies conference. We believe that there is an absolute essential pre-requirement in any negotiations for wages and salaries and terms and conditions of employment, and that is that these should be pursued in a proper way within the system that permits for discussion of any discrepancies that might appear. As far as we are concerned, it is necessary that they be so dealt with. I have been disappointed by the very extensive threats against the continuation of the whole of the telecommunications and postal services in Australia when the Government has accepted that there are proper forums within which these matters can be and should be considered. In conjunction with my colleague the Minister for Industrial Relations, we have had discussions on the matter. I hope that common sense will prevail and that those in the trade union movement will exercise the leadership which one might hope they are capable of demonstrating by suggesting to their own members that the matter be referred in accordance with Commissioner Clarkson's recommendation and a threatened disruption set aside while the matters that are of concern to them are settled in the proper and appropriate way.
SINAI PEACEKEEPING FORCE
Mr MORRISON-My question is directed to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. The Minister will be aware that the main purpose of the proposed peace force is to supervise the Israeli withdrawal from the Sinai area. As both Israel and Egypt have a direct and significant interest in ensuring that the Camp David Accords are successfully implemented, will the Minister urge both

Questions Without Notice

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2661

governments to assume responsibility for managing the withdrawal of Israeli forces without the necessity for a multinational force?

Mr STREET-As I said in the House yester-

day in my statement on the current state of I?lay in

relation to the Sinai peacekeeping force, It has,

unfortunately, been impossible to get Unit~d

Nations agreement to establish the for~e under Its

auspices. That was foreseen at the tIme of the

Egyptian-Israeli Peace Treaty. In fact on the same

date as the Treaty was signed President Carter

wrote to Egypt and Israeli and said t~at, if, in. the

event it proved impossible to get Umted NatIOns

cover' for the force, the United States would

assume responsibility for marshalling a multina-

tional force. That is the position we have reached

at the moment. I said also in the House yesterday

that so far as we were concerned, yet happened-Australia received

iaf-~iotrhmaasl

nro~t

quest to take part in such a force, seemg that It

was to operate on the soil of Egypt and Israel, we

would want a request to come from those two

countries. So far as I am aware, that position has

been accepted. The establishment of a multina-

tional force, as distinct from a United Nations

force, was foreseen at the time of the Treaty and

was provided for in President Carter's letter.

Mr Morrison-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I think the Minister may have misinterpreted the question. What I was really aski~g was: Given the interest of both Israel and Egypt, IS a multinational force, in fact; necessary?

Mr STREET-If that was the question, I mis-

understood it and for that I apologise. I am

itnhfeoirmnfeodr~aatnidonsoI

far as have

I have been able to check been given is correct, that

unless there is a multinational force the Israelis

will not withdraw from the remaining portion of

the Sinai.

DISALLOWED QUESTION Mr Coleman proceeding to address a question to the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The question is out of order.

DISALLO\VED QUESTION Dr Theophanous having addressed a question to the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's question is out of order.

YOUTH EMPLOYMENT Mr JARMAN-My question, which is addressed to the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, is in a way supplementary to a question asked yesterday concerning youth unemployment. In addition to the Government's youth and training programs mentioned by the Minister yesterday, what other prospects does he see for an increase in employment opportunities for young people in the near future?
Mr N. A. BROWN-The Government has made it plain on many occasions that it is very concerned about the level of youth unemployment in Australia and that it cares about it very much. For that reason, we have put in place programs which have made substantial inroads into that problem. However, at the same time the Government has always made it clear that the only way in which we can have a sustainable and continuous growth in permanent jobs is by having sound economic policies which will generate those jobs. That is the Government's position and it has been borne out by recent evidence of growth in employment within Australia. I am pleased to be able to say that the Australian Bureau of Statistics' figures released today provide further evidence of that continuing and sustained growth in employment within Australia.
Honourable members will recall that one month ago I was able to announce that in the year to March, employment within Australia h~d grown by 146,000. However, in the year to AprIl, as the figures today show, the growth has been 197,300. That is a very substantial growth and the overwhelming bulk of it comes in the field of full time employment, where there was an increase of 146,700. To emphasise the aspect of youth employment, it is particularly encouraging to find that there has been a continuous improvement with regard to the employment of young people. The figures today show that the number of school leavers who have found jobs has increased over this month, as it has in the past. The result is that 82 per cent of those of last year's school leavers who are in the labour force have now found jobs-that is, by the end of April-compared with less than 80 per cent in the year before.
Finally, the Government has always be~n at pains to make it clear that not too much relIance should be placed on one month's figures and that anyone month's figures should be treated with caution. I make the same comment with regard to this month's figures. But, there is no doubt whatsoever that the Government's economic policies are working. We see this in the employment field

2662 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

becajJse the figures released today show a continuation of the underlying strength and increase in the employment situation in this country.
RESOURCE BASED DEVELOPMENT
Mr HOWE-Has the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy noted statements attributed to the Premier of Queensland to the effect that the largely foreign owned corporations associated with resource based development should be responsible for the full physical and social infrastructure costs required in regions where they locate? Does the Minister agree that regions experiencing rapid economic resource based development, such as Gladstone in Queensland, the Hunter Valley in New South Wales and the Latrobe Valley in Victoria, are unable to cope with the demand for basic services; for example, housing, health, roads and sewerage? Will the Minister reverse present Government policy to subsidise these large corporations and move to a policy which would ensure that they paid their way, particularly in regard to social infrastructure?
Mr ANTHONY-The Government has made certain arrangements to help with the development of infrastructure. We have had special provisions for borrowing arrangements for the States, but there is a limit to what the economy can stand in providing funds in this direction. However, if private companies have resource development prospects and if we can encourage those companies to provide their own infrastructure arrangements and social developments, that is to the benefit of the country overall. Why should the taxpayers be asked to provide these arrangements if it is a commercial proposition for companies to do so? Much of the success in Western Australia has been in getting companies to be involved in this area. That is what the Queensland Premier is endeavouring to do. Of course we would like to see other States doing likewise.
REVIEW OF COMMONWEALTH FUNCTIONS: REACTIONS
Mr COLEMAN-Can the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs inform the House of the action the Government proposes to take to minimise the effects on employment of the decision of the Australian Council of Trade Unions to increase industrial action against the Review of Commonwealth Functions?
Mr N. A. BROWN-I have seen statements attributed to the ACTU with respect to industrial action which it proposes to take to prevent the Government's decisions being implemented. The first thing that must be said about that is that it is

an outrageous course of conduct by a non-elected body to seek to frustrate by force the decisions of an elected government. The second thing that must be said is that the Government's decisions will be implemented. Let there be no doubt whatsoever about that. Consequently, the ACTU's activities can lead only to the loss of jobs and certainly not to the increase of jobs. Thirdly, it must be said that industrial disputation of this sort, or indeed of any other sort, can only seek to erode the economic gains that have been made over the last few years in this country and can only be destructive of the expansion of industry and commerce which creates jobs.
Finally, if the ACTU is looking for a role to play in the employment field, it has a role. Its role, first of all, is not to dissipate its members' funds without asking for their consent for those funds to be dissipated by going off on a frolic of this sort and wasting those funds in useless campaigns of this nature. The role of the ACTU surely is to moderate excessive wage demands and to layoff in the 35-hour working week campaign. Both of those activities by the ACTU can only be destructive of job opportunities in this country. If the ACTU joins with the Government in support of our youth and other training policies and if it supports the economic programs of the Government, we will see a continuous expansion of the number of jobs available for Australians.
AUSTRALIAN CURRENCY: REVALUATION
Mr HAYDEN -I refer the Acting Minister for Primary Industry to the creeping revaluation of the Australian dollar that has taken place over the past year or so. Is it a fact that, over the past year, the appreciation against the currencies of our European trading partners has been 30 per cent or more? In view of the depressed state of rural production and rural exports, does the Minister view with concern the prospect of a continuation of this revaluation process making further inroads into the already depressed incomes of primary producers? Has the National Country Party wing of the Government any proposals to offset the deleterious effects of this trend upon primary producers?
Mr SINCLAIR-Knowing how the honourable gentleman has to live with the various wings within his own party, I can understand the jealousy as regards the total unanimity of the Government parties. As far as the basis of relativity of the Australian dollar to other currencies is concerned, I draw the attention of the honourable gentleman to an answer given in this place a little while ago by my colleague the Treasurer. It is appropriate

Questions Without Notice

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2663

that there is recognition throughout the community that the Government has set up a very effective means of determining the relativity of the Australian currency to other currencies. It has meant that, instead of having significant adjustments, the adjustments have been continuing and the product overall has been to the benefit of all sections of the community. Indeed, it is quite true that if one looks at the system of currency relativity that has applied since the Bretton Woods Agreement was terminated one will find that there has been no greater period of stability as far as Australia is concerned than there has been since the procedures were laid down by this Government. There have been very significant advantages in that in some areas currencies have appreciated and in other areas they have depreciated.
If the honourable gentleman were to look at the position of the Australian dollar in relation to the United States dollar, appreciating the tremendous significance to the United States of Australian agricultural commodity trade, he would realise that there are both pluses and minuses in the present position of the Australian dollar. Nonetheless, there are problems as far as the world scene and agricultural commodities are concerned. It is for that very reason that my colleague the Minister for Primary Industry is at the moment pursuing discussions overseas within the world food council. Our real concern is that, following the very significant drought in many areas of Australia, some State governments have failed to live up to their responsibilities. That is particularly so in New South Wales. I hope that the concern that the honourable gentleman is professing to express here--

concern that the honourable gentleman apparently is now beginning to feel for farmers in some parts of Australia.
ARMED FORCES: PAY RISE Mr COWAN-I ask the Acting Minister for Defence whether members of the armed forces were granted a 4 per cent interim pay rise at the end of last year. Can the Minister say when the Committee of Reference for Defence Force Pay will bring down its recommendations? Mr NEWMAN-I think the information that the honourable gentleman has given is correct. I recall that it was at the end of October 1980 that the Committee of Reference reported to the Minister for Defence, which resulted in a 4 per cent increase in the pay of practically all categories of the defence forces. That has been implemented and approved. As I understand it, the Committee's terms of reference are very complicated and the submissions that it is examining are likewise complicated. I will approach the Committee to find out whether it can give us a final date as to when it will deliver its report.
ANSETT TRANSPORT INDUSTRIES LTD Mr CAMPBELL-I ask the Minister for
Transport whether it is a fact that approximately $8m is owed to Transport Australia by Ansett Transport Industries Ltd. What effort is the Government making to recover the money? Is any interest being charged on money outstanding beyond normal commercial terms; if not, why not?
Mr HUNTI will take the question on notice and give a detailed reply later.

Mr Keating-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. Not one dollar has come from the Com-

QUEENSLAND: VEHICLE REGISTRATION FEES

monwealth for drought relief for New South Mr WHITE-I ask the Minister for Transport

Wales.

whether he has read an article in yesterday'S

Brisbane Telegraph wherein Mr Hinze, the

Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order.

Queensland Minister for Local Government,

Main Roads and Police, is reported to have

Mr SINCLAIR-I would only hope that the blamed the Federal Government for forcing that

professed concern of the Leader of the Opposition State to impose an increase of 60 per cent in ve-

about agricultural producers could be reflected in hicle registration fees? If the Minister has read the

the attitude of the present Premier of New South article can he state whether this reported state-

Wales to agricultural interests in that State. The ment is based on fact?

level of aid generally provided by that State is, regrettably, far less than that provided in States

Mr HUNT-Mr Speaker--

such as Queensland and Western Australia. Farmers still face very significant problems, in

Opposition members interjecting-

spite of the relief rains last week. I trust that theMr SPEAKER-Order! I think the Minister

honourable gentleman will take up with his Labor for Transport does not need assistance in this

colleague, the Premier of New South Wales, the answer.

2664 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr HUNTI think this is a further example of the bellyaching by the Minister for Local Government, Main Roads and Police in Queensland. He is up to his old tricks again, blaming the Commonwealth for every deficiency and shortfall there might be in Queensland, particularly In the roads area. He is quite unfair to blame the Commonwealth Government for any increase in motor vehicle registration that his Government might wish to impose upon the Queensland people. The State governments, of course, have a responsibility to raise revenue for the various functions of those governments. I would not like to adjudicate on whether they do or do not do the right thing. I must say that the Minister has done the wrong thing in blaming the Commonwealth by suggesting that there is a shortfall in road funding. This financial year the Commonwealth Government is making available to each State a nine per cent jncrease for each road funding category. Queensland is treated as fairly and as equitably this year as any other State. I must say that it comes as a surprise that the Minister continues to blame the Commonwealth Government for decisions that the Queensland Government has decided to take in order to raise additional revenues for the purposes to which that State might wish to allocate its resources.

the Victorian post-secondary education committee. That information was before the Government at the time the decision was taken.
The other part of the honourable member's question relates to various representations that the honourable member suggests I have received. I have, in fact, received representatio'ls from the Minister for Foreign Affairs and from the honourable member himself. The Victorian Minister of Education has arranged to see me to discuss the various decisions that were announced in relation to education in the context of the Review of Commonwealth Functions. I said yesterday in answer to another question that the Government sees a real need for rationalisation in the tertiary area. There were some recommendations before it. There were also some suggestions by the coordinating bodies at the Co~monwealth ~evel: I have said that we are firm Insofar as rattonallsation is concerned. We are prepared to talk to the various State governments about the implementation of rationalisation proposals. In that context let me just repeat what I said yesterday: In the first instance there will be negotiations between the Tertiary Education Commission and the various State co-ordinating bodies, and then in due course between myself and the State Ministers for Education.

DEAKIN UNIVERSITY: ENGINEERING COURSES
Mr SCHOLES-Has the Minister for Education received representations from the current Victorian Premier, the Victorian Minister of Education, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, myself, the Deakin University Council and Geelong industry with reference to the Government's announced decision to phase out engineering courses at Deakin University next year? Has the Minister considered these representations? Has he under consideration, or has he established machinery for re-consideration of, the Government's announced and short sighted decision?
Mr FIFE-The decision that the Government took in relation to the Deakin University engineering school and, indeed, other engineering schools in Victoria, was based largely on the findings of the Partridge Committee and also a recent--
Mr Scholes-In 1976.
Mr FIFE-The honourable member asked the question; if he does not mind I will answer it in my own way. The decision taken by the Government was based largely on the recommendations of the Partridge Committee and a more recent set of recommendations made by a working party set up by

WAGES INQUIRY Mr HARRIS-Can the Minister for Industrial Relations inform the House of what action the Government intends to take in the light of the refusal by the Australian Council of Trade Unions to join the inquiry into the fixation of wages?
Mr VINER-As I read the resolution of the ACTU, I did not understand it to be an absolute refusal to participate in the inquiry when it is established. I find it difficult to comprehend the ACTU's resolution because it has expressed misgivings about the present centralised wage fixation determinations of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. The ACTU is openly supporting its affiliates in going outside the ~ystem in respect of both the 35-hour week, to whIch my colleague the Minister for Employmer:t and Youth Affairs referred, and other wage claIms beyond the national wage case guidelines. [ would have thought that it was in the interests of the ACTU itself to participate in the inquiry and to put forward its views as to w~at the future state of industrial relations in Australia should be.
I have said publicly that I was looking to the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System as a model on which the inquiry into the industrial relations system in Australia should be conducted. I therefore noted

Questions Without Notice

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2665

with interest that the ACTU put a substantial submission to the Campbell inquiry. If the ACTU thinks that the financial system in Australia is of such importance to it and to its affiliate members, I cannot understand why it thinks an inquiry into industrial relations holds no interest for it. At the same time as the President of the ACTU was announcing this resolution I noticed that the honourable member for Wills-himself a former president of the ACTU-observed that it was always his view that it was beneficial to the ACTU to participate in such inquiries.
VITAMIN AND MINERAL SUPPLEMENTS
Mrs CHILD-My question is addressed to the Minister for Health. The Minister will be aware of the unease among many people that the availability of vitamins and minerals could be strictly controlled under the draft standards on vitamins currently under discussion. Will he assure the House that both the supplement and therapeutic categories named in the draft will be freely available without the need for diagnosis and administration by a medical practitioner?
Mr MacKELLAR-I thank the honourable member for her question because it gives me the chance once again to quieten some concern which has been expressed in the community about the draft standards which have been circulated by a sub-committee of the National Health and Medical Research Council. I have always made it a practice, and I will continue to do so, for interested industry organisations and interested bodies to be made aware of suggestions for changes which may be in the wind, when put up by sub-committees of the NHMRC. I think it is very important that we get the views of industry and interested organisations about those suggested changes.
I stress again that the document on standards is at this stage only the first draft. There is no finality about it at all. It has been distributed for comment. The Government has not considered a final response to it. I reassure the honourable member and other people who may be concerned about this matter that there is no intention on the part of the Government to restrict the availability of vitamin and mineral supplements, always on the understanding, of course, that if it is shown that excessive amounts of any vitamin are deleterious to health it should be available only on prescription. As the honourable member will know, some vitamins already are available only on prescription. Subject to that proviso, we are seeking to make sure that these products are properly

labelled, that the consumers are aware of the contents of the products they are buying and that they are freely available. I stress again that there is no intention on the part of the Government to restrict the availability of vitamin or mineral supplements.
Mrs Child-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. The other week in this House the honourable member for Tangney asked the Minister for Health whether there was any intention to restrict the sale of supplement vitamins. The Minister answered, quite categorically, no. Now, there are two orders--
Mr SPEAKER--Order! The honourable lady will resume her seat. There is no point of order.
Mrs Child--But there are therapeutic and supplement--
Mr SPEAKER-She is arguing the issue.
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY
Mr EWEN CAMERON-Can the Minister for I-lousing and Construction inform the House as to the current state of the building and construction industry in Australia? What effect would the introduction of a 35-hour working week have on that industry?
Mr McVEIGH--I can assure the honourable member for Indi that the dwelling and nondwelling construction industry in Australia is in good shape. Actually, the period immediately in front of us gives a strong indication that we are returning, once again, to those exceptionally strong growth years of the late 1960s and the early 1970s. Quite obviously, private enterprise has been attracted to the stable climate created by the Government. If we look at the figures, we find in the non-dwelling area that for the first nine months of this financial year there was an increase in investment of 47 per cent compared with the same period last year. Taking into account the remaining three months of this year, we can expect that the figures will show an increase of 70 per cent for the 12 months compared with the previous year. We are delighted with the recent progress in overall plans on the drawing boards for the construction industry in general. There has been an increase in investment of 16 per cent in the last three months, with a total building program on the construction industry drawing boards worth $94 billion. That is an enormous amount of money and, as I said, shows an increase of 16 per cent over the figures announced for the period to March. The Government can report, with a great deal of pleasure and pride, that there

2666 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Questions Without Notice

has been a similar increase in the housing industry. Last year the total number of dwellings increased by ]2 per cent. Figures given to me recently by the Indicative Planning Council for the Housing Industry show that we can look forward to a continuation of modest growth.
The honourable member for Indi also asked what effect a 35-hour working week would have on those plans.
Mr Les McMahon-You tell us, Tom.
Mr McVEIGH-If the honourable member had listened previously he would have heard my colleague the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs indicate the disastrous consequences of the introduction of a 35-hour week. On the one hand, notwithstanding the fact that we have a good solid economic climate, we are under threat from and are quite vulnerable to the introduction of a 35-hour week. 1 am advised that if a 35-hour week were--
Mr YoungWho advised you?
Mr McVEIGH-My Department advised me.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Port Adelaide will remain silent. I ask the Minister to draw his answer to a conclusion.
Mr McVEIGH-If a 35-hour week were introduced there would be an increase of 10 per cent in costs. That would be disastrous, particularly for the construction industry, because it is labour intensive and it is a big user of building materials. I hope, therefore, that all people will oppose, with vigour
Mr SPEAKER The honourable gentleman will answer the question with information, not with a statement.
Mr McVEIGH-And unrelentingly, the pressures for the introduction of a 35-hour week. I hope that those who sit opposite will be interested in creating more employment for Australian people and will stop hitting the Australian people in the face with their political cow pats.
INDEPENDENT SCHOOLS (LOANS GUARANTEE) ACT 1969
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)- Pursuant to section 8 of the Independent Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1969, I present the statement of the payments made in 1979-80.
AUSTRALIAN EDUCATION COUNCIL
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for,Education)- For the information of honourable members, I present a joint statement approved by State, Territory and Commonwealth Ministers for Education attending the meeting of the Australian

Education Council held in Hobart on 19 February 1981.
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS
Mr MACPHEE (Balaclava-Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs)-Pursuant to section 49 (1) of the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs Act 1979, I present the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs first annual report 1979-80.
For the information of honourable members, I present the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs 'Review of the On-arrival Education Program'.
For the information of honourable members, [ present the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs 'Review of Multicultural and Migrant Education'.
AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL POLICE
Mr NEWMAN (BassMinister for Administrative Services)-Pursuant to section 67 of the Australian Federal Police Act 1979, I present the Australian Federal Police first annual report 1980.
RESIGNATION OF NEW SOUTH WALES LEADER OF THE OPPOSITION
Mr KEATING--Mr Speaker--
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr KEATINGI was going to seek leave to make a statement in respect of the resignation of the New South Wales coalition leader, Mr Mason.
Mr SPEAKER-Is leave granted?
Mr Howard-Leave is refused.
Mr KEATING-Oh, what a shock! After a devastating attack on the New South Wales Premier by the Deputy Leader of the National Country Party, the New South Wales coalition leader resigned.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle)-Mr Speaker, I claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr SPEAKER-I request that, in future, the honourable member give me notice of his intention so that! can give him the call.
Mr DAWKINS-I am sorry, Mr Speaker, but you were occupied.
Mr SPEAKER-Does the honourable gentleman claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr DAWKINS-Yes, in two ways, one minor and one more substantial.

Personal Explanation

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2667

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member may proceed.
Mr DAWKINS-I am reported in yesterday's Hansard as asking you, Mr Speaker, not to confuse me with the honourable member for Swan .(Mr Beazley). Regrettably the reference does not indicate that the remark was made facetiously. Certainly I did not mean to make any unfortunate reference to the honourable member for Swan, who, of course, is my great friend. I cannot speak for him.
Mr SPEAKER-He is next in line to make a personal explanation.
Mr DAWKINS-Another reference was made just after that which is reported at page 2533 of Hansard. The honourable member for O'Connor (Mr Tuckey) rose to make a personal explanation. Unfortunately he did not advise me that he intended to do so. Indeed, because I was not in the House at the time. I later asked him to provide me with a copy of what he had to say. Regrettably he did not do so and this is the earliest opportunity I have had to correct something which he said about me in the course of making his personal explanation. In the first instance I want to say that the Hansard report of 14 May in fact was incorrect. I did not say that the honourable member for O'Connor owed the Shire of Carnarvon $180,000. I in fact said that he owed the Shire $180. In the course of his personal explanation, the honourable member for O'Connor said that I identified myself as one of the character assassins in the Australian Labor Party. Of course, I did no such thing. All I had done was point out an indiscretion of the honourable member for O'Connor. In order that the situation can be made clear I have sought and obtained the concurrence of the honourable member for O'Connor to having incorporated in Hansard a Press report which deals with the auditor's report for the Shire of Carnarvon which describes some disallowed expenditure which the Shire made on behalf of then Councillor Tuckey and other councillors and indicates the extent to which there is still an amount of $176 outstanding. I seek leave to have that article incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
GOVERNMENT AUDITOR'S REPORT TO CARNARVON SHIRE
The report of the government auditor, Mr M. J. Breman, for the Carnarvon shire, was discussed at length at the annual meeting of electors on April 8.
The report is as follows:
The audit of the accounts of the Shire of Carnarvon for the financial year ended June 30, 1980, has been completed. The

accounts, subject to the following disallowances and qualifications, have been found to be in order and have been allowed by me as required by section 629 of the Local Government Act.
Disallowance of Expenditure
$436.40 being expenses incurred by the shire clerk A. J. Haylor for Mrs Taylor's airfares and hotel expenses between the August 4 and 13, 1979.
$381.51 being expenses by Cr B. A. McNamara for Mrs McNamara's airfares and hotel expenses between August 4 and 13, 1979.
$351.98 being expenses incurred by Cr D. Maslen for Mrs Maslen's airfares and hotel expenses between August 4 and 13,1979.
$711.37 being expenses incurred by Cr C. W. Tuckey for his own and Mrs Tuckey's airfares and hotel expenses between August 4 and 13, 1979.
Advice has been received that since balance date the disallowed expenditure listed above, with the exception of the part of Cr Tuckey's surcharge, amounting to $176.60, has been re-paid to the shire.
Qualifications
I have been unable to obtain satisfactory evidence to permit me to verify municipal fund debtors amounting to $103,523.
The lists of debtors include long outstanding and disputed insurance claims, accounts subject to unresolved disputes and other amounts which appear to be statute barred from recoveryaction.
As a result I am unable to form an opinion as to the value of the debtors on hand at balance date.
Due to the inadequate method of allocation of indirect costs plant operation costs, amounting to $48,430, and public works overhead amounting to $10,318, remain unallocated in the statements.
The effect of this is that the statements do not reflect accurately the cost of works and services provided by the shire.
Accounting records of the various town planning schemes do not reflect the cost of individual developed lots. This prevents me from verifying whether lots have been sold for a profit or a loss.
Accounting Systems
The routine accounting systems and the financial reporting procedures that were criticised in the 1978-79 audit report improved progressively throughout the year. This improvement resulted in monthly statements, supported by explanatory notes and additional information, being submitted to council. These statements and reports regularly supplied the councillors with the true monthly financial position of each of the shire's funds.
Statutory Requirements-Other Acts
Council did not comply with the Road Traffic Act requirement to remit traffic licence fees to the Main Roads Department by the 15th day of the month following collection.
Money for licence fees, received at the shire was paid into the municipal fund and used to meet day to day operating expenses.
At June 30, 1980, $137,157.70, representing nine months collections, remained unremitted to the Main Roads Department.
Statutory Controls-Local Government Act The Act imposes upon elected members of a council a duty to exercise specific controls over the financial affairs of the municipality.

2668 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Personal Explanation

In my opinion the councillors have not properly discharged the responsibilities required of them by the Act in the following instances:
Section 527 of the Act requires that loan funds shall be expended on the work or undertaking for which the loan was raised and not otherwise.
For the whole of the financial year loan fund monies, amounting to $273,854 were improperly applied towards the payment of municipal fund expenses. $181,110 was returned to the loan fund in July 1980, leaving $92,744 still outstanding.
Section 547 (12) of the Act requires an absolute majority decision of council to authorise unbudgetted expenditure. There is no record of this having been done in respect of the payments for items not provided for in the budgets and other payments in excess of budget provisions.
Section 547 (9) requires a council to observe each budget and, as nearly possible, balance each budget.
There is no record of the council having made any serious attempt to manage the financial affairs of the shire in order to comply with this section.
The financial statements of the shire, submitted to the council each month, clearly showed serious and progressively deteriorating budget trends.
Financial reports on the municipal fund showed that the fund was in deficit throughout the whole of the financial year. The amount of end of month deficits varied at times from $103,620 to as high as $845,795.
An end of year deficit for the year ended 30 June 1979 of $576,247 has been followed by an end of year deficit for the year ended 30 June 1980, of$584,684.
Section 504 of the Act, requires a council to operate its trading undertakings without loss being incurred by the council.
Trading losses of the electricity undertaking for the year ended 30 June 1979, amounting to $505,333 have been followed by further ,losses to 30 June 1980, of $405,765.
The shire treasurer, in his reports to the council, advised of the need to comply with section 504 of the Act. Trading statements of the undertaking showing substantial trading losses to December 1979 and February 1980 were also presented to the council.
No attempt
Despite the advice and also the information on trading losses, council did n'ot make any serious attempt to levy charges that could reasonably' achieve the statutory obligations set out in section 504 of the Act.
In April 1980 the council adopted a discriminatory form of electricity tariff that was structured in a way that required the heaviest users to meet a disproportionate share of the cost of supplying electricity.
The effect of this was that the large consumers curtailed consumption considerably making it impossible for budget predictions to be achieved:
When restructuring tariffs in April and May 1980, the council disregarded a long standing supply contract with a major consumer and billed that consumer at a rate well in excess of the price the council had agreed to charge. The consumer to pay amounts in excess of the contract price leaving $65,494 in dispute at 30 June 1980.
Bearing in mind the impact the revised tariff had on the supplementary budget and also the earlier refusal by the consumer to pay amounts billed in excess of the contract price, I consider that the council should have obtained legal advice on the questioning of altering the contract without notice.

The supplementary budget adopted in April 1980 included as a recoverable receipl estimated sales of current to the large consumer at the higher price. This affected the annual statements by including $65,494 as a sundry debtor at 30 June 1980.
I was not provided with any evidence that would give me an assurance that the amount of $65,494 is a recoverable amount. Section 274 of the Act requires that contracts above $4,000 entered into by a council, should be the subject of an advertised tcnder. During the financial year a substantial contract for the supply of filling sand to a town planning scheme subdivision was left without calling tenders.
Quotes were obtained from three contractors and examined by the council. The lowest quote, which was submitted by a councillor, was referred back to the engineer to be re-negotiated.
The original quote was amended to increase a pricc for delivering one of the cartage leads. During the audit examination it was found that the council had approved payments under the contract of $61,200 and thaI all charges made for the delivery of the sand were at the re-negotiated price.
The effect of this was that $2,354 more had been paid out by the council than would have been the case had the original quote been accepted.
The financial position of the municipal fund at balance date had deteriorated to the state that if the fund had been called upon to meet ils current commitments at June 30, 1980, it would have been unable to do so to thc extent of $501 ,582.
The trading fund budget adopted by the council for the 1980-81 financial year was a deficit budget. This is contrary to the provisions of section 547 of the Act.
In July 1980, $100,000 was withdrawn from a t0wn planning scheme special overdraft account and paid into the municipal fund to meet the day-to-day operating expenses of the shire. This action is contrary to the provisions of section 600 of the Act which restricts the usc of special overdraft advances to the financing of approved works.
The monthly financial statements to October 31, 1980, show that the shire's electricity trading undertaking was still in serious financial trouble. The sales of electricity were considerably less than budget prediclions, resulting in the undertaking being unable to meet its commitments to the municipal fund. This has caused the municipal fund to be in deficit at October 31,1980.
CUSTOMS TARIFF AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill relurned from the Senate without requests.
TRADING BANK MERGERS
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER I have received a letter from the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) proposing that a definite matter of public imporlance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The Government's apparent intention to approve proposed mergers of major trading banks regardless of the serious national implications of such mergers.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number afmembers required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-

Trading Bank Mergers

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2669

Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (3.16)-As I was whole nation because much more is at stake than

saying last night before I was rudely interrupted a large commercial deal involving satisfying re-

by the Government, in the last three weeks we sults to the shareholders concerned. At stake is

have witnessed the greatest attempt at restructurthe future shape of our banking industry and of

ing our financial institutions for many years. That our finance industry, the level of bank services

restructuring has involved merger negotiations by available to people, employment in the industry,

all the major private trading banks with the result the availability of credit to ordinary people and

that at this stage two mergers are now formally the price of that credit, and, most importantly, the

proposed. Those mergers are the Bank of New future investment and lending patterns of our

South Wales with the Commercial Bank of major financial institutions.

Australia Ltd and the National Bank of Aus-

tralasia Ltd with the Commercial Banking Co. of In assessing whether approval should be given

Sydney Ltd. These mergers have enormous implithe Treasurer should give full weight to certain

cations for this country. They are the largest national interest considerations which together

mergers or takeovers in our history. The amount provide strong grounds for not approving those

of money involved in the Bank of New South proposed mergers. The first of these is the undue

Wales and Commercial Bank of Australia deal,is concentration of economic power. I believe that

$700m and the amount involved in the National there will be an undue concentration of economic

Bank takeover of the CBC is $450m. For that power if these mergers go ahead. If we look at the

reason the Opposition believes that it is important companies involved we can start to see the enor-

that the mergers be discussed in this Parliament. mous economic power involved. The companies

We also believe that it is important that they be concerned are among the most profitable

discussed here because of the serious national companies in the country. In 1980 the total profits

interest issues involved in these mergers and beof the four companies involved, after interest and

cause they cannot occur without the approval of tax, amounted to $272m. In the list of the 100 top

the Treasurer (Mr Howard).

companies in Australia compiled by the manage-

Under section 63 of the Banking Act the approval of the Treasurer is required for any takeover or disposal of a bank by amalgamation or otherwise and the consent of the Treasurer shall not be unreasonably withheld. We are greatly concerned that the Treasurer seems to see his role under this legislation as simply that of rubber stamping whatever comes before him. Two weeks ago he put out a statement before any merger proposals were finalised, let alone pre-

ment consultant firm P.A. Consulting Services Pty Ltd earlier this year the Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd, which has missed out in the merger round so far, was the third most profitable company in Australia. The Bank of New South Wales was the fifth most profitable, the National Bank was the tenth most profitable, the Commercial Bank of Australia was the twenty-third most profitable and the Commercial Banking Co. was the twenty-sixth most profitable.

sented to him for approval. In that Press statement he said:

If the mergers are approved, the Bank of New South Wales and Commercial Bank of Australia

. . . my general view, is that strong national interest considerations would need to be involved before the Government sought to interfere with normal commercial processes.

merged company would be the third most profitable company in Australia and the National Bank and CBC merged company would be the sixth

This was widely interpreted as the green light for most profitable company in Australia-that is, in

merger discussions to continue, with the result terms of the absolute amount of profits earned.

that the two merger proposals I have referred to That situation applies even without their using

are now formally before the Treasurer for apthat position of greater strength to increase their

proval. The clear implication of the Treasurer's profitability. In addition to profitability, the

statement is that he considered that the national companies involved have a substantial proportion

interest considerations involved in these mergers of the assets of all financial institutions. This is be-

would not be sufficient to cause him to withhold cause in addition to their banking activities they

approval. That was certainly the way in which it each have a subsidiary finance company, a prop-

was interpreted by the financial Press and the erty company, a nominee company and at least

business world of this country. The Opposition reone minority interest in money market corpor-

gards this matter very seriously indeed because in ations, including merchant banks.

its view the national interest considerations

against granting approval are very strong. The So, we are not just talking about the banking in-

Treasurer's carefree disregard of the national dustry. When we talk about these banking

interest in this matter should be of concern to the mergers we are talking about the banks, the

2670 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Trading Bank Mergers

finance companies and other money market corporations and financial institutions. We are talking about the financial industry as a whole. In regard to all financial corporations, the merged Bank of New South Wales with the Commercial Bank of Australia would own 15 per cent of the assets of all financial corporations and the merged National Bank with the CBC bank would have 9 per cent of the assets of all financial institutions in Australia. Along with the ANZ bank, which has 10 per cent of the assets of all financial institutions in Australia, these three private banking conglomerates would control over one-third of the assets of all financial institutions in this country. So, the mergers have implications not only for the banking industry but also for the finance industry as a whole. Of course, given the enormous importance of the finance industry in determining where funds are allocated and invested, this is very important when considering the possible concentration of control of a large section of industry in a few hands. It certainly gives great economic power to the companies which will be merged if they are given approval.
A second national interest point of concern to the Opposition is the reduction in competition which will come from these mergers which must reduce competition not only in the banking industry but also in the rest of the finance industry for the reason that I have already given-that the banks are so influential in the rest of the finance industry. There will be a reduction in the banking industry from six major trading banks down to four; a reduction of one-third. Admittedly we will get a new bank-I think it is the Australian Bank-from 1 July but that will be a very small bank concentrating on one section of the activity and certainly not concentrating on the so-called retail area of activity. This reduction of one-third in the number of major trading banks is serious because profitability is already very high and if that reduction in competition gives, as it will, greater scope for collusive activity on the part of these banks then there will be a greater chance for them to ensure that that profitability is considerably enhanced.
Bank profitability is already at the point where some of these banks are likely to earn more this year than their paid-up capital; that is, if half-year profits are continued for the rest of the year their total profits will be above their paid-up capital. I have mentioned already that the banks are amongst the most profitable companies in the country and, on top of that, their profits are increasing at a rapid rate. In the latest half-year three of the banks indicated a rate of profit growth of over 30 per cent. In 1980, earnings in

cents per $1 share by all of the banks was over 50c. This year, given the rate of profit growth so far, it is likely that the ANZ bank and the Commmercial Banking Company of Sydney will earn over $1 a share;~that is, they will earn more this year after interest and tax than their paid-up capital. They are very profitable. The rest of the banks will earn in the order of 70c per $1 share.
Not only are these banks profitable in terms of the rest of the companies in Australia or in terms of their earnings on capital, but also they are extraordinarily profitable compared with banks in the rest of the world. A survey was made recently by the Melbourne stockbrokers Byron Moore H. Day and Journeaux which listed all the important banks in the Western world according to their income as a percentage of assets. In that listing, the top three banks were British. The next three banks were Australian. The National Bank was the fourth most profitable in the world on this basis of income as a percentage of assets, the ANZ bank was the fifth most profitable and the Wales bank was the sixth most profitable. The CBA came in at fourteenth. These are very profitable banks indeed. They are amongst the most profitable banks in the world. The only banks in the world which are more profitable than the ANZ, the National and the Wales banks are those in Great Britain which are so profitable that the Conservative Thatcher Government has imposed a super-profits tax on them-a so-called windfall profits tax-to try to get back some of the extraordinary profits that those banks are making out of the monetarist policies being pursued by the Thatcher Government.
One thing that is clear from these figures is that when governments such as the Fraser Government pursue monetarist policies, it might not do much for the country but it does a lot of good for the banks. One can see it in Britain and here in Australia. These banks are undoubtedly extremely profitable. If, on top of this, banks are given more monopoly power, which is what they will be given if these mergers go through, and are freed of all interest rate controls, which seems highly likely-half of that has been done already in respect of deposit rates, which have been decontrolled and the Treasurer has indicated his predilection towards freeing the lending rates-we will have a position in which the banks' profitability will be greatly increased in the future. This will be even more so if the banks are able to retain their current exclusive rights to issue cheques and to control Bankcard. These are monopoly privileges which, as the level of competition in the banking industry diminishes, can. be more effectively used to profit at the expense of the

Trading Bank Mergers

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2671

public at large. The role of the Commonwealth Bank in this situation becomes much more important. If the competition is to continue to exist, it will be increasingly dependent upon the Commonwealth Bank to provide that competitionthat is, if the Commonwealth Bank is not subject to a future so-called razor gang decision, sold off to private enterprise and therefore absorbed into the private bank oligopoly.
Some business groups have expressed concern at this lessening of competition, and well they might. The Victorian Chambers of Commerce and Industry and the Small Business Development Council of New South Wales have expressed concern that reduced competition will lead to higher interest rates and higher costs for business. Also, there is likely to be a reduction in services. Widespread fear exists in the community that bank mergers will result in diminished service to the public. There is no doubt that rationalisation of bank branches will occur as the merged banks cut out the duplication of service which would otherwise exist where each of the merger banks has a branch in a country town or suburb. 1 note that the Bank of New South Wales and the Commercial Bank of Australia have branches providing a duplication of services in 300 locations in towns and suburbs. The banks have made it clear in their public statements that they will rationalise where such duplication occurs. Thus, there will be less choice for consumers which can be very important to small businessmen who often shop around for finance. Perhaps there will be a withdrawal of services altogether in some country towns.
Concern that this may occur stems particularly from the clear statements of the banks that substantial cross-subsidisation is involved at present between their so-called wholesale banking activities-that is, corporate financing and overseas activities-and the retail side of their activities-that is, the branch banking side which is the least profitable. They have made it clear that they do not intend to go on with this crosssubsidisation and that there will be rationalisation involving the running down of the less profitable side of the banking business. If this occurs, it is a further reason to expect that the will be a diminution in services. This diminution may mean also that there will be not only a diminution in services available but also in funds available to traditional borrowers from the banks. If the banks concentrate much more on wholesale banking, as it seems is their clear intention, and concentrate less on the more traditional side of banking such as lending to small business, to home buyers, making

personal loans and so on, we are likely to find a reduction in funds available to those areas of activity and, therefore, a diminution in services. This will not just become a matter of inconvenience; it will involve a lack of access to credit altogether in the banking arena for traditional borrowers.
There is also the possibility that a reduction in employment will occur as a result of the rationalisation of bank branching activities. Therefore, it is clear that many banking jobs will be at stake. When the ANZ Bank merged with the English, Scottish and Australian Bank Ltd in 1969, there was a reduction of some 230 bank branches, with up to 2,000 jobs foregone. Of course the banks will claim that there are advantages in what they are doing. They have pointed to the efficient operations which will occur but there is no guarantee that there will be efficient operations.
The Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System states on page 426 of its interim report that there is no evidence to show one way or the other that bigger size is needed for increased efficiency. The report further states that this is a matter which requires more research and inquiry. Yet the government is rushing into approving these banking mergers apparently without getting the benefits of the investigation of the Campbell committee. The banks say also that they will be better able to withstand the entry of foreign banks but, of course, that depends on foreign banks being introduced. Has the Government made a decision about that yet? If it has, it should tell us about it. What possible weight can it give to an argument that mergers should be allowed to withstand foreign banks if it has not made up its mind whether foreign banks should be introduced. Time is against me but I will quickly mention that it is also argued that mergers are needed to enable more resource development funds to be attracted to Australia. There is no clear likelihood of more funds being developed and one must also ask-- -
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong Treasurer) (3.32)--1 thank the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) for raising this matter as it is an important subject. It is a subject that should be approached in a serious fashion. These two mergers deserve very careful analysis and debate. As my colleague has said, we are dealing with the largest merger in Australian commercial history between the Bank of New South Wales and the Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd. If approved,

2672 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Trading Bank Mergers

the mergers will have a significant effect on the size and shape of the trading bank system in Australia. It is a subject that ought to be approached not only seriously but also in a positive fashion. We ought not to look at it in negative terms and we ought not to look at it wholly enveloped by a concern or even with awe at the fact that, if the mergers are approved, we will produce some larger Australian trading banks and banks which will make large profits. As we on this side of the House have said on many occasions the fact that a company -be it a bank or any other Australian company--makes a large profit is not, and should never be, a point of criticism. Rather, it ought to be a point of satisfaction that companies have been able to trade profitably.
Let me make it quite plain that no decision has yet been taken under section 63 of the Banking Act to approve either of the two proposed mergers. I have indicated--and it remains my intention --that a prompt response wi11 be given to the merger applications which have recently been submitted by the two groups of banks in question. In the course of considering the applications in respect of the two mergers, the Government will be giving careful attention to national interest considerations. I repeat what I said in my statement about 10 days ago: The mergers require consent under section 63 of the Act. I remind the House that that section provides that my consent under the Act shall not be unreasonably withheld. I made the general observation that, without wishing to prejudge the outcome of specific consideration of particular applications, my general view then was, and remains, that strong national interest considerations would need to be involved before the Government sought to interfere with normal commercial processes. There is a presumption against intervention in commercial matters on the part of this Government. That has been this Government's philosophy for a long time not only in this area but also in a number of other areas.
In sensibly addressing this issue and becoming involved in a debate, we have to understand something of what has happened to the Australian financial system particularly over the last 10 years and more generally over the last 25 years. During that period the Australian financial system has changed enormously. Certainly that change has not left Australian trading banks untouched. Over the last 25 years the share of total financial assets held by trading banks in Australia has declined from 52 per cent to 38 per cent. So what we are talking about is the merger of participants who between them hold about 38 per cent of the total assets of the Australian financial system. That has

to be said in order to get into proportion consideration of words such as 'monopolies', 'excessive power', and 'excessive economic domination'.
We have to understand that, particularly since the last group of bank mergers were approved, I think by the right honourable member for Lowe (Sir William McMahon) when he was Treasurer back in 1969, there have been enormous changes in the Australian financial system. We have seen the rise through the 1970s of permanent building societies offering many of the facilities that are offered by the savings banks. We have seen the rise of merchant banks and a diversification in activity on the part of the trading banks. In short, we have seen a very significant maturing change in the structure of the Australian financial system where the influence on the role played by the trading banks has been highly significant. It was, of course, in part, in response to these changes that the Government decided to establish in 1979 the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System. The report of that inquiry which, on my latest advice, will be available to the Government in about August of this year wi11 be awaited with enormous interest.
There have been a number of policy decisions in the financial area that the Government has seen fit to postpone until the Campbell Committee report is received. I think it is a thoroughly defensible and logical position for a government to say: 'We have established an inquiry into a financial system. It is a very broad-ranging inquiry. It has people of quality and people who are highly regarded on both sides of politics in Australia. We ought to defer some major policy decisions that can wait until the outcome of that inquiry'. We certainly have done that in a number of areas. But that does not mean that the Government should be paralysed into activity in implementing existing policy. What I and the Government are required to do in respect of the mergers that are now before us is to make a response in terms of the existing policy. I remind the House of the words of section 63 and, indeed, of the requirement that the consent of the Government should not be unreasonably withheld.
Mr Willis-It does not say you must say yes.
Mr HOWARD-No, it does not say that we must say yes.l remind the honourable member for Gellibrand that at no time has the Government, through me, or through anybody else, done other than state the existing requirements of policy and express a general view as to the approach it ought to take to intervention in market-place matters. Of course, that remains the Government's
position.

Trading Bank Mergers

27 May J981 REPRESENTATIVES 2673

By world standards, Australia is heavily banked. For example, if one looks at major banks-I acknowledge straight away that international comparisons are always a bit difficult and they are not perfect but, from time to time, all of us have to fall back on them because they give some clue to the relative position in Australia-at present there are six what we could describe as major trading banks in Australia. If the mergers go ahead, there will be four. In Canada there are five, in Italy five, in Denmark five, in the United Kingdom four, in the Netherlands four, in West Germany three, in France three, in Belgium three, and so-it goes on. Those figures are a guide. They are no the conclusive answer one way or another as to the level of concentration of the banking system in Australia.
If the two mergers go ahead, the shares of trading bank business held in Australia as a result of the mergers will be approximately 29.5 per cent for the Wales-CBA group; 19.9 per cent for the National Bank-Commercial Banking Co. of Sydney group; 18.3 per cent for the ANZ Banking Group Ltd; 21.1 per cent for the Commonwealth Trading Bank; and 11.'7 per cent for other trading banks, of which the Rural Bank of New South Wales, soon to be renamed the State Bank of New South Wales, is by far the largest. As a consequence, if these mergers go ahead we will have a situation where the largest group will hold 29.5 per cent of the assets, and in turn those assets will comprise something like 32 per cent of the assets of all financial institutions in Australia. We should keep those sorts of figures in mind when we are considering the implications in terms of market shares and the like if the mergers go ahead. I have already indicated, and I repeat that indication today, that the Government will be particularly keen to know what is involved in terms of the branch networks, the employment prospects of people currently employed by the various banks involved in the mergers, as part of its consideration of the applications by the companies concerned for permission to merge. The Government regards those matters as being relevant to the decision it has to take.
The question of the strength of Australian banks against the possibility of there being some change in policy as a result of the report of the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System is a factor which inevitably has entered into this debate. I make no prediction about the attitude of the Government in response to what the Campbell Committee may have to say on the question of foreign entry, but it would be quite unrealistic for us to pretend other than that the possibility of foreign entry is a factor

which has influenced decisions taken by Australian banks in recent times. Obviously, we have to give some thought to what the banks have in mind in that area. Nobody likes to see reduced competition. The extent to w.hich competition is reduced as a consequence of a smaller number of units in a market depends very much on the size of the market and on the size of the units that are left after the reduction occurs. As the honourable member for Gellibrand would know, in terms of market shares of major participants, a share of 30 per cent of the market is significantly less than the share of the market held by major participants in many other industries throughout Australia. If we applied the simple test of the merger provision in section 49 of the Trade Practices Act, nobody could seriously suggest that with 30 per cent of the market anyone of these groups would be in a position to control or dominatc the market-the requircment that has to be triggered if refusal to consent to merge under the Trade Practices Act arises. I am not suggesting that it is simply a matter of applying that test, but I do suggest that it is not entirely irrelevant to the situation.
Finally, I certainly agree with the honourable member for Gellibrand that there have been expressions of concern by some representatives of the business community. I do not pretend for a moment that there are not people in the community who have expressed concern about the possibility of banks merging. It is an issue of some difficulty which inevitably raises fairly sensitive considerations and different points of view in the Australian environment, particulady in the country areas. I say bluntly that I can understand people in the rural parts of Australia wanting to know whether the sorts of facilities that their local banks have provided in the past are going to be provided in the future. That is not an unfair pleading of special interest on the part of people in rural Australia, and representatives of those people have a perfect right to be concerned about it.
Nevertheless, it would be quite wrong to suggest that a blind attitude of opposition is being taken, even by representatives of rural parts of Australia, to the possibility of mergers. I refer in particular to a statement issued yesterday by the National Farmers Federation, which is the roof organisation of farmers bodies throughout Australia. In that Press statement the National Farmers Federation declared itself as being not opposed to trading bank mergers, but it stressed that new competition was required within the Australian financial system. I neither endorse nor
reject that statement. 1 merely observe that if we are quoting, as the honourable member for

2674 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Trading Bank Mergers

Gellibrand did, statements from Australian indusmergers should be withheld until we know pre-

try bodies, Parliament should know that view cisely what is in that report, what its recommen-

taken by the National Farmers Federation.

dations are, and whether it would be in the best

interests of this country to allow foreign banks,

I conclude by saying that the decision to be for example, to come into Australia. The Govern-

taken by the Government will be taken against ment not only will receive this report but also will

the background of some of the circumstances I have to make decisions arising out of it.

have described today. It will be taken out of a concern for the national interest. It will also be taken in recognition that the Australian financial system has changed enormously over the last 25 years.
We have to take decisions which evince a willing-
ness to allow it to change further in the next 25 years.

As I said earlier, these decisions are far-reaching decisions. I think it is important to keep in mind that the whole basis of these two mergers is, in effect, the fear that the Campbell Committee will recommend that foreign banks should be able to obtain licences to operate in this country, the fear that the Government will approve that rec-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

ommendation with regard to foreign banks and
the further fear that the foreign banks will engage mainly in wholesale banking. It has be~~ those fears which have brought about the deClSlons of

Mr ARMITAGE (Chiftey) (3.47)-The the ban ks to attempt to amalgamate.

Treasurer (Mr Howard) in his address to the House this afternoon, whilst stating that no decision has been reached at this time as to whether approval will be given for the mergers, nevertheless has given the House the full rationale of the basis upon which he will grant such approval. He did not argue in any way against the mergers. Right throughout the I 5 minutes of his address he put the reasons why the mergers should be approved. Is it any wonder that the Press is stating that the Government has already made up its mind?

I believe that this whole matter centres on the Campbell Committee's recommendations and whether the Government will implement those recommendations. As this whole merger proposition derives from that aspect, surely it is obvious that no decision should be made on the mergers until the Government has made up its
mind as to what sections of the Campbell Committee's report it will implement. For example, as I mentioned earlier, if the foreign banks enter into operations in Australia they will engage mainly in wholesale banking. The Australian banks have

r submit that great attention has to be given to
what will be recommended by the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System and which of its recommendations will be approved by the Government. The Committee's report will be far reaching and will deal with major issues, including whether foreign banks should be given approval to enter Australia. It will have to give consideration to the number of licences to be granted in the event of those foreign banks entering Australia. Quite frankly, it is rumoured that up to five licences could be granted to foreign banks to operate in Australia. The report will have to give consideration to deregulation of the banking system and to many other vital and important issues. The Treasurer has pointed out that if the Bank of New South WalesCommercial Bank of Australia Ltd merger goes ahead it will be the biggest merger in the country's history, whether of a financial organisation or

been reduced in number. For example, we had 21 private banks in 1914, nine in 1939, and seven in 1969. The number is now to be reduced to four. In that set of circumstances, I think it is logical and common sense to say that the merged banks and the ANZ Banking Group Ltd will be forced into the situation of competing with the foreign banks in wholesale banking. The result will be that they will tend to wind down their activities so far as retail banking is concerned. They will then find themselves in a situation where they are no longer providing the same service to the general public, particularly to the small businessman and to those in the country, as they are providing today. That will have a very big impact upon employment in the banking industry. If, at the same time, the Government decides to deregulate the banks altogether, it will mean that there will be a steadily increasing interest rate. It will mean that there will be much greater profits.

otherwise, and will involve an amount of $700m. We are not against these banks having adequate

In view of the fact that the Campbell Committee profit margins. On the other hand, one must re-

will make its recommendations to the Governmember that when the profit margins go beyond

ment in the comparatively near future, I believe being adequate and become excessive-as men-

that a decision on whether to approved the tioned by the honourable member for Gellibrand

Trading Bank Mergers

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2675

(Mr Willis), even the British Thatcher Government is taking action to obtain its share of the windfall profits from the British banks-interest rates will rise and profits will rise. Who will be paying for this? The public generally, whether it be the corporate sector or people as a whole. Just recently the various banks announced increases in profits. The Bank of New South Wales has announced a profit increase of 33 per cent, the National Bank 39 per cent and the ANZ Bank 34 per cent. These are very appreciable increases in profits. With these mergers and the entry of the banks into the wholesale sector these profits will increase. I remind the Treasurer that they will be met by the public generally and by the economy generally. It is all very well to say that it is good to see large profits being made. We should always remember from whose pockets those profits come. They come from those of the public generally.
r believe that the Treasurer and the Govern-
ment have to look at what will occur as a result of these mergers. There will be the closing of a large number of branches, in effect making staff redundant. Staff might not be dismissed there and then but the banks will not take on staff in the future. That will have a big impact on employment opportunities for young people. The mergers will affect the services that the banks provide to the public. Once the banks enter the wholesale banking setup that must affect the general service to the public. They will cut down the choice that the public has in making a decision as to where to bank. We should keep in mind that the right honourable member for Lowe (Sir William McMahon) came into Parliament as a result of the bank nationalisation campaign. The argument then was that the banks should be allowed to continue, that there should be opportunity for choice by the public. Yet today the Government has turned right around. The Government and the Treasurer today are arguing the opposite of what the Government parties argued back in 1949.
Mr Young-Chifiey was right.
Mr ARMITAGE-I agree. I wish we had a Treasurer like Ben Chifiey today. For these reasons, I submit that decisions on these mergers should be held back until such time as the Campbell Committee's report is tabled in the Parliament, until such time as the Government has made its decisions as to whether the whole of that report will be implemented or what sections of it will be implemented and whether foreign banks particularly are to be allowed into this country and licensed. That is the very crux of the decision of the banks to amalgamate. If it were not for the fear of the entry of foreign banks, Australian

banks would not be undertaking these amalgamations in such haste. J submit that the decisions should be held back until such time as the Campbell Committee's report comes out.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON (Lowe) (3.57)--The comments of the honourable member for Chifiey (Mr Armitage) give me a real opportunity to show the falsity of the arguments that have been made by and on behalf of the Opposition. The honourable member mentioned first the probability that the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System will recommend that there should be greater deregulation of the trading banks and that some foreign banks should be permitted to operate in this country. I hope both are true. As the honourable gentleman said, 1 entered this Parliament in 1949. One of the assurances that 1gave to my electorate then was that I would ensure that the private banking system was sustained in this country. That was a goal that I wanted to achieve.
I never argued that, with changing circumstances, with Australia's trading interest in the rest of the world increasing day by day particularly with recent developments in the energy field, we should remain stagnant and do nothing. On the contrary, there has been an inducement and incentive for us to get into the international market so far as banking is concerned and similarly to let bankers from overseas come into Australia.
I must say, too, that I had the opportunity at one stage of being the operative solicitor in a Sydney firm for both the Reserve Bank of Australia and the Bank of New South Wales at the same time. Naturally, this was an invaluable education. I must say also that when [ was Treasurer I opposed the entry of foreign banks into this country. We have gone a long way since I was the Treasurer. I believe that the time is ripe for action now.
[t is true that in 1972 I agreed to the ANZ Bank taking over the E. S. and A. Bank. 1 believe that that takeover was in the interests of Australia. Equally, not only as the Treasurer but also as the Prime Minister, I was anxious to ensure that there should be an amalgamation of the Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd and the Commercial Bank~ ing Company of Sydney Ltd. Those banks were operating in too narrow a sphere, not over Australia as a whole. One was operating fundamentally in Sydney and the other was operating basically in Victoria. Those banks are now to be amalgamated with other banks. This will be to the

2676 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Trading Bank Mergers

advantage of the Australian people. 1 warn Australians and I warn this House of the dangers that can emerge if we allow little ban ks to go on for too long. We have the example of the Bank of Adelaide. lts experiences show what we should have done earlier to avoid the serious problems that occurred. Now I want to speak about the structure of the whole banking system.
Mr Young-- That means that we will end up with only one bank.
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-Please be a good boy. I am very kind to the honourable member. I put this to the House: As one looks at the problem today, one would think from what has been said by the Opposition that one would have trading banks only. A new trading bank is coming into existence; that is the Australian Bank Ltd. Nobody has mentioned that.
Mr Willis 1 mentioned it.
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-Shut up, please. I did not interject when the honourable member spoke. I listened to him with great tolerance, as he knows I do, despite the fact that his knowledge is remiss. We should look at what happened from the time Nugget Coombs was the head of the Commonwealth Banking Corporation. He restrained the operations of the trading banks and that led to the establishment of the merchant banking system in this country. What happened was that instead of the trading banks expanding-these banks being the most efficient traders in Australia . depositors went to the merchant bankers. The trading bank assets were reduced from 54 per cent to 38 per cent of total banking throughout Australia. That was bad luck for Australia, I believe, although the merchant banks are doing well now.
The Opposition then forgot section 51, placitum (xiii) of the Constitution which refers to the fact that under the Constitution the Commonwealth has no control of the State banks. Now we have a big banking system including the State banks and merchant banks. There were so many different kinds of merchant banking organisations that they had to be controlled. I am glad that in 1959 I participated in the formation of the Banking Act. I and the late Roy Wheeler were two of the dominant people in the Liberal Party in ensuring that that Banking Act came into existence.
The Opposition seems to have forgotten that all foreign companies and all of the merged banks will be controlled by that Banking Act. The Opposition should look at the various activities of the trading banks that will be controlled by the Reserve Bank. The Reserve Bank of Australia will not let anyone run wild. It is an Australian bank;

its governors are all Australian; the senior officials are Australian too. Do honourable members opposite not think that, together with the Australian trading banks, the Reserve Bank will consider and act in the best interests of the people of Australia
before anything else?
I refer to the financing of farm interests which was raised by the Treasurer (Mr Howard). I point out that in the last few months we have seen loans to farmers increase by $2,168m. Does that mean that farmers have been forgotten? Of course not! What sector is playing an important part in the housing industry? It is the trading bank system with those banks' savings banks wrapped up in it. The real problem is that honourable members op-
posite want to be backwoodsmen with their feet in bogland. We, in this Party, want to simulate effort to expand, not only internally, but also internationally. When Australia gets the opportunity, as has been shown in the manufacturing industry, it can supply the rest of the world with energy. Equally, I am certain, our banking system will do
the same.
I mention some other resources that are important. The world has changed. We all know that. We have seen changes internally. We must also remember that in these days trade knows no geographical boundaries. Per head of population, Australia is one of the great trading nations of the world. Should we prevent our traders having access to Australian funds wherever they go and being able to get advice from Australian banks whilst they are overseas? New technologies. are increasing every day. Finally, the services given by banks are improving rapidly. In other words, banks have got out of the basic elements of the banking system into provision of services of many kinds. They should extend world wide too, Let me present one other change in the financial world to honourable members that has not been mentioned. It is stated in one of the preliminary reports of the Campbell Committee of Inquiry that nowadays, because of the very big increase in household disposable income, it is essential that we have a bigger banking system with a spread into the widest parts of Australia to ensure bigger bank deposits. In other words the merged banks will not be able to stand still. When competition comes to this country from overseas or even with the competition that will come from the three bigger banks, including the Commonwealth Bank, each will do its best to ensure that it gets the biggest part of the deposit market. This is an essential
conditions of success.
Let me give an illustration of the way the Bank of New South Wales will operate and expand. It will have a widespread and balanced group of

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill 27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2677

branches with 1,770 branches initially. One thouis important to all Australians and their families.

sand five hundred and thirty of these branches The implementation of the Government's de-

will be in Australia, 200 branches will be in New cisions arising from the review commenced on the

Zealand and 13 branches in other countries. This day of the Prime Minister's statement. Some de-

demonstrates an attitude we want-expansion. It cisions can be implemented almost overnight. is an attitude that means the banks are prepared Others cannot be achieved as quickly but initiat-

to take risks. The incentive is there; the judgment ing action has been taken. Positive demon-

and the guts to go out and fight economically and strations of the Government's determination to financially for this country. They will show that withdraw from inappropriate activities and

this country can succeed in other parts of the streamline Commonwealth operations are already world in the same way as we, in our war efforts, in evidence. were able to make a notable contribution over-

seas, and we know of the overseas achievements of our manufacturers. I hope the Government will quickly operate under, I think, section 63. It must not refuse any application unreasonably. I know that the Government will not be unreasonable. These banks will perform a remarkably good duty for this country. This will involve more employment amongst other things.

The Government is committed to following through the decisions announced by the Prime Minister with all expedition; decisions which are in the best interests of all Australians. In reaching its conclusions, it weighed all considerations, in particular the longer term gains to the Australian community. The Government will not be swayed from the speedy implementation of the decisions.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)- Order! The right honourable member's time has expired. The discussion is concluded.
COMMONWEALTH FUNCTIONS (STATUTES REVIEW) BILL 1981

The measures contained in this Bill are part of the implementation process. The large majority of the decisions announced by the Prime Minister are being implemented by executive direction as they do not require legislation. Several amendments will become effective from the date when royal

Bill presented by Mr Viner, and read a first time.
Second Reading

assent is given. However, some provisions will not become effective until necessary obligations are discharged or arrangements completed.

Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister) (4.6) -I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
In his statement to the Parliament on 30 April the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) observed that the Review of Commonwealth Functions has been the most significant and far-reaching ministerial review of its kind ever undertaken by a federal government. The Prime Minister announced some 350 decisions aimed at transferring to the

Further legislation may be required after more detailed reviews of some functions have been completed. Negotiations with the States are required to implement some decisions. In particular, later legislation may be needed to encompass decisions on such matters as student loans, the Curriculum Development Centre, the transfer to the South Australian Government of Australian National Railways staff and deregulation of the Australian National Railways and the Australian National Line.

private sector and the States functions more appropriately performed by them and rationalising functions which properly belong to the Commonwealth. The overall objective of the review is to establish conditions under which there can be increased opportunities for all and better care for

I shall now outline the individual provisions in the Bill which give effect to decisions on each of the three major areas examined by the Reviewthe private sector, the States and the Commonwealth sector.

those in need. As the Prime Minister said in his statement, the immediate aim of the review was to

Transfer to Private Sector

streamline and fine down Commonwealth operThe Bill includes provisions which enable the

ations. He further said:

transfer or sale to the private sector of several

Big government concentrates power, loses perspective on its own limitations, and leaves less room for people to make their own choices.
The elimination of unnecessary costs of govern-

activities currently undertaken by the Commonwealth. The Government's view is that activities of a commercial kind are generally best performed by the private sector, where they are open

ment is an essential ingredient of a sound and to the disciplines of competition. Not all such

growing economy. A sound and growing economy transfers require legislation.

2678 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981 Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill

The Minister for the Capital Territory is empowered in Part II, Division 3 of the Bill to direct the Canberra Commercial Development Authority to enter into an agreement for the sale of the Belconnen Mall. Upon completion of the sale the Canberra Commercial Development Authority Ordinance 1974 will be repealed. Similarly, the Minister for the Capital Territory is empowered in Part II, Division 4 of the Bill to direct the Canberra Retail Market Trust to enter into an agreement for sale of the Canberra Retail Markets after which the Canberra Retail Markets Ordinance 1971 will be repealed. In accordance with the decision that the Australian Post Courier Service be abolished, Part III of the Bill removes from the Postal Services Act 1975 all references to that Service.

Firstly, estates with divisible assets of over $10,000 will be administered by a registered private trustee unless the court exercising jurisdiction in bankruptcy or the Registrar in Bankruptcy is satisfied that there is no registered trustee willing to administer the estate.
Secondly, some changes are being made to ensure that the trustee is not subject to any restrictions which might impede the performance of his trustee function in a proper and businesslike manner.
Thirdly, most of the statutory responsibilities currently exercised by the official receivers will either be considerably reduced or else transferred to the trustee of the estate, whether public or private.

Part IV of the Bill deals with amendments to the Wool Industry Act 1972 to give effect to the Government's decision that the Australian Wool Testing Authority and some wool stores operated by the Australian Wool Corporation be sold. The continued issuing of test certifications and ready trade acceptance of such certification is essential to the sale of the Australian wool clip. This has influenced the legislative provisions made for the sale of the Authority.

Part XIII of this Bill provides for the Minister for Housing and Construction to enter an agreement for the sale of the business of the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation. The Corporation was established in 1965 to insure lenders against losses on housing loans. It has been successful in serving as a catalyst for the development of a mortgage insurance industry in Australia, with the result that three private mortgage insurers now operate in competition with HUe. The Government has concluded that mortgage in-

Clause 115 of the Bill will allow for the formasurance can now be provided efficiently by the tion of a body corporate owned by the Australian private sector without direct government

Wool Corporation to assume the present funcinvolvement.

tions of the Authority, and to facilitate its sale as a going concern to a final owner. Provision is made for the Corporation to hold an interest in the body which is the final owner to such an extent and on such terms and conditions as the Minister approves. If necessary, the Corporation may act as a guarantor for the purchaser. Certificates issued by the Authority prior to its sale will retain their validity. Any certificate issued by a new testing body in which the Corporation has an interest will be a legal certificate in the same way as those presently issued. The proposed amendment to section 76 of the principal Act will empower the Minister to direct the Corporation to dispose of land or buildings which comprise wool stores under Part VII of the Wool Industry Act where, in his opinion, these are surplus to minimum wool storage capacity.

.

Tn selling the Corporation the Government expects to see the continuation of a competitive mortgage insurance industry with the business of HLIC taken over as a going concern. Accordingly, the Corporation will continue to operate on its present basis up to the time of sale. Any purchaser of the Corporation's business will be required to have the necessary strong financial backing. Sale will be subject to the understanding that the purchaser maintains the level of services now provided by the Corporation. The sale will not prejudice the interests of policy holders or those persons whose housing loans have been insured by the Corporation. The Commonwealth will stand behind the liabilities of the Corporation on insurance policies written up to the time of sale. The Government acknowledges the contribution of

Part V of the Bill will amend the Bankruptcy Act to ensure that as much as practicable of the bankruptcy trustee work that is currently being

the management and staff to the Corporation's success. It will ensure that they are treated fairly and equitably.

performed by the Commonwealth will be handled by the private sector. The amendments seek to

Deregulation

create a framework in which creditors and The Government's determination to remove

debtors will make greater use of the facilities in unnecessary and ineffective regulation of industry

the private sector for handling these matters:

is retlected in several components of the Bill. Part

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill 27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2679

II of the Bill gives effect to the Government's decision to deregulate a number of activities currently being carried on in the Australian Capital Territory. The repeal of the Architects Ordinance 1959, the Surveyors Ordinance 1967 and the Agents Ordinance 1968 will enable the professional organisations in each sphere to regulate their own affairs. The Bill will repeal the Prices Regulation Ordinance 1949 and empower the Milk Authority to determine the maximum prices for milk in the Australian Capital Territory.
By amending the Landlord and Tenant Ordinance 1949 the Bill will abolish the office of Rent Controller and the Fair Rents Board thereby removing fair rent control in the Australian Capital Territory. All other functions of the Rent Controller which do not relate to rent control will now be exercised by the Minister or his delegate. By repealing Part III of the Co-operative Societies Ordinance ]939 the Bill will give effect to the Government's decision to deregulate co-operative trading societies. Control of trading hours for the sale of goods will be abolished by the repeal of the Trading Hours Ordinance 1962. Other minor amendments to various Ordinances consistent with the Government's decisions are also included in the Bill.
Acquisitions of shelf and shell companies are, at present, notifiable under section 26 of the Foreign Takeovers Act. The Government has decided to exempt from notification acquisitions of shell and shelf companies. The proposed amendments in Part XII of the Bill will reduce and simplify the notification requirements for foreign investors and further improve the efficiency of the foreign investment screening process.
Part XVIII of the Bill repeals all prices justification legislation, following the Government's decision to abolish the Prices Justification Tribunal. Provision is made in this Part for the preparation and tabling of a final report of the operations of the Prices Justification Tribunal and for the transfer to the proposed petroleum products pricing authority of those PJT records that relate to the production or supply of petroleum products or to associated services. A separate Bill to establish a commissioner for petroleum products pricing will be introduced by the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs.
Part XX, which amends the Remuneration Triburtals Act 1973, provides that a person simultaneously holding two full time offices may at most receive only one salary and one annual allowance. This provision is included in the light of Part XIV of the Bill which would permit the holder of the full time office of commissioner for

petroleum products pricing to be appointed also as the full time member of the Temporary Assistance Authority, should that he necessary.
The other purpose of Part XIV of the Bill is to amend sub-section 23 (1) of the Industries Assistance Commission Act to allow the Minister to refer to the Commission matters relating to assistance to industries generally without referring to a specific industry or group of industries. This amendment is proposed as a consequence of the Government's decision to request the Commission to investigate the scope for modifying or improving the Customs by-law system.
Industry Assistance
The Review's approach to reducing costs on the community included identifying areas with less need for specific government initiatives to promote particular business activities. Parts X and XI of the Bill provide for the Export Expansion Grants scheme to be extended for an additional year with the grant rates being halved for the additional year and for the Export Market Development Grants scheme to be extended for an additional year. The export incentives schemes are being referred to the Industries Assistance Commission for inquiry and report by 31 December 1981. The extension of the Export Incentives schemes will give time for the Government, following the report of the lAC, to consider the future of the schemes and for industry to be able to take the Government's decisions into account in their export planning. Bills have been introduced earlier this sitting relating to export inspection charges for fish and dried fruit. Inspection charges will be extended in the next two years to a range of other primary products. Legislation to give effect to the reduced taxation concessions announced by the Prime Minister in his 30 April statement is being introduced by the Treasurer (Mr Howard).
Transfer to the States
The Review of Commonwealth Functions identified major programs appropriate for early transfer to the States. Such transfers are part of this Government's consistent policy of allowing the States greater freedom in deciding how they will spend their available finances. The transfer will eliminate unnecessary overlap, waste and interference in the delivery of services and programs. Part XXI of the Bill provides for the amendment of the States Grants (Urban Public Transport) Act 1978 so as to give effect to the Government's decision to terminate specific purpose assistance to the States for urban transport as from 30 June 1981. The Government takes the

..

2680 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981 Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill

view that urban public transport is an area which is properly the responsibility of the States, and that henceforth it should be for State governments to determine the total amount of funds to be allocated for their urban public transport programs.
Honourable members may be aware that at the Premiers Conference on 4 May 1981, the' Commonwealth announced that the States' overall entitlements for 1981-82 under the tax sharing arrangements would include a special adjustment of $50m to offset the termination of specific purpose grants for urban public transport. The Bill also gives effect to the Government's decision to ter- ~inate assistance to the States for transport planmng and research after the current year. Again, the Government views this as an area in which the States must bear the prime responsibility. The majority of the projects which had been funded under the program related predominantly to State and local government concerns. The Commonwealth will, however, continue to provide funding for the Australian Road Research BoardARRB-and the Australian Railway Research and Development Organisation-ARRDO. The Treasurer is introducing separate legislation to give effect to the new tax sharing provisions with the States and hospitals and related health services funding.
Rationalisation of Commonwealth Activities
Other parts of the Bill deal with a range of decisions to rationalise Commonwealth Government activities. I remind honourable members that the Government made its decisions in this area with several clear objectives in mind: Firstly, to make sure government activity does not inhibit private sector expansion; secondly, to reduce unnecessary demands on the taxpayer by cutting back on bureaucracy; and thirdly, to achieve the greatest efficiency and effectiveness possible. Part VI of the Bill is to give effect to the Government's decision to remove the options, currently available under the Compensation (Commonwealth Governme~t Employees) Act 1971, of making compensatlOn appeals against determinations of the Commissioner for Employees Compensation to State and Territory courts and commissions. It also transfers the present jurisdiction of the Commonwealth Employees Compensation Tribunal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. All matters not heard or part-heard by the Compensation Tribunal at the time Part VI is proclaimed will be transferred to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal subject to appropriate transitional provisions provided in the Bill. Matters before the State and territory courts and commissions at that

time will continue to finality but no new applications for judicial review may be made after the date of commencement.
The Bill provides for aspects of Compensation Tribunal procedures that may be more advantageous to an employee appellant than present aspects of procedures before the Administrative Appeals Tribunal to apply to compensation appeals before the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. Thus, for instance, the time for lodging of appeals to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal in such matters will be 60 days not 28 days. The Attorney-General (Senator Durack) has received from the Administrative Review Council a report concerning rights of appeal under the 1971 Act and related matters. The amending Bill is consistent with each of the Council's recommendations in relation to the Commonwealth Employees Compensation Tribunal. Part VII of the Bill provides for the amendment of the Audit Act 1901 to provide that all payments of remuneration or allowances to Commonwealth employees shaH not be made in cash unless the Minister for Finance otherwise determines. However, it is expected that a few exemptions will be granted and that they will apply mainly to industrial type payrolls.
Part VIII of the Bill retains the Commonwealth Teaching Service but provides for the abolition of the office of Commonwealth Teaching Service Commissioner. It provides for the transfer of the functions currently performed by the Commissioner to the Department of Education, the Australian Capital Territory Schools Authority and the Public Service Board. A significant factor in the decision to abolish the office of Commissioner was the reduction in his responsibility which will occur with the imminent transfer of Commonwealth Teaching Service members employed in the Northern Territory to a Northern Territory Teaching Service. The Department and the Schools Authority will be responsible for functions associated with the on-going operation of the Australian Capital Territory further education and schools systems respectively including appointments, promotions, deployment of staff and discipline. The Board will be responsible for terms and conditions of service, including the conduct of arbitral proceedings and for authorising the creation and abolition of teacher positions by the relevant authorities.
Part IX repeals section 5 of the National Health Act thereby removing the requirement for the Director-General of Health to be-a medical practitioner. This amendment would give effect to an earlier recommendation made by the Royal Commission on Australian Government Administration. The proposed amendments to the Lands

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Bill 27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2681

Acquisition Act 1955 in Part XV gives effect to the Government decision that the overseas property activities of statutory authorities be transferred to the Department of Administrative Services. The Act will apply to all overseas property acquisitions by agreement~inc1uding acquisitions by statutory authorities~in the same way as it applies to acquisitions by agreement in Australia. This will achieve a consistency of approach in the Government's property dealings and will avoid any wasteful competitive biddings between Commonwealth instrumentalities on overseas property markets. A side benefit of the amendments will be that overseas property transactions will be included in the schedules of property acquisitions provided to the Parliament.
Part XVI of the Bill will repeal the Legislative Drafting Institute Act of 1974, by which the Legislative Drafting Institute was created. The Institute was established for the purpose of training legislative draftsmen, mainly for the benefit of this Parliament but also to assist other countries, especially developing countries, in the training of draftsmen. (Quorum formed). Five annual training courscs have been conducted by the Institute, each of about 10 to 12 persons, and a course currently in progress will terminate in November of this year. Most of the trainees have come from other countries. It is intended that, in future, training and assistance of this kind will be given in thc form of on the job training, in either the Office of Parliamentary Counsel or the Legislative Drafting Division of the Attorney-General's Department.
Under the Navigation Act 1912 the engagement and discharge of merchant seamen comes under the supervision of mercantile marine office superintendents. It has been decided that the present degree of supervision, which is a carry over from earlier days when such supervision was needed in the interests of the seamen, is no longer necessary. Part XVII of the Bill therefore amends the Navigation Act to provide for the reduction of such supervision. This is being achieved mainly by amendments that will allow seamen to be left behind from their ships for legitimate reasons, such as proceeding on leave, without going through formal discharge procedures and to rejoin their ships without going through formal re-engagement procedures.
Part XIX amends the Preference to Australian Goods (Commonwealth Authorities) Act 1980. Its purpose is to give effect to the Government's decision that the purchasing function of the Department of Administrative Services is to be ex-
tended to encompass purchases over the Finance Regulation 52 limit of $10,000 for statutory

authorities and departments. The legislation will provide a basis for a major rationalisation of Commonwealth procurement operations.
The Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) will introduce a separate Bill to provide for the amalgamation of the Australian Capital Territory Totalizator Agency Board and the Liquor and Poker Machine Licensing Boards. An amendment is to be moved in another place to the Archives Bill to provide for charging for archival storage of certain records of Commonwealth business undertakings.
Conclusion
The timely and efficient manner in which the Governmcnt's decisions are being implemented reflected their widespread acceptance. The measures which comprise the Bill, together with many more being implemented administratively, are a significant step towards reducing the cost of government to the community and so contributing to economic growth and the well-being of all Australians. Tcommend the Bill to the House.
Mr Scholes~T wish to move that the debate be adjourned to this day six months.
Debate (on motion by Mr Scholes) adjourned.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)- Honourable members will appreciate that the honourable member for Corio is following an unusual course. It is in the Standing Orders and is quite pcrmissible. The question now is: That the adjourned debate be made an order of the day for the next day of sitting.
Amendment (by Mr Scholes) negatived:
Omit 'the next day of sitting'; substitute 'this day six months'.
Original question resolved in the affirmative.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PRICING BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Moore, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.36) - -I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to give effect to the Government's decision, announced by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) on 30 April 1981, that concurrently with abolition of the Prices Justification Tribunal a Petroleum Product Pricing Authority would be established for the maintenance of the Government's petroleum product pricing policy. The Petroleum Product Pricing Authority proposcd by this Bill will take over

2682 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Petroleum Products Pricing Bill

from the PJT the specific responsibility for price surveillance of the petroleum products industry. The Authority will have substantially fewer staff than the PJT but will have powers similar to those that the PJT now has in relation to the prices of petroleum products. Surveillance of the prices of the industry will extend only to defined petroleum products and to services related to the production or supply of such products.
The Bill provides for the creation of an office of Commissioner for Petroleum Products Pricing. The Commissioner can also hold simultaneously, if necessary, the office of full time member of the Temporary Assistance Authority. Provision is also made for the appointment of associate commissioners for the purposes of particular inquiries. The Minister's direction or approval will be required before an inquiry can be conducted by the Authority. Inquiries by the Authority will not necessarily be confined to the justification of particular prices. It will also be able to undertake inquiries of a more general nature relating to the prices of petroleum products or associated services.
The companies which will be required to notify the Authority of proposed price increases are those companies which are declared by the Minister by notice published in the Gazette. Where a proposed increase is to be subjected to an inquiry, an interim increase may be allowed pending the outcome of the inquiry. The Minister will have the power to give directions to the Authority on matters which should be given special consideration. Confidentiality of material submitted by companies will be adequately protected under the provisions of clauses 26 and 37 of the Bill.
The Bill provides for appropriate surveillance of petroleum product prices, bearing in mind that these prices have been affected sharply in recent years by world-wide increases in crude oil prices. The legislation has been framed to ensure that the activities of the Authority have due regard to the interests of the industry and those of the community as a whole. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Hurford) adjourned.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY GAMING AND LIQUOR AUTHORITY
BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Hodgman, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (4.39)-1 move:

That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill is the first step to be taken in implementing the Government's decision to amalgamate the Australian Capital Territory Totalizator Agency Board, the Liquor Licensing Board and the Poker Machine Licensing Board and thereby to rationalise the number of statutory authorities in the Territory. The proposed authority will bring together a range of like and interrelated functions leading to a more effective and efficient co-ordination of gambling and liquor controls. The amalgamation offers scope for administrative efficiency with the sharing of common facilities and computer services.
The new Authority will consist of five members, including a chairman and deputy chairman. No specific membership qualifications are prescribed but because of the important community implications of the Authority's activities I propose that it should include a member of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly and a legal practitioner. The Bill includes a number of transfer arrangements and savings provisions to facilitate the establishment of the new Authority. It vests all the assets and liabilities of the TAB and Poker Machine Licensing Board in the Authority and protects the ~mployment conditions of TAB staff. The rights of the public servants who service the Liquor Licensing and Poker Machine Licensing Boards will not be affected under the Bill. Once the legislation is in operation and the new Authority constituted, the Government will consult with it on the further changes' that might be necessary to facilitate the amalgamation process. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Scholes) adjourned.
INCOME TAX LAWS AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1981
.Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (4.42) -I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
It is with some satisfaction that I place before the Parliament the results of much careful and difficult work carried out to establish appropriate provisions to deal in a general way with the sorts of artificial schemes of tax avoidance with which of recent times we have become only too familiar. In short, this Bill proposes new general antiavoidance measures to replace section 260 of the Income Tax Assessment Act. As I shall explain in more detail later, the measures in the Bill are designed to operate against avoidance schemes of a

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2683

blatant, artificial or contrived kind and to have an measure with whatever further action may be ap-

impact in respect of both domestic and interpropriate in the circumstances.

national transactions. In the international area, however, even more is needed by way of a general legislative response to problems of avoidance of Australian tax. Later in this speech J will be setting out in some detail changes that the Government will be proposing to section 136 of the Income Tax Assessment Act which is, of course, the provision dealing generally with avoidance in international business and transactions.

What is it that general anti-avoidance provisions should aim to achieve? Few people have faced up squarely to that question. This Government has faced up to it, and also to the probably even more difficult problem of finding the legal language in which to express the conclusions reached about desired policy objectives. We are acutely aware that the term 'tax avoidance' means
different things to different people. Reasonable

Honourable members will be aware that for men and women are bound to differ on this cru-

some time now the Government has been actively cial question and on the subsidiary matter of the

carrying through processes to design provisions to appropriate tests for determining what behaviour

overcome the limitations on the scope of section a general anti-avoidance provision ought to

260 that have been revealed by a series of court proscribe.

decisions. In view of the special nature of this task, the processes have not been confined to the work carried out by officials, but have extended to taking advice from senior private counsel and from the Government's Taxation Advisory Committee. This external advice along with contributions from the Government members' taxation committee have played a significant part in determining the final form of the Bill and ] wish to place on record my appreciation, and the Government's appreciation, of the contributions that have been made by all of those bodies and their members. I think it is appropriate on this occasion to say that the Bill substantially accords with advice coming to the Government from both official and non-official sources.

The proposed provisions-embodied in a new Part IVA of the Income Tax Assessment Actseek to give effect to a policy that such measures ought to strike down blatant, artificial or contrived arrangements, but not cast unnecessary inhibitions on normal commercial transactions by which taxpayers legitimately take advantage of opportunities available for the arrangement of their affairs. For example, a husband and wife who choose to run a business as partners will need
have no fear of having their arrangements affected by Part IVA. There will be no question, either, of the new provisions impeding a parent
who wishes to pass to a spouse or to children the use and enjoyment of some income-producing assets.

It is the belief of the Government that there is a wide community consensus that Australia must have an effective general anti-avoidance provision. There is widespread abhorrence of blatant tax avoidance of the kind that we have recently experienced. It distorts in a most unacceptable way the relative burdens of tax that are borne by different sectors of the community. In pursuing the Government's firm resolve to counter this kind of activity we have, over the past three years or so, introduced a series of specific, yet complex, anti-avoidance measures. That has been a necessary response in the circumstances, but unless something is done along general lines there is a

Some writers on the subject suggest that tax avoidance involves conduct entered into for the sole or dominant purpose of obtaining a particular tax advantage. That description could be expected to cover the types of tax avoidance that, again using the language of social or political debate, are blatant, artificial or contrived, and which are indeed intended to be covered by this Bill. But it is also apt to describe other arrangements, including some family arrangements, which are beyond the appropriate scope of general anti-avoidance measures and ought, if need be, to be dealt with by specific measures.

very real danger that our income tax legislation [n order to confine the scope of the proposed

will become so voluminous and so complicated as provisions to schemes of the blatant or paper var-

to be virtually incomprehensive. I do not say that iety, the measures in this Bill are expressed so as to

the measures in this Bill will provide a cure-all in render ineffective a scheme whereby a tax benefit

respect of all future avoidance arrangements. The is obtained and an objective examination, having

problems inherent in expressing solutions in a genregard to the scheme itself and to its surrounding

eral, but controlled, way may mean that there will circumstances and practical results, leads to the

be tax-avoidance arrangements contrived in the conclusion that the scheme was entered into for

future that escape being struck down by the new the sole or dominant purpose of obtaining a tax

measures. As to that, let me say simply that the benefit. Certainly, different approaches might

Government will, where necessary, follow up this have been taken. The Government tried many of

2684 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

them in the course of developing this Bill. One possibility considered was to adopt the language of the Privy Council in the well-known decision in Newton's case and, positive tests of inclusion having been expressed, make the new provisions inapplicable to schemes entered into in the course of ordinary business or family dealing. It has been decided, however, that the better test of what is blatant, contrived or artificial is the positive one that has been adopted. That test seems best to capture the essence of the views expressed by the Privy Council which, in fact, characterised an ordinary business or family dealing as representing a situation other than one of which it can be predicated that it was implemented in the particular way so as to avoid tax.
I have already said that one of the conditions for the application of the new Part IVA is to be that a taxpayer has obtained what the Bill terms a tax benefit. Such a benefit will have been obtained if, after all other provisions of the income tax law have been applied, an amount is not included in a taxpayer's assessable income that might reasonably be expected to have been included if the scheme had not been entered into.
The other form of tax benefit covered by the Bill concerns an amount that, again after all other provisions have been applied, is an allowable deduction to a taxpayer, but is one the whole or a part of which might reasonably be expected not to have been allowable if the scheme had not been entered into. This approach-of specifying in the new provisions what constitutes a tax benefit and that the relevant purpose for application of the provisions is one of obtaining such a benefitshould help to eliminate some of the uncertainties associated with the use in section 260 of less precise expressions.
That section uses phrases that speak of 'altering the incidence of any income tax' and 'defeating, evading or avoiding any duty or liability imposed on any person by this Act'. These very wide, but uncertain, expressions appear to have been at the root of the development by the courts of the so called 'choice principle', a rule of interpretation which, together with other established defects, has greatly limited the scope of section 260.
There are two other significant limitations on the effectiveness of section 260 which the new Part can be expected to remove. The present section does not permit the purposes of the persons entering into an arrangement to be inquired into, except by reference to the effect of the arrangement itself. Moreover, it does not provide a power or procedure once an arrangement is struck down, to reconstruct a taxable situation.

As to these points, I have already mentioned that, under the provisions of this Bill, an inquiry must be made, on objective grounds, into the purpose of a person who entered into the arrangement. The 'reconstruction' problem is to be overcome by an express provision for the cancellation of a tax benefit obtained under a scheme to which the Part applies. Authority will be given to the Commissioner of Taxation to eliminate the benefit in an appropriate way. In other words, the Commissioner will be specifically authorised to disallow the whole or an appropriate part of a deduction or to include in assessable income an omitted amount. This method of eliminating the sought after benefit, or part of it, is designed also to remove another uncertainty which surrounded the application of section 260. It was unclear whether an arrangement to which that section applied had to be treated as wholly void or could be treated as only partly void as against the Commissioner.
I draw to the attention of honourable members that Part IVA contains a supplementary code applicable to schemes that are commonly called dividend stripping-and to similar schemesunder which shareholders in effect receive company profits in a tax free form, in substitution for taxable dividends. The reason for such specially tailored provisions within the new general measures is to be found in particular features of such schemes when viewed in the context of the structure it has been necessary to give to the basic provisions of Part IVA. It is this: When profits have been accumulating in a company, possibly for extended periods, there will be no clear answer to the question whether those profits might reasonably be expected to have been distributed as dividends if the scheme had not been entered into. As often as not, that expectation could not be established to exist. Where this is so-and despite the fact that the company had been stripped of profits-the result under the basic provisions would be that there is technically no 'tax benefit' obtained. Dividend stripping cannot be allowed to escape the new provisions on a technicality of this kind.
In the simpler schemes of divided stripping, assets of a company are generally converted into cash, the shareholders sell their shares for a capital sum and the purchaser arranges for the profits of the company to be stripped by way of a tax free dividend or other payment from the company. The purchaser is thus reimbursed for the price of the shares, while the former owners have effectively obtained the accumulated profits of the company in a tax free form. Other schemes of a dividend stripping kind involve the sale of shares

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2685

in 'current year profit' companies. Both kinds of There are, of course, other things of note about

scheme are within the supplementary code.

the Bill but these are covered by the very compre-

hensive explanatory memorandum available to

The dividend stripping provisions will treat a honourable members and I think it is not necess-

shareholder who disposes of his or her shares in ary for me to speak about them at this stage. I do,

the context of one of these schemes as having however, want to touch on just one point. This is

obtained a tax benefit of the amount which he or that the Bill indicates specifically that a tax

she would have derived as a dividend if the profits benefit cannot arise in respect of the deduction

stripped under the scheme had been paid as a diviavailable for deposits made under the income

dend. A tax benefit so obtained will be subject to equalisation deposits scheme, and that the mere

the new general provisions for cancellation of tax making of an election or the giving of a notice

benefits that I have described. Where a tax benefit specifically provided for in the Act will not be
has been cancelled under Part IVA, the ComalTected by Part IVA. r note these things as a prel-

missioner of Taxation will be empowered to effect ude to my response to concern that I can foresee

corresponding adjustments to reduce the tax liabbeing expressed in some quarters that taxpayers

ility of others alTected by the arrangements, if it is who simply take advantage of certain incentives

fair and reasonable in the circumstances to do so. in the law will find themselves at risk under Part

IVA. Other critics of the Bill will, no doubt, say

Another key part of the legislation covers the that arrangements that survive the application of

imposition of statutory additional tax on taxspecific anti-avoidance provisions inserted to sup-

payers whose future schemes are struck down by port particular provisions are in double jeopardy

Part IVA. Bearing in mind that the Part is conin then having to face and survive the paramount

cerned with blatant, contrived and artificial general provisions.

schemes, the Government has concluded that taxpayers who, in the face of it, wish to persist with
such schemes should be exposed to something
more than only the tax they seek to avoid. We have seen it as highly relevant that a taxpayer who
omits assessable income from a return, or who
claims deductions in excess of expenditure actually incurred, is liable to statutory additional tax
of twice the tax avoided. Accordingly, a taxpayer
to whom the new Part applies will be liable by statute to pay an amount of additional tax equal
to double the tax sought to be avoided.

I make no apology for the approach adopted in the Bill. But I do assert that taxpayers who simply
take advantage of concessions for the purposes for which they were put in the law cannot and will
not be affected by the new provisions. Specifically, for example, Part IVA will not deny
to people who simply respond to our concessions for investment in Australian films the benefit of
the tax advantages that are part of those concessions. But I think it incontrovertible that
blatant misuse of those and other 'incentive' con-
cessions ought to be within the scope of Part IVA.

As under the existing provisions, however, that
amount will be subject to remission by the Com-
missioner of Taxation and his decision will similarly, on objection by the taxpayer, be open to re-
view by one of the independent Taxation Boards
of Review. I add the observation that, in the absence of these penalty provisions, taxpayers
would have the 'odds to nothing' in participating

A general anti-avoidance provision would be of
little worth if it could not be used to prevent unintended exploitation of such concessions in the
law, or to operate as a backup to a specific anti-
avoidance provision in circumstances where a taxpayer has tailored arrangements so that the provision is circumvented in form, but not in
substance.

in future avoidance schemes and in risking the apFinally, before turning to the subject of section

plication of Part IVA.

136, I mention that it is the Government's wish

that this important Bill be debated and passed by

The provisions of Part IVA as a whole will opboth Houses of the Parliament before the end of

erate with paramount force in the income tax law, the current sittings. I have indicated on a number

but only in relation to schemes entered into after of occasions in this House that proper time will be

today. However, in line with settled policy in regiven, after exposure of the legislation, for com-

lation to anti-avoidance legislation, carry forward ment by interested persons. If it is to be dealt with

losses resulting from schemes that have already before the winter recess, the time available for

been entered into will not be available for deducpublic comment is short, and shorter than I would

tion against income of the 1980-81 or any later have liked. However, the alternative to debating

year. In harmony with the rules for application of the Bill immediately would be to defer its passage

Part IVA, section 260 is being made inapplicable for some months and in all the circumstances that

to arrangements entered into after today.

is an alternative which the Government believes is

2686 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

not an appropriate one. We will of course welcome, and give careful attention to, constructive comments that persons and organisations care to put to us on the provisions of the Bill.
Shifting Income Abroad
I would like now to spell out what is involved in the Government's decision to introduce in the next sittings of the Parliament further antiavoidance measures complementary to those I have just explained and which will deal with what might be described as the transfer pricing problem. The further measures will apply in relation to income derived and expenses incurred after today.
I have previously informed the House that the existing section 136, which was designed decades ago to deal with tax avoidance arrangements under which profits that should be taxed in Australia would be shifted out tax-free, was being reviewed because it was proving inadequate to meet modern conditions. That point has been driven home by the decision of the High Court of Australia in the Commonwealth Aluminimum Corporation case. I have also said that decisions about section 136 would be made once the related redrafting of section 260 was completed. Honourable members who have been following my remarks today will appreciate that blatant tax avoidance arrangements, including those involving international transactions, will in future be subject to Part IVA. But there remains a significant area involving international tax avoidance which cannot feasibly be countered by the provisions of that part.
International tax avoidance involves transactions carried out wholly or partly overseas, where Australian taxation authorities lack powers to obtain information by which the purpose and effect of the transactions can be judged. There is also the point that, damaging as they are to the Australian revenue, international transfer pricing arrangements may be entered into for a complex mixture of tax and other reasons. The fact, if it is one, that tax saving is not a key purpose of an arrangement or transaction is, however, no reason why we as a nation should not be in a position to counteract any potential losses of Australian tax inherent in it. Other major countries have in recent times acted against the growing use of international arrangements that have a tax avoidance purpose or effect, especially those involving transfer pricing. Methods adopted by tax authorities to reallocate profits on a more appropriate basis than pricing arrangements throw up are usually based on the internationally accepted 'arm's

length' principle, and this will form the foundation of our proposed new measures.
It is proposed that assessable income and allowable deductions will be calculated by reference to the price or amount which might have been expected to have been received or paid in any transaction affecting assessable income or allowable deductions, if that transaction had been one between parties who were not only completely independent of each other but were also dealing with each other in an arm's length way. This principle is, in fact, embodied in relevant provisions in all of Australia's double taxation agreements and the existing section 136 has in practice been applied in broad reliance upon it. However, as has been well publicised, one serious deficiency in the existing section 136 was exposed by the High Court in the Commonwealth Aluminium Corporation case. The proposed amendments to section 136 aim to remedy this defect.
Essentially, the new provisions will be applicable to transactions in respect of which the Commissioner of Taxation, having regard to any connection between the parties and to other relevant circumstances, is satisfied that any parties to the transaction were not dealing at arm's length with each other. The provisions will thus be capable of application not only where the parties are associated in terms of ownership or control but also where they in fact do not, in a transaction extending to this country, deal in an arm's length way with each other. The new provisions will also be directed at overcoming other difficulties in the transfer pricing area. For example, there may well be no basis available to the Commissioner on which to arrive at arm's length price or amount. This could arise in a monopoly situation, particularly in a vertically integrated industry, where there simply are no arm's length dealings with outside parties which would provide an arm's length benchmark. Everyone of Australia's double taxation agreements addresses this difficulty, which can also arise because of lack of sufficient information.
Regrettably, adequate and reliable information may not always be supplied or be available to Australian authorities. Accordingly, it is proposed to include in the new section a supplement to the arm's length principle. Where, for the reasons mentioned, it is not practicable for the Commissioner to apply the arm's length principle, he will be empowered to assess tax on a taxable income of such amount as he determines to be appropriate in the circumstances. Wide though such a power may appear to be, it is clear from court and Taxation Board of Review decisions under the existing section 136, which already contains

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill (No.2)

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2687

such a power, that those tribunals would expect income, be statutorily obliged to pay additional

the Commissioner, as far as practicable in the cirtax at the rate of 10 per cent a year. That ad-

cumstances, to work to a broad arm's length ditional tax could, of course, in appropriate cases

yardstick. Boards of Review will have full power be remitted in whole or in part by the Com-

to review the Commissioner's decisions and to missioner of Taxation.

substitute their own opinion if they consider him to be wrong. It is to be noted that the existing section 136 limits adjustments under it to the amount of the company's total receipts. The new provision will not be confined in this way.

At a more technical level, the proposed law will be structured to make it clear that, if application of the new measures results in an increase in tax paid under a previously issued assessment, credit is to be allowed against the increased tax for the

Although international tax avoidance comtax paid by the taxpayer under the earlier assess-

monly takes the form of manipulation of trading ment. The new structure will also remove any

stock prices, any item of income or deduction is doubt that prior year losses may appropriately be

potentially open to abuse. The new measures will, taken into account. The amendments to section

therefore, apply in relation to all of these items. 136 are to apply to expenditure incurred, and to

Thus, both business and non-business transincome derived or that which might have been

actions, rent, royalties, interest and other income expected to have been derived, after today. In this

not clearly business proceeds will be within the particular area, the government considers that

purview of the reva.mped section 136. Moreover, this purely prospective application of the new

the new measures will permit the imputation of measures ought not to be modified so as to leave

income where necessary to counteract avoidance, outside their scope arrangements entered into in

for example, in the case of an interest free loan by the past. There are transfer pricing arrangements

an Australian resident to an associate in a tax between associated companies entered into in the

haven. The measures may be applied to both resipast that still have many years to run. It would be

dents and non-residents who are parties to an inpatently absurd if the future effects of these on

ternational transaction or series of transactions taxable income were to be outside the scope of the

but they will not apply to any transaction solely new provisions.

within Australia between Australian residents. Individuals, trustees and other entities as well as companies will be within the scope of the new provisions.

The measures I have spoken about today are, by any test, significant ones. Leaving aside those with an axe to grind, some people may be con-
cerned about the breadth of the new measures.

As is the case under the new Part IVA, the new section 136 will allow appropriate corresponding adjustments to be made by the Commissioner, in favour of the taxpayer or others affected by a profit shifting arrangement to which section 136 applies. Effective measures to recast taxable income along the lines I have mentioned are a basic necessity. But a deterrent is also needed. In speaking about the new Part IVA I have indicated that a substantial statutory additional tax will, subject to

We will probably hear a lot about their uncertainty. To that I say that any problems of that kind are an inevitable outcome of the approach to tackling a widespread and intricate problem by provisions of a general kind. I believe that the measures represent a sober and appropriately restrained response to a difficult problem and will be welcomed by all responsible members of the community. I warmly commend this Bill to the House.

the usual powers of remission, apply where an avoidance of tax is struck down under it. For cor-

Debate (on motion by Dr Blewett) adjourned.

responding reasons, the government believes that

PETROLEUM (SUBMERGED

additional tax should be imposed by statute on

LANDS-MISCELLANEOUS

taxpayers whose international profit shifting ar-

AMENDMENTS) BILL 1981

rangements are negated by the new section 136.

Second Reading

However, the fact that Part IVA is to operate in relation to blatant schemes of avoidance, while the situations that fall within section 136 will not necessarily be as reprehensible, has led us to the

Debate resumed from 14 May, on motion by Mr Anthony:
That the Bill be now read a second time.

conclusion that a differently structured penalty Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for

tax should apply for section 136. Our view is that Education)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have

a taxpayer whose international profit shifting aryour indulgence to suggest that the House have a

rangement is struck down under section 136 general debate covering this Bill, the Petroleum

should, whether or not a relevant double taxation (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amend-

agreement also authorises recasting of the taxable ment Bill, the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Bill,

2688 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Bill

the Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Bill, the Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Bill, the Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Bill, the Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Bill and the Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Bill as they are all associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Dr Jenkins)-Is it the wish of the House to have a debate covering these eight measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr KEATING (Blaxland) (5.1 I)-As the Minister indicated, this is to be a cognate debate on eight Bills, all of which represent further steps in the implementation of the Government's offshore arrangements with the States. The Opppsition did not support these arrangements when they were introduced last year and we will not be supporting this supplementary legislation now before the House. The first two Bills, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Bills, are to amend legislation governing the exploration and production of petroleum resources off-shore. The amendments are largely of a technical nature but they do seek to extend the area of application of the legislation to the Coral Sea. I will have more to say about that provision later. Although these amendments are not in themselves objectionable to the Opposition we do not support the basic legal framework of the legislation being amended. The amendments therefore have little value when viewed against the background of the present off-shore legal arrangements.
The other six Bills seek to establish a mining code for mineral exploration and production offshore but as with the petroleum code they relate only to the off-shore adjacent area and do not include the territorial sea. Legislation governing the mining of both petroleum and minerals should apply not only to the adjacent area but also to the three-mile territorial sea. Commonwealth legislation alone should govern Australia's off-shore domain from the low water mark to the outer perimeter of the continental margin. Last year this Government implemented what amounted to a de facto alteration of the Constitution in order to cede to the States both title to and power over the territorial sea. The High Court of Australia held unanimously that the States neither as territories nor states ever had power with respect to the territorial sea. The Fraser Government's policy enacted last year does not seek to revert to a situation which existed at Federation, but one which is new and which is anti-federalist in its concept.

For years the question of off-shore sovereignty has been debated. Most people believed that power over this area resided with the Commonwealth, though bickering between the Commonwealth and the States prevented any declaration of sovereignty. The decislon by the Commonwealth and the States in 1967 to enact a common petroleum mining code for the off-shore area of each State was a conscious attempt to avoid testing the sovereignty question. In 1970, the issue was raised again with the presentation of the Territorial Sea and Continental Shelf Bill which was abandoned due to a wrangle between Commonwealth and State elements of the coalition parties. In 1973, Labor introduced the Seas and Submerged Lands Bill not only to declare sovereignty over the off-shore in the name of the Commonwealth but also to exercise it from the low water mark to the edge of the continental margin. In the face of obstructionism by conservative States rights elements in the Senate at that time, the mining code sections of the Bill were withdrawn and the declaratory part passed into law. This section was then challenged by the then coalition government of New South Wales which was then joined by some of the other States. But the assertion of Commonwealth sovereignty was upheld by the High Court unaminously in 1975. Sir Garfield Barwick summed up the issue in his judgment when he said, 'once the low water mark is passed the international domain is reached'.
Of course as far as the Commonwealth Government is concerned that should have been the end of it. The matter should have remained settled once and for all. Attempts by the recalcitrant State Premiers, Sir Charles Court and Mr BjelkePetersen, to overturn or to circumvent the High Court decision should have been treated with contempt. Instead the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) at the height of his anti-centralist frenzy was bent upon returning Australia to its colonial mode. By the dubious use 0f a vague power of the Constitution, the Fraser Government not only alienated sovereignty but also right, title and interest in the territorial sea in a manner designed to preclude the repeal or alteration by a future Commonwealth government. The granting of some state-type powers to the States in the territorial sea was not objectionable and is something that would have been granted by any Commonwealth government in the course of setting up offshore arrangements. The Seas and Submerged Lands Act in fact recognised State powers over inland waterways which existed at Federation and also power over wharves and piers, et cetera, which may happen to be outside an internal waterway but in the territorial sea.

Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Bill

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2689

By its actions this Government has abrogated production licences, administration will be con-

its national responsibility and overturned an hisducted by the State Minister as the designated

toric decision of the High Court in such a way authority. All communications with companies

which only raised further constitutional doubts and other concerned parties will be through the

which should have remained settled. Under the State Minister.

petroleum legislation of last year and the mining
legislation now being debated, day-to-day control of our off-shore resources is being given to reactionary Premiers, such as Sir Charles Court and
Mr Bjelke-Petersen-Premiers who believe in selling resources as quickly and as cheaply as possible. The States have been granted powers to do anything they consider appropriate within the territorial sea, the most environmentally sensitive region, and have considerable power in the adjacent area. We are giving the States control of resource to which they have no entitlement. I outlined the Opposition's views on this in detail last year and would like to reiterate that a future Labor government will have no bar of these arrangements and will do all that is necessary to return control of the territorial sea to the Commonwealth government, particularly with respect to areas of national importance such as the exploration and production of our petroleum and mineral resources.

The Oppostition is trenchantly opposed to these joint authority arrangements. They represent a sell-out of the Commonwealth's power in the area of off-shore mineral management, with the State Ministers acting in some dubious legal role as officers of the Commonwealth. The arrangements smell of the parochial interests of the States coalition parties, particularly those of Western Australia and Queensland, aided and abetted by the political complicity of the Fraser Government.
The situation in Bass Strait in recent years has shown what can happen when we have off-shore developments administered by a State government. For at least four years several Federal departments and the Commonwealth Auditor General have been complaining about the procedures adopted by the Victorian Government in discharging its responsibilities. The Victorian Department of Minerals and Energy has repeat-

I would now like to turn to some of the specific edly been asked to improve its performance. The

aspects of the legislation before the House, parVictorians have been unable to determine accu-

ticularly the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Bills rately the amount of oil being produced from Bass

which seek to establish an off-shore mining code Strait. Therefore, their calculations of revenue

for minerals other than petroleum. Despite many payable to the Commonwealth and Victorian

attempts, Australia has never had a uniform offgovernments have been questionable. This has

shore mining code, mainly due to the obstructionamounted to millions of dollars. Under this legis-

ist elements of the coalition parties. The Gorton lation, in off-shore areas, excluding the territorial

Government foreshadowed the introduction of sea, these responsibilities will fall to the joint

such a code in 1970 but this was never proceeded authority-the Commonwealth and State

with. The former Labor government also Ministers-but administration will remain with

introduced a code in 1973 as part of the Seas and the State Minister. The veto rights of the Com-

Submerged Lands Bill but this provision was not monwealth Minister are not an appropriate

passed. It was reintroduced separately in 1974 but measure of management. For mining develop-

was again rejected by the then conservatively conments within the territorial sea, the situation will

trolled Senate. Now the party which refused to be even more ludicrous. Responsibility will rest

accept either of these codes is introducing one solely with the State Minister, and only State

with less merit and one which fails to recognise legislation will be applicable.

the international prerogatives of the Commonwealth Government.

There will be seven different governments with seven different mining codes regulating off-shore

Again, under this legislation responsibility for mining in these waters and a further seven bodies

the regulation of minerals mining off-shore within regUlating mining in the adjacent area. State legis-

the territorial sea will lie solely with the States. lation will apply to one side of the border of the

Such matters as sand mining will be controlled exterritorial sea and Commonwealth legislation to

clusively by the States because they are mostly the other. If an area of prospectivity straddles the

either off beaches or in part in the area of the terterritorial line, two permits will be required, one

ritorial sea. In the adjacent areas the Commonfrom the State government and one from the joint

wealth will establish joint Authorities for each authority. Off-shore Australia should be subject

State consisting of the respective State Minister to a uniform mining code. It should be adminis-

and the Commonwealth Minister. Although the tered for the nation by the national government.

joint authorities will have responsibility for such Administration should rest solely with the Com-

matters as the granting of exploration permits and monwealth. Many of the specific provisions in the

2690 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Bill

code are acceptable to the Opposition, particuthe north. Admittedly this is one of the worst

larly those relating to the timing of permits and spills in history but a detailed investigation of oil

leases and the conditions of such leases. But spillage problems must be undertaken before any

others, especially those concerning the role of the notion of buffer zones for the reef can be seriously

States, are not. For example, under this legislation considered. The Great Barrier Reef is part of

royalties will be shared on a 60-40 basis between Australia's heritage and international heritage

the Commonwealth and the States.

and should be protected by law, not merely by a

The States do not share with the Commonwealth the royalties they collect from mining onshore, so why should the Commonwealth share its

sentence in a Minister's second reading speech. For the reasons I have outlined, the Opposition opposes the measures.

off-shore royalties. Sovereignty off-shore lies with I reiterate that we have seen a shameful situ-

the Commonwealth. Moneys collected should ation develop. After years and years of discussion

therefore go to the Commonwealth for distriand of thought about the management of

bution equitably amongst the community of all Australia's off-shore resources, we find, even after

the States. The same situation arises for the cola unanimous High Court decision, this legal ruse

lection of fees. These also should be payable to the developed to build the States into power over the

Commonwealth. These are further examples of territorial sea and power under off-shore arrange-

the failure of this Government to stand up to the ments that they had, as the High Court said,

parochial interests of the States. A future Labor neither as colonies nor as States. The evil genius

government will change these arrangements. As behind this is the former honourable member for

well as broadening the application of the legisWentworth, Mr Ellicott. As a supposed centralist,

lation to the territorial sea, it will provide for all this reflects no credit on him. This legislation will

functions proposed to be exercised by the joint live to haunt him. But the legislation has its ante-

authorities and the designated authorities to be cedence in the crude States' rights notions of the

exercised exclusively by the Commonwealth MinWestern Australian and Queensland Premiers

ister as the designated authority. This will apply and the lack of intestinal fortitude of Mr Fraser,

to the mining of both petroleum and minerals the present Prime Minister. He communicated to

off-shore.

the States by telex, after the High Court decision,

Before concluding my remarks, I refer briefly to the provision in the Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill to extend the off-shore adjacent area to include the Coral Sea. The Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) made it clear in his second reading speech that the purpose of this amendment is to

that he would have no bar of any attempts to reorder the constitutional arrangements off-shore as they previously existed. Pressure within the coalition parties after that brought him to alter his position. What we see now is this pile of legal fiction where we have State Ministers trying to act as officers of the Commonwealth.

allow for petroleum exploration. The Opposition When the Australian Labor Party comes to

is gravely concerned about the lack of any propower-the way the Coalition parties are going,

visions to protect the Great Barrier Reef region. that will not be too far away-it will repeal these

The Minister in referring to this matter stated that arrangements and establish the Commonwealth

'no commitment will be given to issue exploration in its rightful role-that is, as governor of the off-

permits within 30 miles of the reef' but we find shore resources of the nation for the nation. As Sir

nothing in the legislation to this effect. In other Garfield Barwick so eloquently said, once the low

words, there is nothing to prevent the issuing of liwater mark is reached the international domain is

cences within this area. Until the Great Barrier reached. This is the Parliament of the nation. We

Reef Marine Park is declared, there is nothing to govern international aspects. The external affairs

stop this Government allowing oil drilling on or power of the Constitution says that we should

close to the reef. Even if the 30-mile limit were govern international affairs. The off-shore re-

legislated for, this would be unacceptable to the sources of Australia are an international matter.

Opposition because tides flowing through the We will not be bowing to the seedy, snide tactics

Coral Sea region flow into the Great Barrier Reef of Sir Charles Court and Mr Bjelke-Petersen. We

region. Tides do not respect legal boundaries.

will change this legislation. If they object, we will

This 30-mile limit pales into insignificance if we ram it right down their necks.

look at some of the major oil spills in recent years. Mr O'KEEFE (Paterson) (5.26)-The Min-

The Campeche oil well blow-out in the Gulf of erals (Submerged Lands) Bill 1981 provides for

Mexico continued for nine months, spilling three the recovery of minerals other than petroleum

million barrels of oil. This spill fouled 250 kilofrom the continental shelf of Australia and cer-

metres of beach in Texas area 1,125 kilometres to tain territories. The minerals referred to in this

Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Bill

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2691

Bill are sand, gravel, clay, limestone, rock, shale, appropriate that Commonwealth legislation

oil shale and coal. Of course, petroleum is should regulate mining activities in this area. It is,

eliminated from it. There has been very little achowever, satisfactory that these laws have been

tivity in mining for other minerals in Australia's worked out in consultation with the States and

off-shore areas to date. The constitutional uncerthat State authorities will remain so closely in-

tainty may have been a contributing factor in this volved in their application.

regard. Three off-shore exploration permits are current at the moment. Two of them are off New South Wales and one is off Queensland. No production licences have yet been granted. In addition, there are several on-shore coal leases in New South Wales which extend off-shore. Some of these subterranean mining operations are carried out as extensions of on-shore operations. It is also understood that in Tasmania there may be some subterranean mining for tungsten from on-shore.
As yet, there is no Commonwealth legislation to cover off-shore minerals other than petroleum. However, in this respect, the Australian Minerals and Energy Council agreed in 1978 that mining

There is no doubt that this minerals Bill gives the Commonwealth ultimate control over the im-
portant policy issues which may arise. Clause 11
of the Bill makes it clear that the decisions of the joint authority may be made by the Common-
wealth Minister if he and the State Minister do no
agree or if the State Minister does not indicate an opinion within a reasonable time. This time is 30
days after being notified of the opinion of the
Commonwealth. This leaves control where it should be, with the Commonwealth, but ensures
that States are consulted and that decisions are
not made without their point of view being considered if they wish to participate.

titles for off-shore minerals could be issued under Also, as all communications to and from the

the respective State laws. The Commonwealth, joint authority are through the designated auth-

however, stipulated that this procedure was withority, the involvement of the States in all decision

out prejudice to any future arrangements and the making is ensured. All important decisions are

operators involved must have been prepared to made by the joint authority-that is, the granting

accept the risk that any title so granted may not or refusal of permits, licences and works authori-

be considered valid. The Commonwealth underties, and their renewal, the fixing of conditions for

took the transition of such titles when new legispermits, the fixing of royalty rates including the

lation was enacted. The Bill contains transitional landed value and quantity of minerals. These mat-

provisions to deal with such titles. The Minerals ters are dealt with in the Bills which are being dis-

(Submerged Lands) Bill constitutes a further step cussed in this cognate debate. The designated

in the development of an orderly regime for the authority has more practical day-to-day respon-

controlled management of our otT-shore resibilities such as receiving and processing appli-

sources. It follows on from the constitutional cations to be decided by the joint authority, giving

settlements between the Commonwealth, the directions and ensuring their compliance, main-

States and the Northern Territory whereby the taining records and the register for the relevant

Commonwealth ensured that the States and the adjacent area.

Northern Territory would have control over and membership of the resources of the three-mile territorial sea. In this respect I draw the attention of honourable members to the Coastal Waters (States Powers) Act 1980, the Coastal Waters (States Title) Act 1980 and the related Acts for the Northern Territory.
At the same time the Commonwealth equalised the situation relating to petroleum mining by withdrawing its legislation from the territorial sea and providing for joint authorities-the Commonwealth Minister and the State or Northern Territory Minister for the area concerned to

The financial provisions of the Bill provide for a
60 per cent payment to the States and the North-
ern Territory of royalty they collect on behalf of the Commonwealth and the full amount of other
permit, licence, works authority and registration
fees and applications fees. These matters are also dealt with in the supporting legislation. Exploration permit fees, production licence fees, works
authority fees and registration fees are dealt with in the Bills now before us and will be collected by the designated authority on behalf of the
Commonwealth.

decide important matters of policy and for the The major cost of administering the code falls

continuation of State Ministers and othcials in the on the States and the Northern Territory. The

ordinary administration of the legislation. This major return from the results of the orderly devel-

Bill sets out the new mining code for minerals opment of the legislation should go to those who

other than petroleum in areas over the continenhave the greatest practical involvement and bur-

tal shelf outside the territorial sea. So it is den. Although no minerals of any extent have

2692 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Bill

been found off-shore at this time it is very importThe Coral Sea area is thus one of considerable

ant that this legislation go through because in the dimensions and most of it is sufficiently distant

near future it is quite possible that with explofrom the Great Barrier Reef to permit exploration

ration and modern techniques minerals will be activities to be undertaken in those areas. In re-

found in the shores off Australia.

gard to the areas adjacent to the Great Barrier

Reef region, the Government is very mindful of its

I would like to say something about the Petundertaking to protect the reef. It has therefore

roleum (Submerged Lands - Miscellaneous been decided that no commitment will be given to

Amendments) Bill 1981. A package of off-shore issue exploration permits within 30 miles of the

legislation was passed in May of last year. This reef and, furthermore, that all exploration pro-

package included the Petroleum (Submerged posals within the new area will be subject to the

Lands) Amendment Act 1980. Proclamation of closest scrutiny under the Commonwealth

that Act has not taken place and it has become apenvironment legislation. In this respect it is very

parent that amendments of mainly a technical relevant to point out that all islands and cays in

naturp. to it and to the Petroleum (Submerged the area are excluded from the ambit of the Bill.

Lands) Act 1967 are required before the 1980 Act is proclaimed. The present legislation introduces the necessary amendments to make this possible. In regard to constitutional settlement, Commonwealth off-shore petroleum legislation would apply beyond the three-mile territorial sea and State legislation would remain within the State three-mile limit.

As was mentioned by the honourable member
for Blaxland (Mr Keating) who led for the Opposition in this debate, an indication was given in the second reading speech to the petroleum submerged lands legislation in 1967 that when at some future time the legislation is extended to the Coral Sea area, administration of the legislation in that area will be carried out by Queensland. This

The Commonwealth Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act 1980 implements this agreement by amending the Commonwealth Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act 1967 so that it
will no longer apply inside the three-mile territorial sea. The 1980 Act contains a scheme for transitional arrangements agreed on between the Commonwealth, the States and the Northern Territory under which existing permits straddling the boundary of the territorial sea are to be split into two permits-a Commonwealth permit and a State permit. they are to cover those parts respectively under Commonwealth jurisdiction and State jurisdiction. The 1980 Act was drafted in close consultation with the States as was the legislation now before us.

Bill, therefore, provides that for the purposes of the petroleum legislation the area is to be administered as if it were part of the Queensland adjacent area. Thus, the new area will be covered by Commonwealth legislation alone with the day-to-day administration being carried out by Queensland but with the Commonwealth, through the joint authority arrangements, having overall responsibility for the area and the final say in major decisions which, of course, will include drilling proposals.
The Bill also amends the boundaries of the Queensland adjacent area in the Torres Strait. There are several anomalies in that boundary and the requirement to amend it at this stage arises out of the fact that when the boundary was established in 1967 it intersected the Australian terri-

The Bill extends the application of the off-shore petroleum legislation to the continental shelf in the Coral Sea area which is virtually one of the last areas of the Australian continental shelf to be unexplored for petroleum. The petroleum industry has shown a keen interest in exploring this area. It is considered to be prospective and the petroleum industry, as I mentioned a moment ago, has expressed keen interest in exploring there. This new area will be bounded to the west
by the existing Queensland area boundary, to the south partly by that boundary and partly by the

torial sea five miles into the Torres Strait resulting
in some of these islands lying outside the
Queensland adjacent area. This has not been a problem in a practical sense to date. However, under the provisions of the Coastal Waters (State Powers) Act, legislative powers are to be granted
to States only in territorial seas which lie in adjacent areas immediately before that Act comes into
force. It is therefore necessary to amend the Queensland adjacent area boundary to encompass
these territorial sea areas to ensure that State legislative powers are extended to those areas.

parallel of latitude 25 degrees south, in due course When the Torres Strait treaty is ratified, the ad-

to the north by the sea bed boundary to be estabjacent area boundary will be amended to corre-

lished when the Torres Strait treaty enters into spond with the treaty seabed line which is con-

effect, and to the east by sea bed boundaries under siderably further south than the present

negotiation with the Solomon Islands and France. boundary. The Australian territorial sea around

Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Bill

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2693

Australian islands north of the seabed line will continue to be covered by the Coastal Waters (State Powers) Act. As an interim measure, the adjacent area boundary has been amended so that it accords also with the limits of areas in the Papua New Guinea territorial sea. The Act provides for the mining of petroleum and minerals off-shore as far as the Commonwealth is concerned. As mentioned previously by me, there is no doubt that with modern technology and know how there is every possibility of our petroleum and minerals coming from that source.
The Opposition, of course, is opposing this legislation. It opposes nearly everything for the benefit of the nation that we bring before this House. The Opposition says that we have abrogated our responsibility. We have not abrogated our responsibility. We do not believe in centralism but in federalism and in giving the States their proper share and interest in matters in this field. It has been stated that a future Labor government will reverse this situation and change the arrangements. How can a Labor government be elected in this country when it opposes all legislation of benefit to Australia? I support the Bills being debated in this cognate debate tonight because certainly they are for the benefit of Australia.
Mr WEST (Cunningham) (5.43)-The Opposition opposes the package of amendments to the 1980 off-shore legislation. We oppose them for the same reasons that we opposed the historic sellout in May 1980. I refer to the arrangement between the Fraser Government and all the State governments to legislate to let the States back into a position which the High Court of Australia had ruled against. This decision has turned back the clock some 80 years to pre-Federation days, to the colonial days of six nation states. The Government has described the off-shore package of amending Bills as a milestone in co-operative federalism and as a major achievement. Our attitude was summed up last May Day, 12 months ago, by the Opposition spokesman on minerals and energy, the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating), who said:
The granting of the powers is a piece of constitutional adventurism embarked upon with the intention of establishing a legal arrangement designed to preclude a repeal or alteration of the powers by a future Labor government. Essentially it has been hatched up by the perverse minds of the coalition parties to thwart the prerogatives of a future Commonwealth government.
The Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) said when concluding the debate that the Government had:
. . . locked the Australian people as a nation out of control of the wealthy resources of the seabed. It has put national resources at the mercy of parochial pettiness-at the mercy of

some State Premiers who, in their own self-delusion, behave like primitive colonial chieftains.
Instead of a milestone of co-operative federalism, we in the Opposition regard the whole deal, including these amendments, as dangerous, dodgy and devious. It is a snide back-down with regard to the powers of the Commonwealth Government; an arrangement with parochial Premiers, an abrogation of national responsibility and an attack on our nationhood. Resources which should have been under Commonwealth jurisdiction are now totally in State hands or subject to State daily administration. We should examine the long history of these matters. It is a history of ambivalence, of valiant struggle, of historic victories followed by terrible defeats and tawdry se\!- outs. It goes back to 1967 to the Federal-State agreement to set up a common petroleum mining code to cover adjacent State waters out to the edge of the continental shelf.
In 1970 the then Gorton conservative Government did at least see the need for some action on these matters. It introduced the Territorial Sea and Continental Shelf Bill in an attempt to assert federal control and was prepared if necessary to test the powers of that legislation in the High Court. It is history how Mr Gorton lost the Prime Ministership over his efforts in this area. Of course, the McMahon Administration did not proceed with the matter. Tn 1973 my late and great predecessor, Rex Connor, as a great Labor Minister for Minerals and Energy, introduced the Seas and Submerged Lands Act which asserted Federal sovereignty from the low water mark to the continental shelf. In 1975 the then New South Wales Liberal State Government instigated a High Court challenge against these Commonwealth powers. In 1976 the historic High Court decision was brought down in favour of the Commonwealth. ] will quote from the booklet entitled A Milestone in Co-operative Feqeralism which was issued by the Government. The Government's own statement says:
. . . the constitutional issues were resolved by the High Court in 1975 when it upheJd--in New South Wales v. Commonwealth . . . the Act's assertion of sovereign rights on the part of the Crown in right of the Commonwealth, as against the States, over the continental shelf. Also, it upheld the Act's assertion of sovereignty on the part of the Crown in right of the Commonwealth over the territorial sea, and also over internal waters outside State limits as at 1901, including the seabed beneath the territorial sea and those waters. In effect, this meant that Commonwealth sovereignty extends. generally speaking, right into low-water mark.
Initially, the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) defended this decision. In a letter of November 1976 to Sir Charles Court he stated:
The position of the Government is that it regards the High Court decision in the Seas and Submerged Lands Act case that

2694 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Bill

sovereignty over the territorial sea is vested in the Commonwealth and not in the States as having settled the general issue of sovereignty over the territorial sea, In taking this position my Government has had regard to the advice it has received from its law officers that the Commonwealth Government could not legally accede to your request.

In 1979 at the Premiers Conference we saw a complete reversal on the part of the Prime Minister and the Government when State demands were acceded to. The end result of all this is that the territorial sea-Australian waters out to the three-mile limit from a designated base line-is now under full State control. The continental shelf from that three-mile limit out to 200 miles or to the edge of the continental shelf is under the control of a joint authority with the Federal Government having power of veto. For the purposes of clarification, I add that 'coastal waters' means that part of territorial sea opposite State boundaries. 'Adjacent waters' means that part of State waters out to the edge of the continental shelf. This was all achieved through dubious constitutional trickery under section 51 (xxxvii.) of the Constitution. It is a little used or known clause from which it appeared that all the States could request the Federal Government to implement certain powers on their behalf. They did that in the belief that all States must request a repe;l if the provision was to be repealed. It must be noted that all the States collaborated. It must be regarded as one of our greatest ever betrayals of national interest in the name of State parochialism.

Mr Hodgman-What you are talking about includes two State Labor Governments.

Mr WEST-I say: 'If the cap fits, wear it'. It is not correct to assert that the Opposition accepts that these arrangements are irreversible. For instance, the arrangements could be struck down in the High Court. A Federal Labor Government could repeal the package or we could legislate the State powers out of existence.

There are two major Bills in this package-the

Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous

Amendments) Bill and the Minerals (Submerged

Lands) Bill. I want to deal with the first of those

Bills. It has three purposes. The first is to clear the

way so that this legislation can mirror the not yet

enacted State legislation covering the 3-mile sea in

the continental shelf; the second is to amend the

northern boundaries of the area adjacent to

Queensland in the Torres Strait so that it includes

all territorial and the third

sea is to

aorpoeunntdhefiCveorAaluSsteraaltioanoiliselxapnldos~'

ration and drilling. This legislation is intended, by

way of clause 10, to apply to the continental shelf

of the Coral Sea islands and this area will be considered as if it were part of the Queensland adjacent area under joint control, with day-to-day management administered by the State but with Federal power of veto.
This provision will add up to one million square kilometres to the adjacent area. It covers the area south from Bundaberg, which is at a latitude of 25 degrees south, north to Torres Strait and virtually to the top of the Great Barrier Reef, which is at 9 degrees south, and east to the border with the Solomon Islands, although that is not yet formally decided. As I have said, we are talking about approximately one million square kilometres. In the north it will extend at least 1,500 kilometres from the coast and in the south at least 500 kilometres from the coast. That gives an idea of how big an area the Government intends to include in this nefarious off-shore package. The Opposition opposes this legislation. In different circumstances it might agree with it"but we oppose it because it is part of this historical sellout that the Government has engineered with all the States. We oppose it because the Coral Sea territory is opened up for oil drilling but no protection is given to the Great Barrier Reef.
We are very concerned about the Great Barrier Reef. I would like to go into it further but I want to finish my contribution to the debate by 6 o'clock. Since the declaration of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park, this Government has been extremely tardy about declaring the various sections of the Park. It has declared the Capricornia section and the present Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) gave us an assurance that the Cairns section would be declared before Christmas 1980. That has not occurred. So far there has been one meeting of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, which was held in January, with the promise of a ministerial council meeting to follow shortly. Not only has that meeting not occurred but also the Queensland Government still has not even announced its ministerial representatives. Two junior Ministers, the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson) and the Minister for Science and Technology, will represent the Commonwealth. It is clear that Mr Bjelke-Petersen is deliberately obfuscating on this matter because he will not agree that the Cairns section western boundaries ought to be the low water mark. The reason for that is that not only does he want to drill for oil but also he wants to allow sand mining and other mining activity.
What protection for the reef does the Government propose? It says it could declare any area a part of the marine park, and so protect it. It says it

Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Bill

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2695

will not give any commitment to allow exploration for oil or drilling within 30 miles of the reef, and that in the final event it could use the Federal Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act to inquire into what would happen if drilling occurred. The Opposition does not trust any of those measures. I will explain why we do not put any trust in them. The declaration of a section of the reef as a marine park is relevant only to the area designated by the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act. Presumably, it really only applies to the territorial sea area under Queensland State control. However, there is this great area that I have just described under joint control with Federal veto in the Coral Sea. If the Federal Government fails to exercise its veto over drilling in this area, it certainly would not be likely to contradict itself and declare any part of that area a marine park to so prevent exploration and drilling.
I now wish to deal with the so-called 30-mile protection zone. The Minister for Trade and Resources (Mr Anthony) in his second reading speech stated that in order to protect the reef his Government had decided that 'no commitment will be given to issue exploration permits within 30 miles of the reef'. Had it been a Minister other than the Minister for Trade and Resources who read the speech I would hilVe said that, in spite of the fact that 30 miles offers absolutely no protection for the reef and it is only a policy decision with no force of legislation, it might be a nice although empty gesture. But we all know the attitude of the Deputy Prime Minister to our national heritage-mine it first and put the remains if any, into a park. There is no statement that oil drilling will be prohibited within 30 miles, only that the Government is not committed to grant permits. This means that in certain circumstances drilling may be allowed within 30 miles of the reef.
At any rate, 30 miles is ludicrous as protection for the reef. Oil slicks can travel hundreds of miles. The blow-out of the Ixtoc 1 well fouled 250 kilometres of Texas beaches, 1,125 kilometres to the north. At one point, 10 per cent of the Gulf of Mexico was covered by oil slick. In January 1980, a Texaco oil blow-out off the Niger River in West Africa polluted 100 kilometres of coastline and penetrated 30 kilometres inland, up rivers and creeks. Thirty miles offers no protection to the reef and it is possible that even 300 miles may not protect it, either. No doubt the Department of National Development and Energy plucked 30 miles as a safe distance out of the 1974 report into oil drilling on the Great Barrier Reef, without any recent research or supporting evidence. The Government legislated in the Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 that

ships needed to be 50 miles from the Great Barrier Reef before they could release oil, and then it could be released at the rate of only 60 litres per mile. Does this Government believe that 30 miles is sufficient to protect the reef from an oil well blowout of thousands of barrels but 50 miles is needed to protect the reef from ships releasing 60 litres of oil per mile? That is ridiculous. The reef is extremely vulnerable to any spill or blow-out in the Coral Sea because the currents travel towards the reef and southwards along it, so that a wide area of the reef will be damaged by any spill. The Opposition also has no confidence that the Government will use the Federal Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act to set up a public inquiry into any proposal to explore or drill near the Great Barrier Reef and the Coral Sea, or even out in the areas I have described. The Labor Party implemented this Act in 1974 and only two inquiries have been set up under it. We set up both of them. They were into the Ranger uranium project and sand mining on Fraser Island. This Government has never set up a public inquiry under the impact of proposals legislation.
The misconceived and gutless capitulation to State parochialism involved in this off-shore package of legislation and amendments means the surrendering of legitimate and necessary Commonwealth control of our off-shore resources to the edge of the continental shelf. It leaves environmentally sensitive areas of our long coastline, such as the Great Barrier Reef and Moreton Island, to the mercy of those drill-or-mine-at-any-cost Premiers such as Mr Bjelke-Petersen. The final decision on the issue of exploration licences in areas under joint control is left to Federal Ministers such as the present anti-environment protection Minister for Trade and Resources.
This legislation compounds the 1980 crime. It allows State governments such as Queensland, Western Australia and New South Wales, to make decisions, which are rightfully those of the Federal Government, to mine tin, limestone and sand along our coastlines and adjacent islands, in their territorial seas and in environmentally sensitive areas such as Fraser and Moreton Islands. The Commonwealth, then, has to seek to rectify or curtail the State Premiers' worst excesses by witholding export licences, as happened in the case of Fraser Island.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Mr WESTI wish to conclude my remarks very quickly. This latest amendment to the offshore package, this blueprint for the destruction of some of our most stupendous natural wonders, occurs in the complete absence of uniform

2696 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Petroleum (Suhmerged Lands) Bill

Federal-State environmental legislation, which ought to be introduced to assess the impact on the environment of major controversial development projects in environmentally sensitive coastal areas. With regard to the future of this off-shore package and the amendments we are discussing tonight, I can do no more than reiterate the words of the Leader of the Opposition at the end of a speech on this matter on May Day some 12 months ago. On that occasion he said:
We oppose this ludicrous scheme in its totality . . . if it is passed into law. . . we put the Liberal and National Country parties on notice that this legislation shall be the first law that a Labor Government . . . will bring to the High Court to be struck down for what it is. It will be struck down as a constitutional violation, a treachery against the nationhood of Australia, a legal fraud and nullity.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (8.])-1 wish to address my remarks primarily to the fourth Bill in this cognate debate, the Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Bill, and in doing so to support the remarks made in this debate by the two Opposition speakers. Before doing so, however, I point out that the legislation before us, at least in its attempt to set up a regime for the continental shelf, is really 23 years too late. It is 23 years too late primarily because the parties that make up this Government, and made up the Government for most of those 23 years, have been unable to accept national responsibility in an area which clearly is a national responsibility. A responsibility was given to this nation to determine a code of mining and for usage of the continental shelf by the law of the sea agreements entered into in 1958, and it has taken 23 years for relevant legislation to come here. The form in which it has come forward suggests that the Government parties still have not accepted the responsibility that was put upon us as a nation in 1958. The Labor Party is entirely blameless in this matter. When it had an opportunity in 1973 to do something about it, it did so. We were resisted to the death by our opponents in the Senate who further, through their State governments, took the matter to the High Court. The High Court upheld our position.
Spurious issues have been raised in relation to the matter by speakers from the other side of the House. The argument has been put forward that the difference between us is purely a question of the difference between a centralist approach and a States' rights approach. On this particular question, which is one of the most important sections of the legislation in that it establishes a process for collecting royalties, that is clearly not what is at issue. Whether the Commonwealth has authority to determine the ways in which and the level at which royalties will be collected is not at issue

here. This is because the joint authority to be established to do that clearly gives the Commonwealth that authority. So it is not a matter of handing rights to the States. The question involved here is the efficiency of the procedure, not States' rights. I would argue that our experience to this point with the Bills introduced last year suggests that the processes laid down are not efficient procedures for the collection of royalties, and I suspect that they will not be efficient procedures for the determination of who will or will not get licences. The fact that that is not the case will be very much to the detriment of the people of this country in the future.
Effectively, the Bill sets up seven authorities to administer the collection of royalties at the point of production, and the Commonwealth is being given the authority to exercise a supervising role. However, the problem with that course of action-as has been quite clearly demonstrated in successive reports of the Auditor-General in relation to the collection of royalties in association with Bass Strait oil-is that the procedure simply does not work effectively. The Commonwealth, again according to the Auditor-General's reports-at least they have established a prima facie case to suggest it-has not received the amounts of money it should have received, and it is extraordinarily difficult for the Commonwealth to exercise a supervising role. It is becoming increasingly important that we do exercise such a role effectively because other related areas are beginning to get the attention of our Government. The Law of the Sea Convention, when it is finally ratified, will demonstrate that we have an international responsibility to exercise an effective supervising role, not just a responsibility to the Australian population, important as that is. We will find that these matters, particularly those related to the continental shelf, will become increasingly complicated for us because of the decisions of the Law of the Sea Convention. I do not have time to go through the new definition of the continental shelf, but J seek leave to incorporate in Hansard the relevant sections of the recent report of the Australian delegation to the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows~
PART VI. CONTINENTAL SHELF
Article 76
Definition of the continental shelf
1. The continental shelf of a coastal State comprises the seabed and subsoil of the submarine areas that extend beyond its territorial sea throughout the natural prolongation of its land territory to the outer edge of the continental margin, or to a

Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Bill

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2697

distance of 200 nautical miles from the baselines from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured where the outer edge of the continental margin does not extend up to that distance.
2. The continental shelf of a coastal State shall not extend beyond the limits provided for in paragraphs 4 to 6.
3. The continental margin comprises the submerged prolongation of the land mass of the coastal State, and consists of the sea-bed and subsoil of the shelf, the slope and the rise. It does not include the deep ocean floor with its oceanic ridges or the subsoil thereof.
4. (a) For the purposes of this Convention, the coastal State shall establish the outer edge of the continental margin wherever the margin extends beyond 200 nautical miles from the baselines from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured, by either:
(i) A line delineated in accordance with paragraph 7 by reference to the outermost fixed points at each of which the thickness of sedimentary rocks is at least I per cent of the shortest distance from such point to the foot of the continental slope; or
(ii) A line delineated in accordance with paragraph 7 by reference to fixed points not more than 60 nautical miles from the foot of the continental slope.
(b) In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the foot of the continental slope shall be determined as the point of maximum change in the gradient at its base.
5. The fixed points comprising the line of the outer limits of the continental shelf on the sea-bed, drawn in accordance with paragraph 4 (a) (i) and (ii), either shall not exceed 350 nautical miles from the baselines from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured or shall not exceed 100 nautical miles from the 2,500 metre isobath, which is a line connecting the depth of 2,500 metres.
6. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 5, on submarine ridges, the outer limit of the continental shelf shall not exceed 350 nautical miles from the baselines from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured. This paragraph does not apply to submarine elevations that are natural components of the continental margin, such as its plateaux, rises, caps, banks and spurs.
7. The coastal State shall delineate the seaward boundary of its continental shelf where that shelf extends beyond 200 nautical miles from the baselines from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured by straight lines not exceeding 60 nautical miles in length, connecting fixed points, such points to be defined by co-ordinates oflatitude and longitude.
8. Information on the limits of the continental shelf beyond the 200 nautical mile exclusive economic zone shall be submitted by the coastal State to the Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf set up under annex 1I on the basis of equitable geographical representation. The Commission ;hall make recommendations to coastal States on matters related to the establishment of the outer limits of their continental shelf. The limits of the shelf established by a coastal State on the basis of these recommendations shall be iinal and binding.
9. The coastal State shall deposit with the Secretary General of the United Nations charts and relevant information, including geodetic data, permanently describing the outer limits of its continental shelf. The Secretary-General shall give due publicity thereto.
10. The provisions of this article are without prejudice to the question of delimitation of the continental shelf between adjacent or opposite States.

Article 77
Rights of the coastal State over the continental shelf
J. The coastal State exercises over the continental shelfsovereign rights for the purpose of exploring it and exploiting its natural resources.
2. The rights referred to in paragraph I are exclusive in the sense that if the coastal State docs not explore the continental shelf or exploit its natural resources, no one may undertake these activities without the express consent of the coastal State.
3. The rights of the coastal State over the continental shelf do not depend on occupation, elTcctive or notional, or on any express proclamation.
4. The natural resources refcrred to in this Part consist of the mineral and other non-living resources of the sea-bed and subsoil together with living organisms belonging to sedentary species, that is to say, organisms which, at the harvest able stage, either are immobile on or under the sea-bed or are unable to move except in constant physical contact with the seabed or the subsoil.
Article 78
I,egal status of the superjacent waters and air space and the rights and freedoms of other States
I. The rights of the coastal State over the continental shelf do not affect the legal status of the superjacent waters or of the air space ahove those waters.
2. The exercise of the rights of the coastal State over the continental shelf must not infringe, .or result in any unjustifiable interfcrence with navigation and other rights and freedoms of other States as provided for in this Convention.
Article 79
Submarine cables and pipelines on the continental shelf
I, All States arc entitled to lay submarine cables and pipelines on the continental shelf, in accordance with the provisions of this article.
2. Subject to its right to take reasonable measures for the exploration of the continental shelf, the exploitation of its natural resources and the prevention, reduction and control of pollution from pipelines, the coastal State may not impede the laying or maintenance of such cables or pipelines.
3. The delineation of the course for the laying of such pipelines on the continental shelf is subject to the consent of the coastal State.
4. Nothing in this Part alTects the right of the coastal State to establish conditions for cables or pipelines entering its territory or territorial sea, or its jurisdiction over cables and pipelines constructed or used in connection with the exploration of its continental shelf or exploitation of its resources or the operations of artificial islands, installations and structures under its jurisdiction.
5. When laying submarine cables or pipelines, States shall pay due regard to cables or pipelines already in position. In particular, possibilities of repairing existing cables or pipelines shall not be prejudiced.
Article 80
Artificial islands, installations and structures on the continental shelf
Article 60 applies mutatis mutandis to artificial islands, installations and structures on the continental shelf.

2698 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Bill

Article 81
Drilling on the continental shelf
The coastal State shall have the exclusive right to authorise and regulate drilling on the continental shelf for all purposes.
Article 82
Payments and contributions with respect to the exploitation of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles
1. The coastal State shall make payments or contributions in kind in respect of the exploitation of the non-living resources of the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles from the baselines from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured.
2. The payments and contributions shall he made annually with respect to all production at a site after the first five years of production at that site. For the sixth year, the rate of payment or contribution shall be 1 per cent of the value or volume of production at the site. The rate shall increase by I per cent for each subsequent year until the twelfth year and shall remain at 7 per cent thereafter. Production does not include resources lIsed in connection with exploitation.
3. A developing State which is a net importer of a mineral resource produced from its continental shelf is exempt from making such payments or contributions in respect of that mineral resource.
4. The payments or contributions shall be made through the Authority, which shall distribute them to States Parties to this Convention, on the basis of equitable sharing criteria, taking into account the interests and needs of developing States, particularly the least developed and the land-locked amongst them.
Article 83
Delimitation of the continental shelf between States with opposite or adjacent coasts
1. The delimitation of the continental shelf between States with opposite or adjacent coasts shall be effected by agreement in conformity with international law. Such an agreement shall be in accordance with equitable principles, employing the median or equidistance line, where appropriate, and taking account of all circumstances prevailing in the area concerned.
2. If no agreement can be reached within a reasonable period of time, the States concerned shall resort to the procedures provided for in Part XV.
3. Pending agreement as provided for in paragraph I, the States concerned, in a spirit of understanding and cooperation, shall make every effort to enter into provisional arrangements of a practical nature and, during this transitional period, not to jeopardise or hamper the reaching of the final agreement. Such arrangements shall be without prejudice to the final delimitation.
4. Where there is an agreement in force between the States concerned, questions relating to the delimitation of the continental shelf shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of that agreement.
Article 84
Charts and lists of geographical co-ordinates
I. Subject to this Part, the outer limit lines of the continental shelf and the lines of delimitation drawn in accordance with article 83 shall be shown on charts of a scale or scales adequate for determining them. Where appropriate, lists of geographical co-ordinates of points, specifying the geodetic datum, may be substituted for such outer limit lines or lines of delimitation.

2. The coastal State shall give due publicity to such charts or lists of geographical co-ordinates and shall deposit a copy of each such chart or list with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations.
Article 85
Tunnelling
This Part does not prejudice the right of the coastal State to exploit the subsoil by means of tunnelling, irrespective of the depth of water above the subsoil.
Mr BEAZLEY-I thank the House. I draw attention to one of the articles of the draft Convention which is of direct relevance to these Bills. Article 82 establishes a new regime for the continental shelf where it extends beyond 200 nautical miles from the baseline from which the territorial sea is calculated. For exploitation of the continental shelf seabed, from this point on we will be obliged to pay an amount to a new international authority which will start at a rate of one per cent of the value of the volume of production at the site. As honourable members will be aware, this legislation deals with the continental shelf, which at some points will go well beyond 200 nautical miles from the baseline of the territorial sea. Accurate determination of the levels of production, and its value, will be an obligation imposed on the Commonwealth not only by the Australian people but also by an international authority. We have limited experience of the determination and collection of off-shore royalties under the process determined by the Government in this legislation. As I said before, however, on the whole such experience has been disastrous and, despite its relatively recent history, the object of repeated comment by the Auditor-General.
Let me say at the outset that although I do not oppose royalty sharing with the States, and neither does the Opposition, we do oppose the haphazard way in which the Government has permitted it to proceed and will continue to permit it to proceed under the current joint arrangements. The damaging effects of this situation have been clearly evident from the royalty collection arrangements in force in connection with Bass Strait oil production. If honourable members wish to see the evidence of this in detail, I refer them to the published minutes of evidence of the Public Accounts Committee hearings last year. They can also see it in the reports of the Auditor-General for 1977-78 and 1978-79. The Auditor-General's Office investigated the possible millions of dollars of losses to the Commonwealth in royalty collections because of the procedures which basically last year's legislation permitted to continue in force. There has been no report yet from the Public Accounts Committee, but a prima facie case has been established that in this one uncomplicated area, the collection of Bass Strait

Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Bill

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2699

oil royalties, Commonwealth departments have been unable effectively to monitor State production. In 1979 the Auditor~General was obliged to say:
Because the administration of the royalty system is in the hands of the Designated Authority-
In that case, the relevant ministry of the Victorian Government -
the Commonwealth is unable to verify the Victorian calculation of royalty.
All this confusion 10 years after Bass Strait oil got into production! I understand that in June last year agreement was finally reached on a determination of value at the well-head. That decision had been foreshadowed five years earlier as being likely to be made immediately. However, because of the disputation that surrounded the handling of the Labor Party's legislation at that time the matter was not resolved until five years later, again to the very great detriment of the Australian population. Even the agreement that has been reached probably will not solve the problems. We will never be fully informed as to whether it does because the Commonwealth's means of monitoring its own legislation is out of its hands. It is out of its hands in the case of Bass Strail oil production and in precisely the same sort of legislation it will be out of its hands in other areas of mineral exploitation.
How much worse will this be with the area of confusion now extended to all minerals exploitation? We from Western Australia will immediately be confronted with the problem of royalty payments from North West Shelf gas as a result of this legislation. We will in the future be confronted with a problem in determining royalties from the exploitation of mineral nodules on the seabed. We will not only have a problem with a vast array of different types of minerals and ex-- traction, but also will have a problem of monitoring seven other authorities. The Auditor-General stated that at the moment the Commonwealth does not have the capacity to monitor efTectively what one would f18Ve thought was a fairly simple arrangement with a State over Bass Strait oil production. How will the Commonwealth do that when it is dealing with the North West Shelf and with future developments which will occur when, in 10 to 15 years time, the technology exists to extract a variety of minerals from the seabed.
The point is that what sounded like a simple procedure when it was presented to this House by the Ministers-that is, assessing a volume of production in order to determine a royalty -will become enormously difficult when we look at it in detail. The volume of a mineral extracted can change at different stages of extraction and with

different production techniques. Volume will form at least one basis on which royalty will be determined. I think that in the Australian experience it is the most likely basis. For example, if nodules were taken from the seabed to land to be broken down into their various mineral components, volumes and royalties would be fairly easy to determine. At least one current technology, the vacuum process, would probably produce that sort of delivery to the coastline, and therefore probably make fairly easy determination of royalties. If, however, the breaking down process takes place during extraction, royalty attracting minerals may well be discarded. For example, a company may not be particularly interested in extracting manganese from those nodules. It may only want the cobalt from them. We will be placed in a situation where it will be extraordinarily difficult to prevent a wastage of important royalty gathering materials in the process of a company's production.
There will be ways around this, but what I am trying to demonstrate is how complicated the task will be. These are not impossible problems, but if one confuses the administrative process or if one has an inadequate monitoring process one is headed for trouble. It is patently evident from our experience to this point that we are doing so. This legislation will not enable the Commonwealth to
have confidence that it is fully in control of the situation. It might be argued that the States will always have an interest in maximising royalty payments so that State designated authorities can be relied upon not to create a situation in which the Commonwealth is not effectively, via the joint authority, ensuring that the Australian people receive the amounts that they are entitled to receive from a development. That mayor may not be the case. I come from a State where the Liberal Government has an almost obsessional desire to minimise royalty obligations on mineral producers. We find ourselves in Western Australia subsidising production through energy and freight charges while getting very little in return.
In relation to bauxite mining, the Western Australian Government, through royalties, takes not one twentieth of what is achieved by other bauxite producers, such as Jamaica. Nowhere is a relevant level of royalty so important as in bauxite production as, at an international level, the industry is highly vertically integrated. As a result of that intcgration other tax evasion takes place through transfer pricing and, in the case of Western Aus-
tralian production, r suggest that that practice is
quite rampant. Legislation, partly related to this problem, was recently introduced into this House. H it is as effective as the Government's other tax

2700 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Bill

avoidance legislation, I suggest that the problem will still not be overcome.

In Western Australia we have benefited little because of the Government's attitude to royalties. This is a government which is about to be given the sole authority to administer the determination of what is the appropriate amount of royalty to receive from the production. Because of the Western Australian Government's actions we have benefited very little from it. We can see that when we turn to consider the effect of minerals development on per capita income in Western Australia. It .is evident that we are not benefiting-I am usmg figures of the Australian Bureau of Sta~ist~cs-fro~ the comparative decline of per capIta mcome ill Western Australia since the peak which occurred under the Whitlam and Tonkin Labor governments in 1973-74. Then we were at 102 per cent of the national average. We have since declined to about 95 per cent. Our decline has been due to the fact that we derive a lower proportio~ of our per capita income from profits, rents and mterests than is the case in the eastern States. These aspects of income are of course the results of investment, including investment in minerals production. So we benefit only during the construction phase of minerals development when substantial wages are earned in that limited period. Royalties would help us overcome some of the effects of this distribution of wealth.

The attitude of the Western Australian

Government, to which the Commonwealth wants

to hand the administration the antithesis of the needs

of of

rtohyeaplteyopcolelleocftWioen~tis

ern Australia and of Australia.

Companies which pay royalties and require licences need simplicity and reliability in government administration. They need the simplicity and reliability in government administration that would be provided if this joint authority-we have no objection to an authority in which the States are involved in discussions with the Commonwealth in this area-had the administration of royalties conducted by the Commonwealth and not at the State level. They would be confident that they would not be subject to constant chopping and changing. It is the Commonwealth government, after all, that they will have to deal with when the question of export licences for developments arises and they would be confident in dealing with that government on the question of the administration of royalties. We have an opportunity to provide this simplicity in off-shore development. It is not something that we can do on-shore. We have been unable to do so on-shore but could have done so off-shore under the 1973

legislation. The Government has deprived its private enterprise backers of their requirement for consistent, clear and reliable government at the same time as it has deprived the Australian people of efficient administration. I think that what I have said in relation to the royalty section of the Bill will increasingly become a problem when we deal with the distribution of licences for production and exploration.

I reiterate that I support the position adopted by the Opposition that this Bill is a further celebration of legislation that was last year a national tragedy. As such it cannot be supported. I draw the attention of the Government to the very considerable problems that it will confront with international authorities in the future regarding those sections of the continental shelf which proceed beyond the 200 nautical mile limit. It will have to answer to an international authority because we will agree to such jurisdiction as we have agreed to it in the Law of the Sea negotiations at this point. It will have to answer to that international authority for the reliability of royalty collections. The report of the Auditor-General indicates that there is the clearest evidence that this reliability, this certainty, this capacity of the Commonwealth effectively to undertake its obligations to the Australian people to ensure that they are obtaining a sufficient return on the production from the offshore areas is totally inadequate. We have no evidence from the Government that it will improve those procedures. How much more confusing that situation will be when it is not simply a matter of dealing with the Victorian Government on Bass Strait oil production but becomes one of dealing with six other authorities and a wide variety of other elements of mineral exploitation.

Question put:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

62

Noes

45

Majority

17

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D.
Baume,M.E.
Birney,R.J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Burri M. A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian

AYES

Howard,J. W. Hunt,R.J.D. Hyde,J.M.
Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Lioyd,B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William

Minerals (Submerged Lands) Bill

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2701

AYES
Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A,G. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D.
Fife, w.e.
Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, O. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall, Steele Harris, O. MeD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M.

McVeigh, D. T. Moore,J.c. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. ,Ruddock, P. M. Shack,P.D.
Shipton, R. F.
Spender, J. M. Street, A. A.
Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson,D.S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. 1. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

MINERALS (SUBMERGED LANDS) BILL 1981

Second Reading

Debate resumed from 14 May, on motion by Mr Anthony:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

Question put:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

62

Noes

48

Armitage, J. L.
Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Brown,John Brown, Robert
Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, I. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V.
Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Humphreys, B. C. Hurford, C. J. Innes, U. E.

NOES

Jacobi,R. Jenkins, H. A. Johnson,I.es (Teller) Jones, Barry
Jones, Charles
Kelly,R.J.
Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Lea (Teller) Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morrls,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G.
Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C.
Uren, T. West,S.J.
Young, M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Howard) read a third time.

PETROLEUM (SUBMERGED LANDS) (REGISTRATION FEES) AMENDMENT
BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 14 May, on motion by Mr Anthony:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.

Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Howard) read a third time.

Majority
AYES
Adermannl A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. \V. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly,D.M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Edwards. H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J . Groom,R.J. l1all, Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N. J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M.

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Ca,s,M.H.
Charles, D. E.
Child,J. Cohen,B.
CroSS,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S.
Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Frce,R. V. Fry,K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L.

NOES

14
Howard,J. W. Hyde,J. M. Jarman, A. W. Jull.D.F. Katter, R. C. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MaoKenzie, A. 1. Mclean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh,D. T. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher. A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling,G.E.J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner, R. I. White, P. N. D.
Wilson, I. B. e.
Innes, U.E. Jacobi, R. Jenkins. H. A. Johnson, Los (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Lco McMahon, I.es (Teller) Mildrcn,1. B. Milton, p, Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, O. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. West,S.J.

2702 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Minerals (Submerged Lands) Bill

NOES

Humphreys, B. C. Hurford, C. J.

Willis,R. Young,M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

Message from the Administrator recommending appropriation announced.

Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Howard) read a third time.

MINERALS (SUBMERGED LANDS) (ROYALTY) BILL 1981 Second Reading
Debate resumed from 14 May, on motion by MrAnthony:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.

Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Howard) read a third time.

MINERALS (SUBMERGED LANDS) EXPLORATION PERMIT FEES) BILL
1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 14 May, on motion by MrAnthony:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.

Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Howard) read a third time,

MINERALS (SUBMERGED LANDS) (PRODUCTION LICENCE FEES) BILL
1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 14 May, on motion by Mr Anthony:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.

Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Howard) read a third time.
MINERALS (SUBMERGED LANDS) (WORKS AUTHORITY FEES) BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 14 May, on motion by MrAnthony:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Howard) read a third time.
MINERALS (SUBMERGED LANDS) (REGISTRATION FEES) BILL 1981
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 14 May, on motion by Mr Anthony:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Howard) read a third time.
INCOME TAX ASSESSMENT AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (8.41)-1 move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill contains measures to give effect to the income tax concessions for investors in Australian films that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) first outlined in the policy speech for the election last October. A joint statement by me and the then Minister for Home Affairs and Environment on 18 December last set out details of the concessions in a comprehensive way, In those circumstances, I think it is sufficient in this introductory speech to draw attention to the key points of

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2703

the legislation now brought forward. The Bill will amend the Income Tax Assessment Act to provide a deduction equal to 150 per cent of capital expenditure on the acquisition of the initial copyright in a new Australian film. Also to be provided by the Bill is a tax exemption for an investor's net earnings from such a film. The maximum exemption is an amount equal to 50 per cent of the capital expenditure that qualifies for the 150 per cent deduction. To be entitled to the deduction, an investor must become the first owner, or one of the first owners, of the copyright in a film that the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment certifies to be an eligible Australian film.
The Bill contains extensive guidelines that the Minister is required to have regard to in deciding whether to certify a film as eligible. Primarily, a film must have an appropriate Australian content. Tests in existing legislation authorising a deduction over two years for investment in films will be used for that purpose. The Minister's function will, however, go further than the process of certification of Australian content. As set out in the Bill, he will also have the responsibility of determining whether a particular film is one produced for exhibition to the public in cinemas or by way of television broadcasting. To qualify a film must be a feature film, a documentary or a mini-series of television drama. Day-to-day productions, such as commercials, variety programs and films of sporting or other public events, will not be eligible.
I turn now to the classes of expenditure that will be eligible for the special deductions and the time at which the deductions will be available. The legislation will, of course, express the deductions to be available to companies and individuals who incur eligible expenditure. Partnerships are, however, a common vehicle for film production arrangements and the legislation therefore contains some special provisions in this respect. The Bill provides that each partner is to be taken to have personally incurred his or her share of expenditure incurred by the partnership. As is usual in the tax context, expenditure will qualify only if incurred with a view to production of assessable income. Only expenditure out laid directly in the production of a film will qualify, but the legislation is framed so that, again taking into account practices in the film industry, individuals or partners whose expenditure is in the form of a contribution to a production account will enjoy the deduction to the extent that the moneys contributed are so out laid.
Among safeguards necessary to protect these generous concessions from unintended exploitation are measures to counter inflation of film

production costs above the levels which persons dealing at arm's length would pay. Another key provision is based on the concept that, if taxpayers are to enjoy a deduction of 150 per cent of their outlays, they should only do so for moneys in respect of which they are at risk of a true economic loss. The 'at-risk' requirement in the legislation will limit the special deduction to expenditure that is not greater in amount than that for which the person is at risk of loss in relation to the film. To illustrate, if a person is protected against loss because the financier who has supplied moneys to expend on the film has recourse only against the film, or income from it, that person will not be at risk. Nor will a partner in a limited partnership be regarded under the legislation as at risk for a share of expenditure out of borrowed funds which, because it exceeds capital personally contributed, represents money for which, under the rules of such partnerships, the partner is not liable.
People whose risk of loss is removed or abated simply because they are able, before the film is made, to find a market for it will not run foul of the at-risk test. However, a person who, under one and the same arrangement, borrows money to expend on a film and is guaranteed a flow of income from the film is in a different situation. To the extent of the guaranteed income the investment of the borrowed funds is in no way at risk. In these cases, the special deduction will not be available for any amount not really at risk.
I come now to the question of when the special deduction is to be available. When details of the concession were announced last December it was indicated that the deduction would be available in the year of income in which the investor expends capital moneys in or towards the production of the film. Measures of a safeguarding kind that were foreshadowed then were to operate so that deductions were, however, not allowable if the film was not completed and marketed to produce a yield for investors. In settling details of the legislation the Government has come to the conclusion that it would be appropriate to vary these rules. 1 stress at this point that only a change in the time for taking deductions under the scheme is involved in this variation. 1 note that there has been very strong response to the Government's initiative. To the end of April, application for certification as Australian films had been made in respect of 170 films. It has been practicable so far to process only some of these. The total budgeted cost for the 170 films is some $130m and income tax deductions for 150 per cent of that amount will no doubt be sought. Unhappily, there has also been noted some intervention by elements whose

2704 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill

only concern appears to be exploitation of the concession in unacceptable ways. Responsible film authorities have registered their concern about that.
The safeguarding measures I referred to a moment ago would not have been completely effective in closing off avenues for exploitation and would~ if persisted with, have significantly further complicated an already complex piece of legislation. Accordingly, the Government has decided that, with effect from the commencement of the scheme on 1 October 1980, deductions are not to be available until the year in which the relevant film has been both completed and used to produce income. The Bill is framed accordingly. The change will bring the new concession into line with the existing income tax law that provides deductions over two years for the cost of acquiring a film copyright. Under the existing provisions, which also apply to the capital costs of acquiring units of industrial property generally, deductions become available in the year in which the copyright in a completed film is first used for incomeproducing purposes. For some investors, the change will not have any practical effect. That will be the case for investors in a film that is both completed and productive of income in the same year as that in which capital expenditure on it is incurred by them. For other investors, the effect will be that a deduction can be taken later rather than sooner. But I stress that no more than a change in timing is involved-a change that will mean that allowance of deductions and assessment of related income will more closely coincide.

Those features of it may help critics to an understanding of why, in the context of other tax legislation now before the Parliament, it has taken some little time to produce. A memorandum has been prepared to explain the detailed provisions of the Bill, and is currently being circulated to honourable members. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion byMrWest) adjourned.
INCOME TAX (ASSESSMENT AND RATES) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (8.51 )-- I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill will give effect to some taxation measures recently announced by the Government. Included in the measures are the changes to a number of taxation concessions referred to by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) on 30 April 1981 when he spoke in the House about decisions made following our Review of Commonwealth Functions. Another matter covered is the income tax rebate for contributions for basic health insurance. Also dealt with is the announcement on 29 April 1981 that there is to be halfindexation of personal income tax for 1981-82, and that that year is to be the last in which the system of tax indexation will apply. I turn now to the details of each measure.

I turn now to the exempt income side of the new concessions. A person eligible for the deduction will be exempt from tax on proceeds from the film, with an exemption limit of 50 per cent of the qualifying amount expended in producing the film. Reflecting this, there are in the Bill previously foreshadowed measures that set out what are to be regarded as proceeds from a film for this purpose. In brief, all proceeds, whether technically of a capital or income kind, are to be taken into account, as well as foreign-source income, otherwise exempt from tax, that does not flow from the overseas country in which the film is exhibited. These rules are, of course, of an antiavoidance kind. Related and previously foreshadowed provisions of the Bill require that expenditure of a revenue nature be set off only against film income and that film losses arising in one year be carried forward only for deduction against film income.
I do not think that I need say more at this stage. The Bill is lengthy and, as I have said, complex.

Reductions in Taxation Concessions
The point has been made before, but it is appropriate that I mention it again now. It is that taxation concessions are, in a practical sense, as much a call on the Budget as are direct outlays. That is true even if the effect of a concession is only to delay the collection of tax. It follows that, when government expenditures come under review, taxation concessions are among the things that have to be looked at.
An outcome of the examination made in the course of our Review of Commonwealth Functions was a decision to reduce the value of some income tax concessions. Among the concessions to be reduced are the 20 per cent loading on depreciation rates on plant, the investment allowance and the rebate of tax that is allowable to shareholders for capital subscribed to petroleum exploration and mining companies. Also to be affected are the immediate deduction allowable for the cost of converting oil-fired or liquefied petroleum gas-fired plant to operate from alternative

Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Bill

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATTVES 2705

energy fuels and the deductions that are allowable for capital expenditure incurred on the development or operation of a mine or oil field.
As indicated in a statement accompanying the Prime Minister's speech on 30 April, the reduced level of each concession will generally apply in respect of expenditure incurred by a taxpayer after that day. However, expenditure incurred after 30 April 1981 under a contract entered into earlier, or in respect of work carried out by the taxpayer which was commenced earlier, will continue to qualify for the present levels of concession. The deduction for capital costs incurred by a taxpayer in converting oil-fired or LPG-fired plant to use alternative energy sources is to be allowable in equal instalments over two income years instead of being wholly deductible in the year in which the expenditure is made.
The special loading on depreciation rates for plant is to be reduced from 20 per cent to 18 per cent. The investment allowance deduction of 20 per cent is to be reduced to 18 per cent, with corresponding adjustments to the shading-in rates for plant costing less than $976. Deductions for capital expenditure incurred in the development or operation of a mining property or an oil or natural gas field are to be calculated, where appropriate, by reference to a maximum statutory life of the mine or field of six years, instead of five years. Finally, the rebate of tax available in respect of moneys paid on shares in petroleum exploration and mining companies, or to certain interposed companies, is to be reduced from 30 per cent to 27 per cent of the moneys so paid. The reduced rebate will in general apply to moneys paid by a taxpayer after 30 April 1981, but moneys paid subsequently in respect of calls made on or before 30 April 1981 on shares owned by the taxpayer at that date will retain eligibility for the present level of rebate.
Income Tax Rebate for Cost of Basic Health Insurance
As foreshadowed in the House on 29 April 1981 by the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) and myself, an income tax rebate is to be allowed for contributions paid by a taxpayer for basic hospital insurance or basic medical insurance cover. The rebate is, of course, part of the Government's new health arrangements. The new rebate will be available at the rate of 32c in the dollarequivalent to the standard rate of tax-for contributions paid for basic medical or basic hospital insurance cover for the taxpayer, the spouse of the taxpayer and any children of the taxpayer or of

his or her spouse. [t will apply to eligible contributions made on or after 1 July 1981 in respect of cover from then on.
This new rebate is to be quite separate from the general concessional rebate that covers various classes of private expenditure, including payments for medical and hospital expenses. Because of this a person may receive the new rebate even if he or she is not entitled to the general rebate. This means that tax savings from this concession will not depend on a taxpayer's total rebatable expenditure being more than $1 ,590.
Tax Indexation
I announced in the House on 29 April that half tax indexation would apply for 1981-82, as indicated by the Prime Minister in the policy speech of 5 September 1980. This Bill will give effect to that announcement. The benefits to individual taxpayers from the tax reductions proposed by these amendments are significant. In total, they will amount to some $500m in respect of the 1981-82 year. In line with the practice of previous years, the indexation adjustment is based on the increase of the average consumer price index for the four quarters ended March 1981 over the average for the four quarters ended March 1980. This was 9.9 per cent. The law provides for a discounting of this percentage for the effects of the Government's oil pricing policy and the health care financing arrangements announced on 24 May 1979.
The discounting produces a net increase of 7.6 per cent. On this basis, half indexation means adjustment of the personal rate scale, and dependant and related rebates, by 3.8 per cent, that is, a half-indexation factor of 1.038. Indexation of this order will have the effect that the tax threshold will change from $4,041 for 1980-81 to $4,195 for 1981-82. Subject to the first $4,195 of taxable income being tax-free, the standard rate of 32 per cent will apply to incomes up to $17,894 instead of $17,239. The 46 per cent rate will thus not apply until taxable income exceeds $17,894. The maximum rate-60 per cent-will first apply at $35,789, instead of at $34,479 as at present.
The increases in dependant and associated rebates due to indexation will mean, for example, that the maximum allowance for a spouse will rise from $800 to $830, and for a sole parent from $559 to $580. When allowance is made for these changes in both the rate scale and rebates, the tax free income for a person with a dependent spouse will rise from $6,541 in 1980-81 to $6,788 in 1981-82, and for a sole parent from $5,787 to $6,007. The tax reductions will be reflected in reduced pay-as-you-earn tax deductions from 1

2706 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Bill

July 1981. I have had prepared, and seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard, a number of tables showing the effect of the tax scale and rebate changes on tax payable for 1981-82.
Leave granted.
The tables read as follows-

Table No. 1 WEEKLY TAX INSTALMENT DEDUCTIONS
Taxpayer without Dependants ($)

Weekly earnings

Weekly deductions
before 1 July 1981

Approximate weekly
deductions after
1 July 1981

Reduction

100

8.45

7.50

0.95

120

14.95

14.00

0.95

140

21.45

20.50

0.95

160

27.95

27.00

0.95

180

34.45

33.50

0.95

200

40.95

40.00

0.95

220

47.45

46.50

0.95

240

53.95

53.00

0.95

260

60.45

59.50

0.95

278*

66.30

65.35

0.95

280

66.95

66.00

0.95

300

73.45

72.50

0.95

320

79.95

79.00

0.95

340

88.45

85.80

2.65

360

97.65

95.00

2.65

380

106.85

104.20

2.65

400

116.05

113.40

2.65

420

125.25

122.60

2.65

440

134.45

131.80

2.65

460

143.65

141.00

2.65

480

152.85

150.20

2.65

- - _ 500 .. _.-

162.05

159.40

2.65

* Average weekly earnings per employed male unit,

December 1980, $278.40.

Table No. 2 WEEKLY TAX INSTALMENT DEDUCTIONS
Taxpayer with Dependent Spouse ($)

Weekly earnings

Weekly deductions
before
1 July 1981

Approximate
weekly deductions
after
1 July 1981

Reduction

100 120 140 160
180 200 220
240 260 278* 280
300 320

..
6.25 12.75
19.25 25.75 32.25
38.75 45.25 51.10
51.75 58.25 64.7S

4.75

1.50

11.25

1.50

17.75

1.50

24.25

1.50

30.75

1.50

37,25

1.50

43.75

1.50

49.60

1.50

50.25

1.50

56.75

1.50

63.25

1.50

($)

Weekly earnings

Weekly
deductions before
I July 1981

Approximate weekly
deductions
after 1July 1981

Reduction

340

73.25

70.05

3.20

360

82.45

79.25

3.20

380

91.65

88.45

3.20

400

100.85

97.65

3.20

420

110.05

106.85

3.20

440

119.25

116.05

3.20

460

128.45

125.25

3.20

480

137.65

134.45

3.20

500

146.85

143.65

3.20

* Average weekly earnings per employed male unit,
December 1980, $278.40.

Table No. 3
TAX PAYABLE AT PROPOSED 1981-82 RATES COMPARED WITH TAX AT 1980-81 RATES ON
SELECTED LEVELS OF TAXABLE INCOMES
Taxpayer Without Dependants ($)

Taxable income

1980-81 Rates

Proposed 1981-82
Rates Reduction

4,000 5,000 6,000 7,000 8,000 9,000 10,000 11,000 12,000 13,000 14,000 15,000 16,000 17,000 18,000 19,000 20,000 21,000 22,000 23,000 24,000 25,000 26,000 27,000 28,000 29,000 30,000 31,000 32,000 33,000 34,000 35,000 36,000 37,000

306.88 626.88 946.88 1,266.88 1,586.88 1,906.88 2,226.88 2,546.88 2,866.88 3,186.88 3,506.88 3,826.88 4,146.88 4,573.42 5,033.42 5,493.42 5,953.42 6,413.42 6,873.42 7,333.42 7,793.42 8,253.42 8,713.42 9,173.42 9,633.42 10,093.42 10,553.42 11,013.42 11,473.42 11,933.42 12,466.50 13,066.50 13,666.50

257.60 577.60 897.60 1,217.60 1,537.60 1,857.60 2,177.60 2,497.60 2,817.60 3,137.60 3,457.60 3,777.60 4,097.60 4,432.44 4,892.44 5,352.44 5,812.44 6,272.44 6,732.44 7,192.44 7,652.44 8,112.44 8,572.44 9,032.44 9,492.44 9,952.44 10,412.44 10,872.44 11,332.44 11,792.44 12,252.44
12,742.12 13,342.12

49.28 49.28 49.28 49.28 49.28 49.28 49.28 49.28 49.28 49.28 49.28 49.28 49.28 140.98 140.98 140.98 140.98 140.98 140.98 140.98 140.98 140.98 140.98 140.98 140.98 140.98 140.98 140,98 140.98 140.98 214.06 324.38 324.38

Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Bill

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2707

Taxable income
38,000 39,000 40,000 50,000 75,000 100,000

1980-81 Rates
14,266.50 14,866.50 15,466.50 21,466.50 36,466.50 51,466.50

Proposed 1981-82
Rates Reduction

13,942.12 14,542.12 15,142.12 21,142.12 36,142.12 51,142.12

324.38 324.38 324.38 324.38 324.38 324.38

Table No. 4
TAX PAYABLE AT PROPOSED 1981-82 RATES COMPARED WITH TAX AT 1980-81 RATES ON
SELECTED LEVELS OF TAXABLE INCOME
Taxpayer With Dependent Spouse ($)

Taxable income

1980-81 Rates

Proposed 1981-82 Rates Reduction

4,000 5,000 6,000 7,000 8,000 9,000 10,000 11,000 12,000 13,000 14,000 15,000 16,000 17,000 18,000 19,000 20,000 21,000 22,000 23,000 24,000 25,000 26,000 27,000 28,000 29,000 30,000 31,000 32,000 33,000 34,000 35,000 36,000 37,000 38,000 39,000 40,000 50,000 75,000
100,000

146.88 466.88 786.88 1,106.88 1,426.88 1,746.88 2,066.88 2,386.88 2,706.88 3,026.88 3,346.88 3,773.42 4,233.42 4,693.42 5,153.42 5,613.42 6,073.42 6,533.42 6,993.42 7,453.42 7,913.42 8,373.42 8,833.42 9,293.42 9,753.42 10,213.42 10,673.42 11,133.42 11,666.50 12,266.50 12,866.50 13,466.50 14,066.50 14,666.50 20,666.50 35,666.50 50,666.50

67.60 387.60 707.60 1,027.60 1,347.60 1,667.60 1,987.60 2,307.60 2,627.60 2,947.60 3,267.60 3,602.44 4,062.44 4,522.44 4,982.44 5,442.44 5,902.44 6,362.44 6,822.44 7,282.44 7,742.44 8,202.44 8,662.44 9,122.44 9,582.44 10,042.44 10,502.44 10,962.44 11,422.44 11,912.12 12,512.12 13,112.12 13,712.12 14,312.12 20,312.12 35,312.12 50,312.12

79.28 79.28 79.28 79.28 79.28 79.28 79.28 79.28 79.28 79.28 79.28 170.98 170.98 170.98 170.98 170.98 170.98 170.98 170.98 170.98 170.98 170.98 170.98 170.98 170.98 170.98 170.98 170.98 244.06 354.38 354.38 354.38 354.38 354.38 354.38 354.38 354.38

Table No. 5
INCREASES IN REBATES FOR DEPENDANTS AND ASSOCIATED REBATES AS PROPOSED FOR 1981-82 AND IN THE LEVELS OF INCOME UP TO
WHICH NO TAX IS PAYABLE
Rebates ($)

Type of rebate

1980-81 1981-82 Increase

Spouse

800

830

+30

Daughter-housekeeper

800

830

+30

Invalid relative

362

376

+14

Parent

722

749

+27

Sole parent

559

580

+21

Housekeeper

800

830

+30

Tax Free Levels of Income ($)

Taxpayer

1980-8) 1981-82 Increase

Single With spouse rebate With sole parent
rebate

4,041 6,541
5,787

4,195 6,788
6,007

+ 154 +247
+220

Mr HOWARD-The tables also show the approximate reductions in weekly PAYE deductions at various levels of weekly earnings. The tables show, for example, that a taxpayer on the standard rate of 32 per cent and having a dependent spouse will be $1.50 a week better off as a result of the changes. As I indicated in my statement to the House on 29 April 1981, the Government has decided that discretionary adjustments to the taxation rate scale and rebates are preferable to the existing tax indexation arrangements. This Bill will therefore delete from the law as no longer necessary the provisions under which the present system of indexation operates. In future the Government will pursue on a discretionary basis and usually in a Budget context its policy of reducing taxation where circumstances make it appropriate and responsible to do so. The Bill is explained in detail in an explanatory memorandum that is being circulated to honourable members and I do not think that I need say more at this stage. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr West) adjourned.

HEALTH COMMISSION (AMENDMENT) ORDINANCE 1981
Suspension of Standing Orders Motion (by MI' MacKellar)-by leaveagreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent Notice No. 69, General Business, being called on forthwith.
Motion for Disallowance Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (9.2)- [move:

2708 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Health Commission (Amendment) Ordinance

That the Health Commission (Amendment) Ordinance 1981 (No.6 of 1981), made under the Seat of Government (Administration) Act 1910, be disallowed.
In speaking to this motion, first of all I protest at the method of procedure in relation to this Ordinance. As the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) said in his Press statement, this is a significant change. He said that it was 'a restructuring of the Capital Territory Health Commission'. The ordinance removes from the Health Commission the three part time commissioners elected by the House of Assembly. It removes the three part time commissioners elected by or representative of health industry workers; that is, doctors, nurses and other workers. It will leave a Capital Territory Health Commission of three full time officials appointed by the Minister. It creates a further body, the Health Services Council, to advise the Minister and the Health Commission. This Council will consist of six to 10 members appointed by the Minister. These are a set of major changes, as admitted in the Minister's own statement, yet they are smuggled through this House by ordinance. I am not blaming the Minister or accusing him of some trick although I must confess that the Ordinance was signed on Wednesday 25 March by the Governor-General, gazetted the following Friday and the commissioners were sacked on the same day. For a Minister not noted for his speed this was a remarkable acceleration. I am not blaming him for the way in which this is being done. We are all in this Parliament trapped in this shabby farce whereby even the pretence of democratic procedures is denied Australians who live in the Capital Territory.
Every day in this House, apart from the drought in recent months, Bills of far less import than this Ordinance are introduced, debated and often dealt with at the Committee stage. No such agenda is made for this measure which is vital to the provision of health services in the Capital Territory. The Ordinance has never been introduced. It simply lies on the table. It would simply pass without comment unless some initiative were taken by the Opposition. Therefore, unless the Minister is compelled by the Opposition he need make no statement in this House about what he calls a restructuring of the Capital Territory Health Commission. This is a travesty of the appropriate methods of dealing with significant legislation. All of us on both sides of the House should be shamed by this travesty. I do not excuse the people of Canberra. In a sense they have tolerated such procedures for too long. It is about time we either governed Canberra properly or provided self-government for the Australian Capital Territory.

I have dealt with my objection to the procedures to disallow this Ordinance. I will now look at the substance of the changes. The aim of the changes, put simply, is to gut the Capital Territory Health Commission of its elected community representatives and the elected representatives of health industry workers. For all practical purposes the Canberra community will be denied a direct input into health policy for the Territory and the experiment of worker participation in the making of health policy will be abruptly terminated. I should of course make one qualification. As one might expect of this Government, one group of health workers is guaranteed Health Commission representation. One of the changes the Ordinance provides for is that one of the three commissioners shall be a medical practitioner. The nurse commissioner gets the axe, an elected doctor representative is removed, an elected nurse representative is excised and a representative of the other health workers goes, as do thc three members elected by the House of Assembly. One might describe this, in view of recent activities, as a scalpel gang operation. As I shall show, the proposed Health Services Council is not a proper substitute for the elimination of effective community and worker participation. I refer the House to an editorial in the Canberra Times of 4 April 1981 which puts the irony of the denial of Canberra's participation far better than
I can. It states:
A total of six deeply interested and elected men and women, resident in Canberra are to be removed, without their approval and without the approval of the people who elected them. The decision was taken by the Minister for Health, Mr MacKellar, who lives at Balgowlah Heights, on the recommendation of a Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals throughout this vast continent, which was chaired by Mr J. H. Jamison, who lives at Mosman.
First of all, let me deal with worker representation. This has characterised the Health Commission since 1975. The inclusion of such worker representation reflected a philosophical commit. ment by the Whitlam Government to the ideal that workers in industry should have a say in the development and formulation of policy for that industry. Liberals, of course, have often mouthed the slogans of worker participation. For example, the present Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee), in a previous ministerial incarnation, appeared very strongly in favour of worker participation. But there is a constant contradiction of this Government's rhetoric by its actions. The Liberal Party's attitude to worker participation in policy formulation is exactly the same as its attitude to democracy. It is purely contingent. It depends entirely on whether worker participation or democracy suits the convenience

Health Commission (Amendment) Ordinance

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2709

of the Liberals. Apparently on the Capital Territory Health Commission it does not.
We on this side of the House admit that worker participation in the Capital Territory Health Commission was an experiment. That valuable, worthwhile and imaginative experiment has now been terminated by ministerial fiat without any public assessment by the Minister. It has been simply abolished, apparently on the basis of unargued assertions in the Jamison report on worker participation. The Jamison report stated:
The Commission does not encourage worker representation on boards of management and health commissions.
At no stage in the massive report is that generalisation even explicitly and logically argued for. Indeed, it is contradicted by Mr Jamison in other parts of the report and by the amendments to the Ordinance in the proposal that one select type of worker, the medical practitioner, should be encouraged to be represented on boards and health commissions. Yet it is this tissue of unargued assertion and contradiction that apparently is the basis of the removal of worker representation from the Capital Territory Health Commission. I say 'apparently' because in none of the statements of the Minister does he address himself explicitly to the question of worker participation. I am hopeful that this evening we will get some explanation as to why this experiment in worker participation has been terminated in the Capital Territory Health Commission.
I now turn to the elimination of the community representatives, the three part time commissioners elected by the House of Assembly. They were not a Labor experiment so they are not part of the vindictive operation of this Government to get rid of everything the Whitlam Government introduced. They are in a quite different category from the worker participants. Since 1935 the people of Canberra have had elected representatives on their hospital authorities. For 46 years they have had elected representatives on their central health authorities. What were the Minister's reasons for removing community representation after 46 years? The one explanation we have so far been given in his brief Press release on the day of the changes and the sackings states:
The Jamison Commission on Inquiry identified inefficiencies in the organisational structure of the Capital Territory Health Commission.
When one turns to the Jamison report to find support for the Minister's statement, it can be seen that in endeavouring to establish 'identified inefficiencies in the organisational structure of the Capital Territory Health Commission', the Jamison Commission developed two arguments.

One was essentially based on gossip and the second argument was essentially structural. I will dispatch each of these arguments in turn. Firstly, I will take the gossip and quote from the Commission report:
This Commission has been informed that blatant stacking of the membership-that is the membership of the Health Commission-has occurred when matters of major policy have been under consideration, and that political party views have been put forward under the guise of community representation.
Let me say that that is a very odd idea of the nature of the function of political parties in the community. This gossip was advanced in private hearings and in an unidentified submission. The evidence provided has never been open to public rebuttal. The gossip itself has never been substantiated by the commissioners or by any other source. Certainly, we have not been able to discover any evidence of block voting by all the part time commissioners, if that is what is meant by 'blatant stacking'.
This is not to deny that there were certainly political tensions on the Capital Territory Health Commission. The three part time commissioners elected by the House of Assembly consisted of two Labor members and one Australian Democrat. In confronting this Government on its health policies, certainly there was going to be conflict and tension on that Commission-certainly over issues such as cutbacks in health areas, secrecy in regard to the intentions of this Government concerning health policies in Canberra and in the undisguised hostility of this Government to noncompliant yes persons on its commissions. All of this led to tensions within the Commission. The Canberra Times pointed out on 15 September 1980:
Nobody would expect the Government of the day to be pleased that the Assembly is of a different political colour, and that the Assembly puts its own majority party representatives on local statutory authorities.
One recognises that. The editorial continues:
But that is no excuse for seeking to reduce the effectiveness of the Assembly or considering removing its representatives from authorities like the Australian Capital Territory Health Commission.
I agree that this is no excuse for seeking to reduce the effectiveness of the Assembly or for considering the removal of its representatives from authorities like the Capital Territory Health Commission.
It is true that some Liberals in the local community appear to have been avid in a partisan desire to support the removal of the elected commissioners. I am very glad to say that not all prominent Liberals in this city took that position.

2710 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Health Commission (Amendment) Ordinance

Many of them have been critical of these decisions. But insofar as there were Liberals who were actively co-operating with the Federal Government, such partisan behaviour has simply blinded them to the needs of their own community. Such Liberals, in supporting the gutting of the Commission, have simply betrayed their own community.
Finally, even if all the gossip were true and all the remarks and secret tales told to the Jamison Commission were true, the democratic solution would never be to remove the provision for effective community participation; the solution is simply to use the democratic processes in the proper way to change the representatives. I have not been very happy in the last three years with the decisions reached in this Parliament, nor have I been very happy with the behaviour and attitudes of the majority but I am not going to suggest that we abandon the representative institutions. What we want to do is to encourage the electorate to change the representatives. The same analogy applies to the situation of the Capital Territory Health Commission. In my view, that is a complete and total answer to the gossip.
The second and more serious argument advanced by Jamison was a structural one. The second argument for doing away with the elected commissioners was based on an analogy with State health commissions. Jamison argued that the functions of the Capital Territory Health Commission-that is, planning, major policy determination and resource allocation-were similar to the functions of the State health commissions. Secondly, he said that the State health commissions are made up of experts and civil servants and did not have elected representatives. Hence, the Capital Territory Health Commission should not have elected representatives.
That apparently logical argument neglects utterly, completely and totally the unique situation of the Australian Capital Territory. The States can afford to dispense with a representative element because they have representative assemblies with the power and authority to ensure that their health commissions are responsive and responsible. One of the major tasks of State parliaments is to oversee the activities of the State health commissions. This is just not so in Canberra. The local House of Assembly does not have the authority and power to ensure the responsiveness and responsibility of the Capital Territory Health Commission. It simply lacks that power and the resources to carry that through. Also, the Federal Parliament just does not have the time. It is simply impracticable for this Parliament to carry out its federal tasks and as well function

effectively as a State-type government for the Australian Capital Territory and oversee effectively the work of the Commission. It is simply not equipped to do so.
What this Ordinance therefore does is to eliminate a direct and effective community participation in Canberra's health decisions. It reduces the public access to health information. For all practical purposes we will have, in the true meaning of the word, bureaucratic governance of health in the Australian Capital Territory. [ am not one of those people who participate in glib abuse of Commonwealth public servants. My own view from my own experience of the public servants I have met here and in my own city is that they are dedicated, hard working and at the moment they necessarily possess a sense of humour. But the great virtue of a public bureaucracy as against a private bureaucracy is that it can be made responsive and responsible by the oversight of democratic assemblies. That is the great virtue of the public bureaucracy as against all the private bureaucracies to which this Government would hand away functions. That oversight is not really possible in any practical way with a Capital Territory Health Commission as established under this Ordinance. For all practical purposes, the Commission will be effectively insulated against proper democratic oversight.
No doubt the Minister will attempt to negate these arguments by pointing to the Health Services Council established under this Ordinance. I am not going to waste much time on the Health Services Council. It would be simply dignifying an institution which is laughable as a body designed to provide effective community participation. It is simply a piece of tokenism. The six to 10 members of the Council are simply the nominees of the Minister. They lack entirely representative authority of their own. The Minister may not select yes men or women---l give him that-but in the last resort they are simply his nominees and dismissable by him if they misbehave. The body is purely advisory and its advice, if unwanted, will simply be ignored because it is powerless. As I said, it is a mere piece of tokenism. The Minister, in the glib double talk which I am afraid is becoming so characteristic of his style, claimed:
The Council will ensure continued community and professional input into the formulation of policies and plans for the provision of health services by the Commission.
The language is bureaucratese, the philosophy is bureaucratic. It will do nothing of the sort. The Council is simply a tame cat apology for the destruction of effective community and worker representation. I believe that we are all diminished by the procedures and substance of legislation such

Health Commission (Amendment) Ordinance

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2711

as this. I ask government members-those who may be listening-for once to act according to their frequently espoused principles and vote to disallow this Ordinance.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Hon. Charles Jones)-Is the motion seconded?
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (9.l9)-Irise to second this motion of disallowance. From 1935 to 27 March this year, the Australian Capital Territory community has had a say in determining health policy in the Australian Capital Territory through its representatives first of all on the Canberra Community Hospital Board and after that on the Capital Territory Health Commission. When the Canberra Community Hospital Board was formed in 1935 it had two elected members and by 1955 that had increased to five elected members. In 1967, the then Minister for Health attempted to remove all elected representatives from that board but this move failed after considerable debate in another place. The Government eventually came to its senses and decided to include two elected members from the then Australian Capital Territory Advisory Council as members of the Hospital Board. In announcing the Government's change of attitude on this issue in 1967, Senator Dame Annabelle Rankin specifically stated that this had occurred because the Government had decided that the hospital management board should be 'representative of the people of Canberra'. Today I wish only that this Government would have the same good sense. Fourteen years later, the Government has decided that it does not want representatives of the people of Canberra to have any effective say in health policy in Canberra. The Government has turned back the clock 46 years to deprive a quarter of a million Canberra citizens of the right to any effective say in health policy.
In order to appreciate the significance of this retrograde step, it is worth recalling the structure of government in the Australian Capital Territory. In the Australian Capital Territory, there is no local or State level of government. The Territory is administered by the Minister for the Capital Territory and decisions affecting it are made by the Minister or Cabinet. Canberrans do not have any form of self-government as the House of Assembly acts only as an advisory body. Consequently, it is only through elected representatives on various statutory and non-statutory bodies involved in the administration of the Territory, such as the Health Commission and the Australian Capital Territory Schools Authority, that Canberrans are able to participate in the administration of the Territory. If these elected representatives were removed, the people of the Australian

Capital Territory would be left with no means of effectively presenting community views and taking some measures of responsibility for the decisions which affect their day-to-day lives.
It should be noted that, during the campaign for the 1978 referendum on self-government, opponents of self-government used the argument that the Territory was already well represented on various statutory and non-statutory bodies and that, for this reason, there was no need for further provision for self-government. The removal of elected representatives from the Health Commission is a sad joke for those people of the Australian Capital Treaty who voted accordingly in 1978. The people of the Australian Capital Terri- ~ory voted in the 1978 referendum for no change ill the form of government administration in the Territory. It is now abundantly clear, as a result of these recent government policies towards Canberra, that the so-called benevolent dictator form of government has turned very sour. The removal of elected community representatives from the Health Commission not only removed democratic participation in decisions affecting the whole community but also paved the way for the Government to make further savage cuts in the provision of health services in the Territory. It has been clear to all Canberra residents that for some time the standards of health care have deteriorated as a result of continued funding and staffing cuts in health areas. Over the past two years doctors and nurses have publicly critised the level of health services available and have warned of serious consequences for patients in local hospitals. The mental health area and the provision of services for handicapped people have reached crisis points in the Territory.
Community representatives on the Health Commission are well aware of the deficiencies in o;tr health care system and in the past have proVided a means by which the community can participate in decisions on the delivery of health care. By removing these elected representatives from the Health Commission, the Government may have hoped to stifle criticism of the present deficiency in the health care system and prevent public debate on any further reduction of services. The people of Canberra deserve better than this.
Is is essential that elected representation be retained on bodies such as the Capital Territory Health Commission so that the quarter of a million residents of the Australian Capital Territory can enjoy some measure, little though it may be, of participation in a democratic decision making process. The need for effective community representation on the Health Commission is well illustrated by looking at the extensive range

2712 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Health Commission (Amendment) Ordinance

of community issues considered by the Commission. For example, in the last 12 months the elected representatives on the Commission have initiated, been involved in and have influenced developments such as the provision of a staff morale survey, the development of paediatric services, obstetric ante-natal clinics, the pharmacy at Melba Health Centre, Family Planning Association accommodation problems, the North Canberra Health Centre, the development of medical specialists services, the extension to the Queen Elizabeth Home for Mothers and Babies and the establishment of care for profoundly handicapped children. These are but a small sample of their valuable work.
These are issues of interest and concern to the Canberra community as a whole. They are matters on which the views of the community's representatives have been legitimate, informed and necessary for effective and responsible decision making. Such matters cannot be handled effectively by bureaucrats or technical experts alone. In the long term, decisions made without real community involvement are likely to be inefficient and wasteful if they do not really reflect the needs of the people of Canberra.
I urge all honourable members to support the disallowance of this Ordinance. It attempts to put into effect the recommendations of the Jamison Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals in relation to the Australian Capital Territory. In particular, section 90 of the Jamison report recommends that the Health Commission be reorganised so that policy determination and hospital management are separated. Policy determination is now to be the responsibility of three ministerial appointees. It is very difficult to see how such an arrangement will allow for effective community participation. The absence of elected community representatives allows for possible infringement on the personal welfare and liberty of Canberra citizens, especially as the new Commission, composed of only three representatives of the Minister, is not subject to review by any other judicial or independent tribunal.
Section 90 also refers to the appointment of 'appropriately knowledgeable commissioners', without further clarification of the definition of that term. I am sure that most honourable members, as well as most Australians committed to a democratic society, would believe that representative viewpoints from many areas should be incorporated in any policy development procedures. In the case of the Australian Capital Territory, where there is an absence of any other form of local government, the wisest course in the

development of health policy would be to ensure the involvement of the community, staff and medical practitioners. This is because the representatives of these groups not only can bring knowledge and expertise to both the delivery of health care and consumer aspects of health services but also can provide policymakers with information on the effectiveness of the translation of their policy and the gaps in policy formation. The Health Services Council proposed in part IlIA of this Ordinance provides for six to 10 members to be appointed by the Minister as part time members. The Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) claims that this Council will provide an avenue for community views to be heard but, if this is the intention of this provision, it is difficult to see why its membership is appointed by the Minister. Elected representatives would be a far better way of providing an avenue for community views to be heard, especially when we recall the nature of the administrative arrangements of the Territory. Membership of bodies such as the Capital Territory Health Commission by elected staff and community representatives is the only avenue that the people of Canberra have for participation in the administrative affairs of the Territory.
I believe that this Ordinance should be opposed on four main grounds. Firstly, it will prevent elected members of the community from determining the type of health care services to be provided to the people of the Australian Capital Territory. Secondly, it will remove worker participation, presently allowed under the principal Ordinance. Thirdly, it will add a third tier to the administration of health services in the Territory, making the system more cumbersome. Fourthly, it will make no provision for a commissioner of nursing. The proponents of the amended Ordinance have not been able to explain why the Capital Territory Health Commission is to be restructured in such a cavalier fashion. Canberrans have a right to know why these changes are being foisted on them and their wishes ignored; and their wishes are being ignored because, through their representatives in the House of Assembly, they have strongly and unequivocally condemned these proposals. I wish to quote to the House the Assembly's view on this matter. It passed a resolution stating:
That the Assembly request the Minister to convey to the Prime Minister the concern of the Australian Capital Territory House of Assembly that the Minister for Health has taken action to remove elected representative membership, including the Assembly's representatives, from the Capital Territory Health Commission and urges the Government to withdraw the Health Commission (Amendment) Ordinance 1981.

Health Commission (Amendment) Ordinance

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2713

That this recommendation and report be communicated by message to the Minister.
The report of the House of Assembly Select Committee on Assembly Representation on Statutory and Other Authorities also made strong recommendations on this issue. It stated:
That the Assembly deplores the removal of elected community and staff representatives from the Capital Territory Health Commission . . .
Further recommendations in the report have now been carried out, including a delegation to the Minister for Health, Press conferences, and communication with all members of Parliament and with relevant organisations expressing the clear objection of members of the Assembly to the removal of the elected representatives from the Commission. All honourable members will now be aware of the significance of this issue for the people of Canberra. Their elected representatives in the House of Assembly have advised the Minister of their strong opposition to the restructuring of the Health Commission, yet the Government has proceeded in an autocratic fashion further to disenfranchise Australian Capital Territory residents and to ignore the clearly expressed wishes of their representatives.
It is hard to understand the reasons for the restructuring of the Health Commission in the light of the Government's much vaunted commitment to efficiency and reduction of the bureaucracy. This Ordinance introduces a third tier of management into the administration of Australian Capital Territory health services which would not only be cumbersome and bureaucratic but would also lack any effective role in presenting community views during the formulation of Australian Capital Territory health policy. We should also recall that the Jamison Commission in chapter 3 of Volume I of its report states that the States and Territories are the best judges of their own needs and of how best to integrate all their health services, and that the role of the Commonwealth is to see that funds are used efficiently but not so as to interfere with State and Territory responsibilities. There is clearly a great deal of interference by this Government with the wishes of the people of the Australian Capital Territory as expressed by their elected representatives. In the interests of effective participation by the people of Canberra in their own administration, I urge all honourable members to support disallowance of the Health Commission (Amendment) Ordinance 1981.
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah~Minister for Health) (9.34)~If I can deal firstly with one matter which I think is of great importance, the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) in her speech tonight said that standards of health

care have deteriorated in the Australian Capital Territory. I make it absolutely clear that I have no evidence at all, and no evidence has been presented tonight, to substantiate claims that health services have suffered.
Mrs Kelly~Talk to the nurses and doctors.
Mr MacKELLAR~For instance, recent claims that infections were occurring at Royal Canberra Hospital were investigated. Statistics clearly show that the incidence of post-operative morbidity has fallen in 1980-81 by comparison with previous years. The honourable member in her interjection referred to nurses. Nursing staff numbers compare favourably with like hospitals in other States. In fact, in most cases there is a higher ratio in the Australian Capital Territory. I want to lay to rest right from the start the suggestion that health standards in the Australian Capital Territory have deteriorated. I was interested in a number of the statements made by the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett), who accused me of glib double-talk or something of that nature. For my part, I am a little sorry that we are becoming more than used to the synthetic indignation with which he lards his speeches. Let me quote these statements: 'This matter was smuggled through the House'; 'we are entrapped in this shabby farce'. He went on to say: 'Unless the Opposition had raised this matter, nobody would have known anything about it'. Really, I find that compelling in its innocence.
Dr Blewett~I suggest that you look at what I said. I excused you from that.
Mr MacKELLAR~l am quoting what the honourable member said: 'This matter was smuggled through the House'; 'entrapped in this shabby farce'; 'unless we had been compelled by the Opposition to discuss it'. The fact is that the Health Commission (Amendment) Ordinance was placed before the House and it is the duty of the Opposition, if it so wishes, to raise the matter. It has been raised and it is being discussed. The other thing I mention is that a direct attack was made on the integrity of the members of the Jamison Commission of Inquiry into the Efficiency and Administration of Hospitals. The honourable member for Bonython said that they were subjected to gossip, and he used that word a number of times. I believe that to impugn the members of the Commission by saying that they have been susceptible to gossip and are not able to recognise gossip is a direct attack upon the integrity of those members.
Let me get back to the matters in hand. The facts are clear. In my view, the Opposition has not

2714 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Health Commission (Amendment) Ordinance

raised one issue which shows that the Government has taken the wrong course of action in accepting the recommendations of the Jamison Commission in relation to the Capital Territory Health Commission. In fact, the recommendations were of such a nature that any government that did not act on them would be acting irresponsibly. Before I get on to the specific recommendations, I should give a little background as to how this unfortunate and unworkable situation arose. Since its establishment on 1 July 1975 the Capital Territory Health Commission has operated on the basis of full time and part time membership. The full time members-the Chairman and Deputy Chairman and, more recently, a full time Commissioner of Nursing-were appointed by the Governor-General. The part time members were included on the Commission in order to represent the community in which the health services were to be provided and the staff and private medical practitioners who were providing the health services.
When the legislation to create the Commission was drawn up in 1975 it was felt that the appropriate way to articulate community views on health care was through the then Australian Capital Territory Legislative Assembly. The legislation therefore provided for an election to take place among the members of the Assembly to bring forward the names of three persons to represent the Assembly on the Commission. It also provided for elections among the employees of the Commission who were financial members of an organisation registered under the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904. All medical practitioners who were registered and practising in the Australian Capital Territory were eligible to vote in an election for their representative. I might add also that the Commission was set up at a time when the principle of self-government for the Australian Capital Territory had not been tested by referendum. When it was tested in 1979, two-thirds of the residents of the Australian Capital Territory voted against it.
The structure of the Commission has always posed problems, but unfortunately during the past 18 months it has become almost unworkable, and I say that with a degree of sadness. Over the years, one of the major problems has been that the decision-making process has lacked objectivity and an ability to deal with the problems of divided loyalty. Both Opposition speakers talked about the question of community representation. When we look at that so-called community representation, what was the first object of loyalty of the members of the House of Assembly? Where was their first loyalty given? Was it to the Commission

or to the political parties they represented? Do not talk to me about community representation. At least one of them said quite specifically that his first loyalty was to the House of Assembly and the political party he represented, not to the people of Canberra. The Commission of Inquiry in its report said:
This Commission has been informed that blatant stacking of the membership has occurred when matters of major policy have been under consideration, and that political party views have been put forward under the guise of community representation.
We have not heard any refutation of that charge. The Commission considers that such events must interfere with the efficient management of the health services in the Territory and is of the view that two major changes should be undertaken. These changes are contained in recommendation No. 90 of the report, which has already been quoted. The recommendation stated:
The Capital Territory Health Commission be reorganised to separate major policy determination from the management of hospitals and other services. Policy determination to be the responsibility of appropriately knowledgeable commissioners appointed by the Commonwealth Government. Management, maintenance and operations of hospitals and other services to be the responsibility of an area health board, which may include elected or nominated representatives oflocal bodies.
The problem arising from the conflict of interest that elected members had between their responsibilities to the organisation or the group that elects them and their duties as commissione'rs led the commission of inquiry to conclude that the organisational structure of the Capital Territory Health Commission was inappropriate. Again I quote from the report:
The functions of planning, major policy determination and resource allocation, as well as the parliamentary obligations, should be dealt with by the Capital Territory Health Commission as a separate organisation, responsible both to the field and the Minister. There should not be elected representative members of this Commission, rather appointed commissioners with proven management skills chosen for their capacity to judge between the competing health needs of the services.
The inquiry further commented:
This Commission is unique in Australia because it has the dual role of assisling the Minister for Health to meet his statutory obligation for planning, developing and administering public health services while also being responsible for day to day management of the various institutions and services. In its first task it functions as an equivalent to the State health departments and commissions, but its second responsibility is normally delegated by the health authorities to institutional boards of directors which must work within the limits imposed by the policies of the respective authorities.
A number of witnesses have informed this Commission both in public and private hearings, of the barriers to efficiency which arise from this unusual arrangement.

Health Commission (Amendment) Ordinance

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2715

The Government has accepted these recommendations of the Jamison inquiry. The recommendations were so critical of the present organisational structure of the Capital Territory Health Commission that the Government, as 1 stated earlier, would have been most irresponsible if it did not act on these recommendations as soon as possible. The Opposition, in attempting to disallow this Ordinance, has shown once again that it will not do what is best for the majority but will continually support sectional interests for purely political purposes. It is obvious, I believe, that the Opposition does not want to give the people of the Australian Capital Territory the best possible health services as recommended by the Jamison inquiry. Only last week the honourable member for Bonython was accusing me and the Government of not accepting the recommendations of the Jamison inquiry, yet today he wishes to condemn llS for accepting recommendation No. 90 of the report. I might add that this is not the only recommendation of the report which the Government has accepted.
As I announced in this place on 29 April, the Government has accepted many of the recommendations of the inquiry which have given a new direction in health care in Australia. Foremost in the Government's mind is the fundamental good that all Australians have proper access to health care services of high quality at a cost that the individual and the community can afford. This goal, of course, will only be achieved by the good management of our health system. The Jamison inquiry showed that the Capital Territory Health Commission needed to be restructured to achieve maximum organisational efficiency. As the Commonwealth Government is responsible for the administration of the health services of the Australian Capital Territory it accepted this recommendation to show to the State governments that it was prepared, through action and not words, to bring about the changes that have been requested of the States. To alleviate the problems just outlined, the inquiry recommended the establishment of an area health board to take responsibility for the day to day management of the health services in the Australian Capital Territory. As has been pointed out by the honourable member for Bonython this is a model developed for larger health services where several area health boards are responsible to a central health authority.
However, this is unnecessarily complex for the relatively small, compact Australian Capital Territory health service and so it has been decided that community and professional interests will continue to have input into decision-making through the creation of a six to 10 member health

services council, the task of which will be to advise the Minister for Health and the Capital Territory Health Commission on matters relating to the Territory's health services. Who is it in the shape of members of the Opposition to say that these people on the health services council will not be truly representative of the community's view in the Australian Capital Territory.
Mrs Kelly-We don't know. It is up to you.
Mr MacKELLAR-The honourable member is quite right. It is up to me and to the Govern-- ment. I ask honourable members opposite not to condemn the members of the council in advance because they may find that this council will be more truly representative of the community's view in the Australian Capital Territory than any elected members of the Assembly might be. On the issue of the staff and union representation on governing boards of statutory authorities, the commission of inquiry reported:
The Commission does not encourage worker representation on boards of management and health commissions. The unique arrangement of the Capital Territory Health Commission with its system of elected and appointed members is seen to be antagonistic to effective policy making and resource allocation, so changes to that structure are seen to be necessary.
Let me repeat those words:
. . . is seen to be antagonistic to effective policy making and resource allocation . . .
Is that not what we want to achieve-effective policy making and resource allocation? Whilst the Government has accepted that a change is necessary, provision has been included in this Ordinance for management and unions to liaise by means of a staff council. The council will comprise five members appointed to represent commission management and five members appointed by the union liaison committee. Staff consultation formalised through the staff council will still be a requirement of the Health Commission ordinance and should, therefore, alleviate any concern by ~taff organisations. It can therefore be seen that it is nonsense for those opposing changes to the Health Commission to talk about the removal of the voice of the community until they see who is appointed to the new positions created by the Ordinance. It will be the calibre of the people ultimately appointed to these positions that matters.
Mr Milton-Government yes men.
Mr MacKELLAR-I can assure all honourabie members present that the voice of the community will continue to be heard on the Commission. I hear an honourable member interjecting: 'Yes men '. Let us wait until we see who they are. If the honourable member intends

2716 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Health Commission (Amendment) Ordinance

to stand up afterwards and say they are all yes men, he can make that comment then. The key issue in this matter as focused on by the Jamison inquiry is the management efficiency of the structure and not the representation of the House of Assembly. In fact, if this matter were of such concern to the House of Assembly it amazes me as to why the first meeting it held to discuss the report was on 2 March 1981, almost two months after the report was released. The House of Assembly has stated that the principal argument for the retention of the elected representatives on the hospital board was the fundamental right of Australian Capital Territory citizens to have a voice in policies affecting the provision of health services in the Territory. This statement, of course, has absolutely no substance as all members to be appointed to the health services council will be resident of the Australian Capital Territory and will be both experienced and knowledgeable in providing input to the health services council.
The structure proposed in the amending ordinance is designed to overcome the problems I have just outlined. It is recognised that the effectiveness of the new organisation of the Commission depends entirely on the quality of the persons appointed to the remaining full-time positions on the Commission and on the health services council. The advice provided to me on these issues will bring forward a group of people who will make the best possible decisions on health administration in the Australian Capital Territory as they will have in the forefront of their thinking and actions the overall efficiency of the Commission as an agency of government with defined objectives and the interests of the Australian Capital Territory community in general. I feel certain that the residents of the Australian Capital Territory will be well served by this new structure and, therefore, the Government most emphatically opposes the motion moved by the Opposition.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jal'man)-I wish to point out that there is a growing tendency in the chamber to refer to the occupants of the Chair as Mr Acting Speaker. The correct title is Mr Deputy Speaker.
Mr Barry Jones We would expect more from a Minister.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I expect it from all members of the chamber.
Question put:
That the motion (Dr Blewett's) be agreed to.
The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr A. W. Jarman)

Ayes

43

Noes

63

Majority

20

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. B1ewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G.
Child,J. Cohen. B. Cross,M.'D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S, Duffy,M.J.
Everingham, D. ~. Free, R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke. R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B.L. Hurford, C. J.
Jacobi, R.

AYES

Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Les (Teller) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J. Kent,L.
Klugman. R. E. ~cLeay, Leo
McMahon, Les (Teller) Mildren, J. B. Milton,P.
Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G.
Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren, T. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young,M,J.

NOES

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M.
Braithwaite, R. A.
Brown,N.A. Burr,M.A.
Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Jan Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P.
Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M.
Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife, W. C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck. B. J.
Groom.R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. MeD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teiler) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W.

Hunt, R. J. D.
Hyde.J.M.
Jull,D.F. K'atter, R. C.
Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. l.ynch. Sir Phillip
MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie,A.J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, l. M. Millar,P.C. Moore,J.C.
Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Porter, J, R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M.
Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender,J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S.
Tuckey,S. W. Viner, R. T. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

Question so resolved in the negative.

COMMONWEALTH LEGAL AID COMMISSION AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Bill received from the Senate, and read a first time.

Second Reading
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) (9.58)-1 move:

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Bill

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2717

That the Bill be now read a second time.
The purpose of this Bill is to provide for the replacement of the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission by a Commonwealth Legal Aid Council. For convenience I shall refer to these bodies as 'the Commission' and 'the Council', respectively. The Bill gives effect to a decision of the Government which was announced by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) following the recent review of Commonwealth functions.
The Commission was established in 1978 pursuant to the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act 1977. It does not itself provide legal aid but has a range of functions related to the scheme for legal aid to be provided by State and Territory commissions. The Commission's functions, which are set out in detail in section 6 of the Act, provide overall for the Commission to have an advisory, co-ordinating and monitoring role. In particular, the Commission has the functions of keeping the need for legal assistance in Australia under review, of making recommendations to the Attorney-General and to the State and Territory commissions, of collecting and publishing statistics, of undertaking research and of furnishing an annual report for tabling in Parliament.
The Act provides for the Commission to consist of a part time chairman, a full time deputy chairman and six part time members. Two of those members are to be nominated by the Attorney General and two by the Attorneys-General of the States which have established commissions providing legal assistance in respect of Commonwealth matters. One member is to be nominated by the Law Council of Australia and one by the Australian Council of Social Service. The Commission has the assistance of a separate staff, which is under the control of the full time deputy chairman.
Some of the Commission's many functions are, of course, of greater significance than others. The Commission itself has recognised this. It has recognised also that its resources are not unlimited. It accordingly resolved last year to adopt an order of priority for its various functions and to confine its activities normally to the functions of greater significance. Briefly stated those functions are as follows:
1. Collation and analysis of statistics;
2. Liaison with professional bodies and with national community interest groups;
3. Examination of the basis of Commonwealth Government financial support for legal aid;
4. Research relating to the need for legal assistance, the functioning and effectiveness

of other schemes and new methods of financing and providing legal assistance;
5. Convening meetings with representatives of State and Territory Commissions;
6. Maintenance of a library and clearinghouse of legal aid materials and publication from time to time of a newsletter; and
7. Matters specifically requested by the Attorney-General.
In introducing the present Bill I would stress that there is no intention on the part of the Government to reduce its commitments to the level of legal aid or the commitments it has made in agreements with the States to maintain the level of activity of legal aid. I want to emphasise that it has always been the policy of the Government that no person should be denied legal aid because of lack of means. This is a continuing aim of the Government and is evident from annual appropriations for legal aid, which, excluding Aboriginal legal aid, have increased from $19.6m at the time the first State legal aid commission commenced operations in Western Australia in April 1978 to $26.9m in the current financial year-an overall increase of some 37 per cent. The Government does not question the desirability of an independent Commonwealth body with functions broadly similar to those to which the Commission itself has resolved to give priority. The Government is concerned, however, that the structure and working arrangements of that body should be dictated by efficiency and economy. In the light of experience since the establishment of the Commission the Government has concluded that there is room for improvement in this regard.
There are two main and related causes of concern with the present arrangements. One is that the functions of the Commission overlap those of the Attorney-General's Department, with consequential duplication of effort in some matters and uncertainty as to responsibility in other matters. The uncertainty also presents difficulties for the State commissions. Those problems are accentuated by the other cause of concern, which is the separate staffs bfthe Commission and the Department. The existence of two separate staffs dealing with the same or closely related matters makes for unnecessary bureaucracy and is uneconomic and inefficient. In saying this, I am not, of course, reflecting on the capacity or dedication of individual officers. My concern is exlusively with the system in which those officers have to operate.
With these considerations in mind the Government has concluded that the Commonwealth's legal aid body, while retaining its independence, should have a closer working relationship with the

2718 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Bill

Attorney-General and his Department. To avoid the problem of overlapping functions I have mentioned it is proposed that the body should confine itself to advice and matters incidental thereto, leaving the Department to attend to matters of an executive nature. It is also proposed that staffing assistance for the body should be provided by the Department instead of by a separate staff. In recognition of these changes, which are expected to result in significant costs savings, it is proposed that the new body be named the Commonwealth Legal Aid Council.
In respects other than those I have mentioned the Council will be very similar to the existing Commission. The membership of the Council wiII be the sam~ except that:
There wiII be no full-time deputy chairman;
members at present appointed on nomination-including two nominated by participating States-wiII be appointed instead after the Attorney-General has consulted with the bodies which at present do the nominating. Experience has shown that the present provisions are unduly restrictive and inflexible; and
appointments will be by the Attorney General instead of by the Governor-General.
The functions of the Council wiII be broadly those which the Commission is now performing. Some functions will be exercisable on the Council's own initiative but these can be supplemented by ad hoc requests by the Attorney-General. The functions are expressed in broad terms in proposed section 5 of the BiII. In the course of performing those functions the Council wiII, of course, undertake research, assisted as appropriate by officers of the Attorney-GeneraI's Department or consultants. Functions to which the Commission has given priority are those of maintaining a library and providing a clearing-house of legal aid materials. It gathers those materials and circulates them to legal aid agencies and interest groups. These are very useful functions and they will be continued by the Attorney-GeneraI's Department consulting as appropriate with the Council. The colIection and analysis of statistics wiII be similarly continued by the Department. The Council itself will be required to provide an annual report for the Parliament.
The Council wiII not have the functions of making recommendations to State commissions. While the commission has had the power to make such recommendations, it has seldom exercised it in practice. Where it is appropriate for matters to be raised with State governments or commissions, it is better that they be raised by the Attorney General or by his Department. The functions the

Commission has under the Commonwealth-State agreements wiII be taken over by the Attorney General's Department. In particular, the programs and estimates of expenditure of State commissions will be submitted to the Department, which in any event, must be closely involved in all budgetary matters. The States with which the Commonwealth has entered into such agreements-Victoria, Queensland, South Australia and Western Australia-have agreed to these changes. As I have mentioned earlier, the Council wiIInot have a staff of its own but wiII be serviced by staff of the Attorney-GeneraI's Department. To meet the increased work load that wiII be imposed on the Department, some of the present staff of the Commission wiII be absorbed into the Department. The placement of other staff wiII be considered after consultation with the Public Service Board and staff associations. I commend the BiII to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Willis) adjourned.
INCOME TAX LAWS AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 7 May, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this BiII and the Income Tax (Diverted Income) Bill as they are associated measures. Separate questions wiII, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these two measures? There being no objection, I will alIow the course to be followed.
Mr WILLIS (GeIIibrand) (10.6)-The Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill and the Income Tax (Diverted Income) Bill now before the House incorporate many changes to the tax law in this country. The main provisions of the Bills are to give effect to some election promises of the Government, some Budget measures and some tax avoidance measures. The election promises which are incorporated in this legislation involve the introduction of tax deductions for connections to mains electricity of property used, at least in part, to produce assessable income, for the costs of insulating a first home and for the costs of instaIIing fuel storage capacity on property used to produce assessable income. There is a 100 per cent write-off in the year of expenditure in the case of

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2719

installed fuel storage capacity which takes the concessions before us tonight-that is, deductions

place of normal depreciation which is at the rate for connection to mains electricity, for home insu-

of 5 per cent to 7.5 per cent. The investment allation and for fuel storage facilities-add another

lowance for tourist buses is also to be extended as dozen pages to the Income Tax Assessment Act,

from I January 1976. It currently applies from 1 thus making it even more complex and incapable

October 1980. So, there is a substantial backof comprehension by all but those who are pro-

dating of that legislation.

fessionals in the tax field. That Act already

The Budget measures involved in these Bills involve the extension of gift provisions providing tax deductibility for gifts to voluntary overseas agencies, gifts to the International Disaster Emergencies Committee, African relief appeal, gifts to the International Disaster Emergencies Committee Kampuchean relief appeal, gifts to the Herbert Vere Evatt Memorial Foundation and gifts to a public fund for the purpose of providing religious instruction in government schools.

extends to 1,010 pages as at the end of last year. Three years ago it was a mere 695 pages. So it has increased by over 300 pages in three years. The Income Tax Assessment Act is growing at the rate of approximately 100 pages a year. It has been greatly increased in size and incomprehensibility by the vast amount of tax avoidance legislation that has also been passed in recent years with the Government's pussy footing and totally unsuccessful campaign against tax avoidance.

The tax avoidance measures take action against

The tax avoidance legislation now before the

four types of tax avoidance schemes relating to trading stock, trust stripping, expenditure recoupment and exempt bodies. The general attitude of the Opposition to these Bills is that we do not oppose them but we do have reservations about

House will also add 24 pages to the Income Tax Assessment Act. The amendments brought in tonight for the film industry will add another 35 pages to that Act. So we are already heading for another 100 pages of amendments to the Act this

the measures which give effect to promises made by the Government in the last election campaign and, in particular, about the fuel storage facilities

year. Thus, the simplicity of the tax system is the
desirable aim. It could hardly be claimed that the Government is pursuing that aim with any vigour.

measure, with regard to which I will move an Its fruitless case by case approach to tax avoid-

amendment at the Committee stage.

ance and its continued use of the tax system to

Having mentioned our concern about the elecprovide benefits to various groups, often those in

tion promises incorporated in this legislation, I least need of assistance, is making a farce of the

wish to elaborate on that concern. It relates to the tax law. Increased complexity not only makes it

continued use of the tax Act to extend concessions more difficult to understand but also increases the

or to provide incentives. As I have indicated in scope for tax avoidance as concessions are

other debates, there is good reason to be conexploited in a way not intended by the Govern-

cerned at the continued use of the tax Act by this ment. A great deal of tax avoidance is based on

Government to extend concessions to various such a strategy. So governments concerned to pre-

interest groups and to provide incentives to taxvent or restrict tax avoidance should clearly be

payers to behave in certain ways. Such use of the sparing in their use of the Act to confer benefits.

tax Act has been a feature of the Fraser Government. In the period since it has been in office the Fraser Government has legislated or announced an intention to legislate for some 44 tax concessions, none of which has applied to the majority of taxpayers. Of these 44 concessions, 13 are for companies, 12 are for farmers and the rest are mainly to do with extending gift provisions and the film industry. Only two have had a wide application. They are the increase in the spouse allowance, which tax concession is claimed by little over 20 per cent of the personal income taxpayers, and an increase in the dependants' allowance. The rest are mainly of benefit to sectional groups in the community and of special benefit to those who already have substantial incomes.

Furthermore, the use of the Act in this way enables the cost of concessions to be hidden from view in a way that does not happen with benefits conferred through the expenditure side of the Budget. Once legislated for, a tax concession virtually disappears from sight so far as government accounting is concerned. The cost of those concessions is usually not published with the Budget or anywhere else for that matter. So the Parliament has no idea as to the cost of these programs. There are some exceptions to this. For instance, the cost of the investment allowance has been fairly well traced in Budget Papers. But that is very much an exception. The general rule is that, once the tax concession is granted, it disappears from view. This is more so the further we move

These concessions all add to the complexity of away from the year of introduction. Usually, in

the Income Tax Assessment Act, some much the year of introduction of the tax concession,

more so than others. The three energy-related some estimate of the cost in lost tax revenue is

2720 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill

given by the Government, but the Parliament is generally unable to ascertain the accuracy of that costing or what happens to the cost of that concession in future years.
This is an important deficiency, because the Government has far less control over the cost of tax concessions than it has over expenditure programs requiring an annual appropriation. The cost of a tax concession depends on taxpayers' behaviour. There is no annual limit to the amount that can be spent on that concession in any year, as there is with an appropriated expenditure. The cost of tax concessions is therefore both hidden and uncontrolled. In some cases, even the initial cost is hidden. This is the case with the election promised tax concessions now before the Parliament. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) has given the Parliament no costings for any of these measures; that is, he has given no costings for the deductions for connections to mains electricity, for home insulation or for fuel storage facilities. That contrasts with the procedures that would be gone through if these measures were subsidies rather than tax concessions. If they were subsidies, quite obviously some cost would have to be given and detailed reasons would be given as to why they were being brought in. When it is a tax concession, none of these things seem to happen. We do not even get any costing in the first year, let alone be able to trace the costing in future years.
In fairness, I should say that cost estimates for the three measures I have mentioned were given by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in the supplementary statement to his policy speech last year, but that was not made to the Parliament. Also, being given in an election context, such costing is highly dubious. The House will recall that, at the same time as the tax concessions now before the House were announced, the Prime Minister announced tax concessions for the film industry and gave the estimated cost as $2m per annum. Since then, the Treasurer has admitted that the cost has been reassessed as $20m. He admitted that only after questioning by the Opposition in this House a couple of months ago. On the basis of the figures that he gave tonight in introducing these concessions, it looks as though the cost could be over $1 OOm. It is extraordinary that something which was said by the Prime Minister to cost $2m and which was admitted by his Treasurer before the Bills were actually brought in to the Parliament to cost 10 times that amount might cost 50 times the original estimate or even more.
Mr Ratline-It is not in one year.

Mr WILLIS-It might build up to that. I do not want to get into a debate about the film industry at this stage. Already, on the basis of the estimates given of the amount of tax claims likely to be made by the film industry, we are looking at $lOOm or so. As the honourable member for Macarthur said, maybe it will not cost that amount in the first year but it could build up to that. We certainly have no control over it, given the way in which the legislation was pronounced. We can place little reliance on election speech costing and we have been given no further costings for the measures now before the House.
These very substantial concerns about the use of the tax system for conferring benefits on favoured taxpayers has led to much discussion of this subject in other countries. Such concessions are referred to in this discussion as tax expenditures. That term aptly sums up what is, in fact, involved. The granting of a tax concession instead of appropriating tax revenue for an expenditure program is still, in effect, an expenditure of tax revenue, even though the revenue is not actually collected. The effect on the deficit, of course, is exactly the same. If one appropriates expenditure for some purpose or other, that has an effect on increasing the deficit, all other things remaining equal. The same is true if one grants a tax concession. Certainly, in that respect, there is no difference. Indeed, the Prime Minister, in his statement to the House on the review of Commonwealth functions, made this point when he said:
Taxation concessions for industry, which are equivalent in all practical senses to direct expenditures from the Budget, have also been reviewed . . .
The Prime Minister is admitting there that tax concessions are equivalent, in all practical senses, to expenditures from the Budget. Recognition of this fact has led other countries to begin publication of what is known as a tax expenditure Budget, which concept involves the itemisation of tax concessions under functional headings, plus the costs of that tax concession in tax revenue forgone for the year in question and the possible breakup of the beneficiaries of those tax concessions between companies and individuals.
The United States of America first published such a tax expenditure Budget in 1968-13 years ago. It has since expanded the concept. The United States now publishes five-yearly projections of federal tax expenditures by type of taxpayers. In the annual Budget Papers of the United States one can get estimates of the cost of tax concessions five years ahead of the year in question. It is light years ahead of us. We cannot find out the cost each year of each of the many tax concessions

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2721

which are now incorporated in the Act. Other countries, such as West Germany, the Netherlands, Israel, Canada and the United Kingdom, are beginning to develop the concept. Surely it would be appropriate for this country to do likewise so that we can see what the cost of all these
tax concessions is each year, thus enabling the Parliament to keep some control over these expenditures and to assess their benefit in the light
of their cost.
It is also way past time that we established some guidelines as to the use of tax expenditures rather than appropriated expenditures to confer benefits or influence the behaviour of the populace. Given that use of the tax system still has the drawbacks of complexity, lack of control and increasing the scope for tax avoidance even if its cost is brought out in the open, some guidelines are needed in deciding whether to incur a tax expenditure or an appropriated expenditure. I have no doubt that an unwritten guideline for the present Government is that tax expenditure is better because it does not increase appropriated expenditure and therefore it does not increase the size of the public sector as that is conventionally measured. Of course, the public sector is conventionally measured by just taking total government expenditure as a proportion of gross domestic product. Therefore, if the Government actually appropriates less in the way of Budget expenditures, there is a lesser public sector. If we then put things through the tax system we get a double benefit, as I will explain in a moment.
Since the Government is ideologically prejudiced against the public sector it has been busily popping its expenditures and handouts through on the tax side of the Budget which, of course, not only does not increase the size of the public sector but also acts to reduce tax. The Government's ideology is thus doubly satisfied though the end result in many cases would be less satisfactory for the nation as a whole for the reasons I have already explained regarding the deficiencies of tax expenditures. What is clearly needed is a more objective set of guidelines for determining whether concessions should be provided by way of appropriated expenditure or tax expenditure than mere ideological prejudice. The
bureaucracy could be engaged in much less productive tasks than establishing such a set of guidelines. In the meantime the Government should at least begin to publish the actual cost of these tax expenditures so that the nation can clearly see who is being assisted by the Govern-
ment and at what cost.
Another concern we have relates to the form in which the deductions which represent election

promises in the legislation now before the House are granted. Given that the Government has decided to confer these election promises by way of' tax expenditures, the Opposition is concerned also that the form in which these expenditures are made is quite inequitable. For each of these tax expenditures-the connection to mains electricity, home insulation and fuel storage facilities-the taxpayer is given a deduction from assessable income rather than a rebate. That just simply is inequitable because it means the higher the income of the taxpayer the greater is the tax benefit from any given expenditure which entitles him to a deduction. If we assume a $3,000 cost for connection to mains electricity, in the case of a taxpayer on an income of $50,000 a year with a marginal tax rate of 60c in the dollar, it represents a tax saving to him of $1,800. For a taxpayer on less than $17,000 a year with a marginal tax rate of 32c in the dollar, the same expenditure rcpresents a tax saving of only $960. So for the lower income taxpayer it is a much less substantial tax saving than it is for a person on a higher income. We regard that kind of deduction as quite unfair. We can see no reason why there should be discrimination between taxpayers in this way. Obviously if it were done by way of rebate the same benefit would apply to taxpayers whatever their income. Of course, those comments relate only to personal income tax. Where the tax deduction may be claimed by a company, the same rate would apply whatever the income of the company.
We also have concern regarding the fuel storage concession which I mentioned earlier. The Opposition has an additional concern in regard to this deduction. Although no reasons for the introduction of this deduction have been given by the Treasurer, which to say the least is rather remarkable, it is presumably intended to boost the liquid fuel storage capacity of the nation in the event of a severe interruption to normal supplies such as would be caused by war in the Middle East or a ship running into a major oil well structure in Bass Strait cutting off supply and this, of course, has nearly happened several times. 1interpolate to say that I find it utterly objectionable that tax concessions should be put before the Parliament with no reasons given for their introduction. We have to deduce the reason for the Government introducing this measure. No reason is given to the Parliament whatever. I think this reinforces the point I was making more generally before, that one could not imagine an appropriated expenditure coming before the Parliament with-
out a reason being given for its introduction. But because it is a tax concession, no reason is given.

2722 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill

To return to this example, one may question whether a tax deduction is the best device with which to obtain appropriate increases in storage capacity. It seems to us that this is a clear case in which a desirable objective-a presumed objective in this case, that is, to increase liquid fuel storage-is much better done by way of direct government action rather than the decidedly indirect approach of introducing a tax incentive. This becomes clear if one looks at the intended recipients of the tax concession because there is no doubt that the major beneficiary of this concession will be the oil companies. Let me make it clear that we have no objection to assisting farmers and small business enterprises to ensure their own supplies of refined products. In many cases they are involved in activities in remote areas where supply interruptions are prevalent. Whether that assistance is best provided by a tax concession is debatable. But certainly allowing oil companies, refiners and marketers a 100 per cent write-off for the installation of such equipment, as this Bill does, is likely to do little to contribute to Australia's energy independence. There is simply no guarantee that these companies will increase their storage capacity. The deduction may be used only for the purpose of installing normal storage facilities or for the replacement of old equipment, which is expenditure they would be incurring anyway. This measure is likely to become simply a handy tax concession for the oil majors without achieving much in the way of expanding our storage capacity for liquid fuels.
If the Government is genuinely concerned about security of supply it should be introducing a national strategic oil storage policy, that is, a policy which would require the companies to build up stocks or a policy which allows for the Government to undertake strategic stockpiling. In our view we need a policy which will ensure the build-up of oil stocks sufficient to give Australia security in the event of supply shortfalls of the kind I have previously mentioned. The possibility of an oil shortage occurring is even more likely given Australia's obligations as a member of the International Energy Agency. The lEA's emergency oil sharing scheme means that Australia has to share equally in any world supply cut-backs. In this event not only could we find cargoes being diverted away from Australia but also we may even be obliged to export domestically produced crude. This Government apparently chooses to ignore these possibilities. It is taking no action to implement a strategic oil storage policy. It is merely offering tax deductions for those people who may wish to store fuel in the hope that storage capacity will thereby be increased. Such

tax deductions will do little for Australia's overall fuel requirements in the event of supply interruption because oil companies do not keep stocks for strategic reasons.
The costs of keeping such stocks is very high and oil companies are going to keep them only to cover variations due to seasonal, refining or delivery factors. Therefore, the responsibility must rest with the Government. The major cost of building up Australia's fuel supplies is not the cost of storage, it is the cost of oil itself and the Government must be involved in that responsibility. If it were to meet the lEA recommendation of 90 days national consumption of cruide oil on hand at all times much more direct methods are needed than offering tax concessions to oil companies for fuel tank installations. The Opposition believes the Government should, therefore, be seeking to introduce these direct measures and that the tax concession proposed in this legislation should not apply to large companies, and especially not to oil companies. We are also concerned that the fuel storage facilities deduction will apply to second hand fuel tanks as well as new tanks. Rather than elaborate on my concern about this at this stage I will leave that until the Committee stage.
Another amendment incorporated in this legislation relates to the extension of the investment allowance back to 1 January 1976 for tourist buses. This rectifies an incredible shambles in respect of the handling of tax concessions in this country. When the investment allowance was introduced in 1976 the tourist bus proprietors were originally told that they would qualify for the investment allowance. They were told this by the then Treasurer's office. This was the situation until March 1980 when the Australian Taxation Office apparently informed the tourist bus proprietors that they would not be covered because the investment allowance did not apply to equipment used for recreational purposes. This clearly caused enormous consternation among tourist bus proprietors who had invested a lot of money in the expectation that they would be entitled to the investment allowance and who had relied on advice from the Treasurer's office. The Taxation Office took this action despite the fact that the explanatory memorandum to the 1976 legislation which introduced the investment allowance specifically stated that tourist, coaches would be covered. After protests by the tourist bus proprietors, the Treasurer agreed to introduce legislation to rectify the situation but still the Taxation Office apparently advised bus proprietors that they were not covered. Legislation was introduced last year to apply the investment allowance from October

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2723

1980. But it was not back dated at that time and this legislation does that.
Debate interrupted.
ADJOURNMENT
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! It being 10.30 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr Wilson-Mr Deputy Speaker, I require that the question be put forthwith without debate.
Question resolved in the negative.
INCOME TAX LAWS AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (10.31)-The Opposition notes these incredible bungles which have occurred and, of course, it co-operates fully in rectifying them so that the tourist bus proprietors will not have to go without the investment allowance, even though the Opposition regards the investment allowance on the whole as not an appropriate tax concession. Certainly, given the way in which the operators were given to believe it would apply to them, the allowance should be backdated to 1976.
We fully support the tax avoidance provisions of the Bill, but I note again how important it is to apply other methods in attacking tax avoidance than the case by case approach pursued by the Government to this point in time. Most of the schemes being legislated against are variations of previous schemes already legislated against. I am pleased that the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has had the courage to embrace the principle of retrospective legislation to the point of taking the operative date of these amendments back to the time when he first announced an intention to legislate against the original schemes. If the Treasurer could only take it further so retrospectivity was applied in all cases back to the time of first use, he would deal a grievous blow to the tax avoidance industry. However, he has steadfastly refused to do that. This legislation also demonstrates the need for an effective alienation section in the Act. It has at last been introduced by the Treasurer tonight. I hope that will prove to be very effective, although at this stage we have some doubts.
The result of the Government's approach is that new tax avoidance schemes are always arising. One such scheme that has come to my attention recently is like the expenditure recoupment schemes which are legislated against in this Bill. However, this scheme is certainly not covered by the legislation. I received a brochure from a firm

known as the Australian Business and Corporate Planners whose address is the Commonwealth Bank Building, 367 Collins Street, Melbourne. This firm likes to refer to itself as ABC, presumably with the intention of making people think that tax avoidance is as simple as ABC. The document which Treceived states on page one:
The days of entering into arrangements that surface as mass marketed schemes are very definitely over--
The firm states that it offers a service rather than a scheme. This letter was not sent to me but came to me through a third party. The ABC firm then outlines a precis of an interest payment deduction capital distribution arrangement which it apparently believes is still a viable tax avoidance scheme. Briefly, the precis states:
Almost all balance sheets have loan accounts showing, although not necessarily formalised or interest bearing.
If, in any particular case, suitable loans don't exist. they can be created legally and legitimately.
Once formalised by way of a Loan Agreement providing for interest payments . . . the loan is assigned to one of our entities.
This accomplished, the taxpayer pays interest amounting to the deduction required.
As a result of the transaction, a Trust under our control distributes to a person or entity nominated by the taxpayer a capital distribution amounting to 80 per cent of the deduction obtained by the interest payment.
The entire arrangement takes place on the same day or via the mail, either way ensuring that the taxpayer is -never at risk. There can be no argument, that unformalised loans, interest free, are commercially speaking, very unrealistic-
That is a massive understatement. The letter continues:
. . and could be construed as tax avoidance arrangements in their present state. Formalising such loans and providing for commercial rates of interest is a positive step away from such an interpretation.
The payment of the Capital distribution from our Trust (not Trust Income) to a nominated beneficiary is, of course, tax free, because of its capital nature.
The beneficiary lends the capital receipt back to the taxpayer, thereby creating an additional loan that could if desired, be available for similar treatment in the future. It also ensures that the taxpayer is only out of pocket 20 per cent of the deduction obtained. As this is the actual cost of the arrangement including Taxes, Duties and fees etc. it ensures the taxpayer is never at risk even if we attend settlement on his behalf.
There are many and varied applications and benefits available from the CD.A. that are not immediately apparent. For this reason those interested in the arrangement arc advised to telephone A.B.C. for further clarification.
The letter then referred to a diagrammatic example which sets out the workings of the scheme. It can be seen that the scheme does bear some resemblance to the expenditure recoupment schemes in relation to interest which were legislated against in 1979. Since the letter is dated April 1981, the firm apparently believes that the

2724 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill

type of scheme it has outlined is not picked up by that legislation. It is certainly not picked up by the
legislation now before the House, as r understand
it. It would seem therefore that this is another variation that needs to be legislated against at some future date. 1 am certainly willing to make

they will be the major beneficiaries from this tax concession. It seems highly inappropriate simply to make that concession in a way which is not jus-
tified by the Government in any way either in the second reading speech of the Treasurer (Mr Howard), or anywhere else to my knowledge, In

this material available to the Treasurer should he so wish. I wish to move an amendment to the motion that this Bill be now read a second time. 1 move:
That all words after "That" be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:

any case, it is an inappropriate device to achieve
the presumed objective of the Government which is to increase substantially fuel storage facilities in
this country. Simply giving a tax concession to large companies, particularly oil companies, will not achieve that objective in any concerted way.

'whilst not opposing the Bill, the House notes with concern that:
(I) the introduction of several additional tax concessions raises seri0'Js questions as to the suitability of tax legislation as a means of extending assistance to particular interest groups;
(2) no reasons have been given to the Parliament for providing these concessions through the tax system rather than through the expenditure side of the Budget;
(3) these concessions, being in the form of deductions rather than rebates, are inequitable in that they provide most assistance to highest income earners and least assistance to low income earners;
(4) no costings have been provided to the Parliament by the Treasurer on the concessions, and
(5) the Government has not developed a national strategic crude oil storage policy and calls on it to establish such a policy with the objective of meeting the International Energy Agency's target for national crude oil storage of 90 days national consumption'.

Certainly it will be used by the oil companies to obtain a tax concession for the storage which they normally undertake and particularly, given the fact that the major cost involved in increased storage will be the cost of holding the stock rather than building or erecting further oil storage tanks, it seems to us that it is a very inappropriate tax concession.
As I have said, the Opposition has no objection to providing some assistance to small businesses and farmers in remote areas to obtain some concession, some assistance, in expanding their fuel storage facilities. Often they have difficulty in maintaining supplies when supplies are interrupted for one reason or another. However, we think it highly inappropriate to make it available

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-Is the amendment seconded?
Mr Hurford-I second the amendment. Amendment negatived.

to large businesses and particularly to oil companies. The reason for the limit of 25,000 litres referred to in the amendment is that that is
the approximate volume of one tanker full of refined product. For those reasons we believe this

Original question resolved in the affirmative.

amendment to be highly appropriate.

Bill read a second time,
In Committee Clauses 1 to 7-by leave-taken together, and agreed to. Clause 8 (Insertion of new section-57AJ, Special depreciation on storage facilities for petroleum fuel), Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (10.39)-1 move the following amendment:

Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)
(10.42)-The Govcrnment is unable to accept the amendment moved by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis), The purpose
of this measure is primarily to encourage storage
and secondarily to give assistance to those who qualify, The primary purpose is to encourge
storage, If the primary purpose of legislation is to encourage storage, we should not be totally concerned about the recipients of the encouragement, as the honourable member for Ge11ibrand appears

Clause 8, page 4, proposed sub-section 57AJ (2), after paragraph (e) add the following paragraph:
'(f) if the unit of property is a storage tank-the capacity of the tank does not exceed 25,000 litres.'.
I move that amendment for the reasons that I gave in my speech on the sccond reading of this Bill. It is the view of the Opposition that it is highly inappropriate for this concession to extend

to be. If in fact companies of a particular size are able to increase storage capacity, the Government would not have thought that that size, on its own, was a reason why that encouragement should not be allowed. I remind the House that the concession is not available for the storage of crude oil.
Mr Willis-I was not suggesting that.

to oil companies, which will be the major beneficiaries of the legislation if it is passed in its
present form as they are the companies which hold fuel for sale in their business and presumably

Mr HOWARD-I do not suggest that the honourable member for Gellibrand said that. He should not suggest that I was. However, in the context of the debate I remind the House that this

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2725

assistance is available only in respect of trading stock.
Mr O'Keefe-It is also available for distillate.
Mr HOWARD-Yes, but frankly it is a question of encouraging storage. That is the purpose of the measure. Just because some of the recipients happen to be large companies is, of itself, no reason for the concession to be arbitrarily limited. It would make a nonsense of the situation if, just because a company happened to be large, it did not get the concession. That is an odd way of reasoning.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (10.44)-1 offer a few words in support of the amendment moved by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis). Clause 8 of the Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill provides for allowances which will benefit mainly the large oil companies but not the farmers, although the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) said prior to the last election that those allowances relating to storage facilities would be made available to them.
The other point in relation to this clause that 1 wish to raise relates to the special depreciation allowance which is to apply to both new and second hand storage facilities acquired by the taxpayer under a contract after 1 October 1980. Having been on the land, I know there are literally thousands of storage tanks all over the country. Those tanks situated around the country belong basically to oil companies, not to the farmers. The idea of this Bill is that a farmer can put in a new tank of, say, 1,000 gallons capacity to replace an old tank of 500 gallons capacity. The 1,000 gallon tank attracts the tax concession for the farmer but the 500 gallon tank will go back to the oil company. The company will take it away. Provided it moves it down the road, paints it up and puts a price on it, under this legislation it again becomes eligible for a tax concession. That is clearly the case. I have checked it with the company J deal with. It claims it owns those tanks, and has always said it owns them. That tank could be taken away and, under this legislation, it could be placed two miles down the road and be eligible again for a 100 per cent tax concession.
The greatest rort ever invented will be this one where the tanks will be moved all over the country and taxation funds, that this Government claims it does not have, will go through the farmers and adding capital to the oil companies. They will be able to sell products that they have had sitting on properties for 10 or 15 years by just taking them out, moving them around and replacing them. There is no doubt that that will happen because the farmer will be encouraged to put in

the bigger tank for the tax concession and, once it is put in, that will allow the other one to be taken away. This is a real loophole in the legislation. It is a real weakness and it will allow taxation funds that should be going to the public sector to go directly through the farmer-he will get his taxation concession all right-to finish up in the coffers of the oil companies. Can this Government, in the present climate where it says it has to cut back on spending, allow legislation to go through this Committee which will allow the money to go directly into the coffers of the biggest, most profitable companies in the country?
Mr Howard-This afternoon you reckoned that the banks were. Why don't you make up your mind?
Mr CUNNINGHAM-The Treasurer challenges what I am saying. There is not much doubt that this money will finish up in the coffers of the oil companies. There is no doubt that, if the farmers around the country are given a legitimate tax concession, by all means they will be entitled to take advantage of it. However, this is not a legitimate tax concession. It is a 100 per cent allowance on second hand tanks. How can the Government justify spending public funds in that manner? There is no way in the world that this legislation should be allowed to go through. The honourable member for Gellibrand has moved an amendment seeking to limit the size of the tanks and that part of the legislation concerning second hand storage tanks makes the situation twice as bad. I call upon the Treasurer to explain to the House before this legislation goes through how in the first place he intends to keep control of second hand tanks around the country so they cannot be shifted from one place to another and so attract a 100 per cent depreciation allowance. This allowance will apply to property that is 15 years old, that is of no value at the moment but which, once it is moved up the road to take advantage of the tax concession, will be worth $300 or $400. Great! The farmer will be prepared to pay. He will not have to pass over any money. He will just be told to wait until tax time comes around and, instead of paying the money to the Federal Government, it will go to the oil company. That is the greatest way I have ever heard of to transfer funds from the public sector to the rich companies.
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (10.50)-1 also indicate my concern about this matter and my support for the amendment moved by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis). The honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham) also pointed out very clearly one of
the serious deficiencies in this provision, and the responsibility is on the Treasurer (Mf Howard) to

2726 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill

answer the specific charges that were made. Those charges, better than any other evidence in connection with this matter, highlight the real purpose for which the legislation has been introduced. This is one of the three measures mentioned prior to the election last year. At that time the suggestion was made that they were designed to assist people in rural areas particularly. However, there is no question that the essential purpose of this provision is to assist the large oil companies. The unfortunate thing about it is that, as a result of the application of this provision, if it costs large oil companies $100,000 or any multiple of that amount to install fuel storage to capacity, the Australian taxpayer will be meeting $46,000 of every $100,000 spent. The oil companies are sufficiently affluent and sufficiently profitable to provide their own fuel capacity and not place the burden on the shoulders of the Australian taxpayers.
Another reason why the provision has been introduced in this way rather than by way of rebate or subsidy, has been explained by the honourable member for Gellibrand. If the benefit is given by way of rebate, the small farmer will benefit to the same extent in relation to the cost of the fuel storage capacity he installs. At the same time, if the benefit is provided by way of subsidy some annual appropriation would have to be made and that appropriation would be obvious to the Australian people. Its purpose would have to be explained, and it has not been explained so far. Some opportunity would then be available for this disguised, hidden subsidy to the oil companies to be made perfectly clear.
I am concerned about many aspects of the legislation and about this one in particular, and I support the amendment moved by the honourable member for Gellibrand. It is now incumbent on the Treasurer to answer the claims that have been made and to justify the provisions adopted by him and by the Government to ensure that another massive handout from the pockets of the ordinary taxpayers of Australia is provided to the large profitable oil companies.
Mr O'KEEFE (Paterson) (10.53) -A quantity of 25,000 litres of fuel is not very great when farmers are farming 2,000 and 3,000 acres of wheat. Furthermore, what is better than to have storage tanks with fuel in them throughout the country? There is nothing better. From experience in my electorate I know that once a farmer receives a tank from an oil company there is no way in which he will let the tank off his property. Even if he purchases other tanks of his own he will not let it off the property. For the last two years the oil companies have not provided tanks

for farmers; the farmers have had to buy them. I have vast experience in this field, and 1 know that if a farmer has a farm tank, in no circumstances will he let it go, although he will take other tanks and he will buy tanks. It is essential that we have fuel in the country so that we can produce our wheat and barley and other crops which bring in export income. I support the motion very
vehemently.

Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (10.55)-1 want to add one thing to the comments I made earlier in rejecting the amendment moved by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis). 1 remind the honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham) that this provision will still be subject to the balancing provisions relating to depreciation in the tax legislation. Some of the devices that the honourable member for McMillan forecast would accelerate as a result of this measure would run foul of those balancing adjustments. For that reason, the potential for abuse about which the honourable member appeared to be concerned is not nearly as great as he suggested. I think that ought to be remembered. I endorse the remarks made by the honourable member for Paterson (Mr O'Keefe). Once again the Opposition has demonstrated its ignorance of the true circumstances of rural Australia.

Question put:
That the amendment (Mr Willis's) be agreed to.

The Committee divided.

(The Deputy Chairman~Mr G. O'H. Giles)

Ayes

42

Noes

62

Majority

20

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C.
Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John
Brown, Robert
Campbell,G. Charies, D. E. Child,J.
Cohen,B.
Cross, M. D.
Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S, Duffy,M.J.
Everingham, D. N.
Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L.

AYES

Hurford, C. J.
Jenkins, H. A. Johoson, Les (reUer)
Jones, Barry
Jones, Charles Kelly, R. J.
Kent,L. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo McMahon, Les (Teller) MUdreD, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L MountfordIJ.G.
Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. West,S.J. WiIIis,R. Young,M.J.

Adermannl A. E. AnthonY,I. D.

NOES

Hunt, R. I. D. Hyde,I.M.

Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2727

NOES
Baume,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Browo,N.A. Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowao,D.B. Dean,A.G. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harri~ G. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. (Teller) Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W.

Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F. Katter, R. C. Lloyd,B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McVeigh, D. T.
Macphee, I. M. Millar,P.C. Moore,l.C. Newman, K. E. O'Keefe, F. L. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M.
Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.I. White,P.N.D. Wilson, I. B. C.

PAIRS

Innes, U. E. Kerin,J.C. Keating, P. J. Wallis,L.G.

Drummond, P. H. Nixon,P.J. Killen,D.J. Peacock, A. S.

Question so resolved in the negative.

Clause agreed to.

Remainder of Bill-by leave-taken as a whole.

Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (11.3)-by leave-I move the following amendments together:

(1) Clause 9, page 5, lines 15 and 16, omit 'in pursuance of a contract entered into on or after that date'.
(2) Clause 9, page 5, lines 32 to 43 and page 6, lines 1 to 12,
omit proposed sub-sections 70A (2) and (3). (3) Clause 9, page 7, lines 37 to 43, page 8, lines 1 to 44 and
page 9, lines 1 to 11, omit proposed sub-sections 70A (13) and (14).
(4) Clause 18, page 32, line 9, omit 'where', substitute 'if'.
(5) Clause 18, page 32, Iine41, omit 'where', substitute 'if'.
(6) Clause 18, page 33, line 30, omit 'where', substitute 'if'.

Honourable members will recall that, in introducing the Income Tax Laws Amendment Bill on 7 May 1981, I said that the Government had received a number of representations that people in rural areas would be disadvantaged by the proposed rules for commencement of the deduction for costs of connecting to mains electricity. In its present form, clause 9 restricts the new deduction to connections or supply upgradings that are effected under contracts entered into on or after 1 October 1980, Because this rule would deny entitlement to some people who may even now be waiting for connection of their properties, the Government has decided that the deduction

should be available for connection and upgrading costs incurred on or after 1 October 1980, irrespective of when contracts were entered into.
Amendment (1) will accordingly amend subsection 70A (1) to omit the reference to contracts entered into on or after 1 October 1980. Amendments (2) and (3) are consequential on amendment (1) in that they will delete provisions that will then have no field of application. Amendments (4) to (6) are technical drafting changes to improve the expression of the Bill in a particular respect but which will not alter the substance of the Bill. The word 'if' is to be substituted for the word 'where' in three places. I commend the amendments to the Committee.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (l1.5)-The Opposition does not oppose the amendments.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (11.6)-Very briefly, I would like to say that the Government members taxation sub-committee is very grateful to the Treasurer (Mr Howard) for responding to the submissions made to him on this matter. We believe the result is reasonable in view of the disadvantages that many people would have suffered. I commend the amendments to the House.
Amendments agreed to. Bill, as amended, agreed to. Bill reported with amendments; report-by leave-adopted.
Third Reading Bill (on motion by Mr Howard)-by leaveread a third time.
ADJOURNMENT Curriculum Development Centre-Pensions-National Acoustics Laboratory-Funding of Election Campaigns-William Anglis Hospital Motion (by Mr Howard) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (11.8)-When the Minister for Education (Mr Fife) officially opened the Curriculum Development Centre on 18 March of this year he praised the Centre for its work, stating that it had undertaken a formidable array of projects which had resulted in an enrichment of the fabric of Australian education. It was indeed an ironical statement since within a few weeks the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions was to announce its decision that the CDC should close unless the States were prepared to contribute to 50 per cent of the Centre's costs. The States have yet to indicate

2728 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Adjournment

whether they are willing, or more importantly pensioners in Australia. It is for that reason in the

able, to make such a contribution. What the Minmain that I consider the matter should be spoken

ister has done is place in jeopardy the CDC's total about in this House. I appeal to the Minister for

program of work which he so recently praised. Home Affairs and the Environment (Mr Wilson)

One wonders how genuine is the Minister's comwho is seated at the table to take up the matter

mitment to the Centre.

with his colleague the Minister for Social Security

One of the most significant of the CDC's current programs is the national language development project. This is the first national curriculum project in English language education in Australia. In the name of the project, task forces or resource teams of English language curriculum consultants and associated networks of teachers are now operating in all States and Territories. In Western Australia only the Catholic Education

(Senator Chaney). Mr Bell is a pensioner, 78 years of age. He receives an age pension of $108.20 a fortnight and also a railway service superannuation pension from the New South Wales Rail Authority of $79.80 a fortnight. On 11 December 1980, he received advice from the Hurstville regional office of the Department of
Social Security that he was no longer entitled to the fringe benefits.

Commission is involved while in the Australian When Mr Bell came to see me earlier this

Capital Territory the activity involves a CDC inmonth, r was astounded at the action taken. Being

house team working closely with local State and in receipt of additional income which is below the

Catholic teachers. Elsewhere the team involves $40 a week as set out in the social security pam-

State, Catholic and independent school teachers. phlet, he was of the opinion-as indeed I was-

The language development project teams are that he was entitled to receive the fringe benefits

made up of primary and secondary specialists. of a pension health benefit card and pensioner

They combine expertise in mother tongue and concession card. The reason for his ineligibility

second language teaching. The main aim of this lies in the differing methods used by the Depart-

project is to improve the standards of language ment and the State Superannuation Board to cal-

and literacy of Australian children. The project culate the annual income. The annual income is

has attempted to bring together significant inall important because eligibility for fringe benefits

sights from research into language and learning of is not calculated by looking at the weekly income,

the last J5 to 20 years and to adopt a powerful as implied in the pamphlets issued by the Depart-

view of English language development with which ment of Social Security but, indeed, by looking at

to generate new teaching materials and new the annual income.

approaches to the English language. Apparently, over 300 teachers are working in the various State networks and the number is growing. The result of this activity will be an eventual improvement in the standard of English language proficiency in Australia.

Under section 114 (2) Part IX of the Government's Railways Act, the annual superannuation allowance is calculated by dividing the fortnightly payments by 14 and multiplying by 365. In Mr Bell's case, if one divides $79.80 by 14, which equals $5.70, and mUltiplies that by 365, it equals

An investment in such a project is an invest- $2,080.50. According to the State Superannuation

ment in the nation's future. This project was made Board, Mr Bell's annual incc'.:1e from superannu-

possible only because of the Curriculum Developation payments equals $2,080'.50. However, under

ment Centre, for it was the Centre which initiated the Social Services Act the Department defines a

the program and which brought about the coyear as being made up of 26 fortnights. Therefore,

operative relationship within the States as well as if $40 a week is the maximum income a pensioner

across the States. The CDC has continued to play can earn before he becomes ineligible for fringe

an important co-ordinating role and it is commitbenefits, the annual amount he can earn using the

ted, once the process of development and trialling Department's method is $40 multiplied by two to

is completed, to eventual publication and distrigive the fortnightly rate which equals $80. If $80

bution of the English language materials is multiplied by 26, it equals $2,080. According to

produced. This is only one of the important projthe Department of Social Security, if a pensioner

ects undertaken by the CDC but it highlights the earns over $2,080 in annual income above his pen-

essential role for the Curriculum Development sion, he is ineligible for fringe benefits.

Centre in education developments in this country.

Each year the Department of Social Security

Mr MOUNTFORD (Banks) (11.11)- receives a statement from the State Superannu-

Tonight I would like to speak briefly about the ation Board which lists the annual income earned

plight of an aged pensioner in my electorate. His by members from superannuation payments. ram

plight, because of the Government's bureaucratic told that this information is fed into a computer

bungling, would also be endured by many other which automatically sorts out who is eligible for

Adjournment

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2729

fringe benefits and who is not. To go back to Mr Bell's case, the computer receives a statement from the superannuation fund saying that his annual income amounted to $2,080.50. Therefore, he becomes automatically ineligible for fringe benefits.
Following my representations to the Director of the Department of Social Security, I was advised that Mr BeJl's appeal had been upheld and that, in due course, his fringe benefits would be restored. When I asked on what grounds the appeal was upheld, I was advised that because of the anomaly existing in this case, the original decision was reversed. However, 1 was further advised that, firstly, this decision did not set a precedent; secondly, the Department did not intend to liaise with the New South Wales State Superannuation Board to prevent the situation recurring; and, thirdly, the Department did not intend to compensate Mr BeJl for the five months loss of his fringe benefits; and, fourthly, the Department did not intend altering the social security pamphlets to make the provision clearer. This is a scandalous situation which the Government must immediately rectify so that many thousands of pensioners in a similar position to Mr Bell can receive justice. In addition, I will be taking the matter up, of course, with my colleagues in the State Parliament.
Dr EVERINGHAM (Capricornia) (11.14)-1 seek leave of the House in incorporate in Hansard two documents which I have shown to the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson) who is at the table. The first letter is directed to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) by Mr Colin Lamont to whom I referred in the adjournment debate on 7 May. The second letter is a comment on that document by the national executive officer of the Australian Association for Better Hearing. I will not detain the House in reiterating the points I made on 7 May. T just wanted to place on record those documents which are the basis for the concern I expressed on that occasion in regard to the attempts by Mr Lamont to disparage the functions of the National Acoustic Laboratories.
Leave granted.
The documents read as follows-
AUSTRALIAN DEAFNESS COUNCIL
(Queensland) C/o Queensland Deaf Society, 34 Davidson Street, Newmarket, Queensland 4051. Telephone 356-8255
16 March 1981 Notes for the Rt. Hon. Malcolm Fraser, C.H., M.H.R. Prime Minister:

Prepared by Mr Colin Lamont, President, Australian Deafness Council (Queensland), on behalf of the national executive of the Australian Deafness Council, representing the consumers and professionals working with the hearing impaired and in conjunction with the Hearing Aid Council of Australia on behalf of the private sector distributors represented by Mr Kcvin Barrand, President, H.A.C.A. (NSW).
The Organisation:
I. The Australian Deafness Council represents all organisations of the Deaf and Hearing impaired in Australia as well as the organisations of professionals assisting the deaf and parent groups. These together include the Australian.Association for Belter Hearing, Australian Association of Teachers of the Deaf, Australian Association of Welfare Workers with the Deaf, Australian Federation of Adult Deaf Societies, H.E.A.R. Service and numerous schools and deaf units throughout Australia and their parent and friends organisations.
2. The number of hearing impaired in Australia is not known however the Australia Bureau of Statistics has stated as recently as August, 1980 that up to 7t per cent of the population have a hearing handicap sufficient to warrant the use of a hearing aid of some sort. This indicates the consumer group is potentially one million people.
3. It is estimated that the consumer group actually using a form of hearing aid is approximately one third of a million people. Forty per cent of these users are private industry customers and the remainder are customers of the National Acoustic Laboratory.
The Labor Government Policy:
I. During the Whitlam years, Dr Everingham planned the highly idealistic Socialist policy of replacing the private sector distributing and fitting hearing aids, with National Acoustic Laboratory (NAL) services. Plans included expanding the client group eligible for N.A.L. 's free services until it covered the whole population; becoming involved in fostering an Australian Manufacture of hearing aids and controlling hearing testing services.
In 1973 it was estimated that this massive undertaking would cost in the vicinity of $20 million. A similar program today would cost between fifty and sixty million dollars.
Covert Socialist Growth Under Liberal Government:
I. In 1975, with the change of Government plans for NAL expansion at the expense of the private sector were scrappeu by the new administration. This however did not stop NAL officers from working away at the gradual erosion of the private sector and the insidious expansion ofNAL.
2. In the months of 1980-81 NAL has implemented more expansionist plans than in the previous time since the demise of the socialist Government. In 1980 the budget of NAI. appears (from the estimates) to have grown by forty per cent.
3. Methods employed by NAL to bring about a fait accompli of the Everingham administrations wild expansionist schemes include:
(a) The offer of free hearing aid batteries to all citizens eligible for NAL services whether they use a NAL aid or one provided by the private sector. This ploy allows NAL access to clients of the private sector who could become clients of N AL.
(b) The deliberate and active obstruction of moves hv the Australian Deafness Council and the HearingAid Council (representing the private sector) to secure registration of hearing aid distributors and audiometrists in each State. (Evidence of this is on record). The significance of this is that with registration secureu the

2730 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Adjournment

private sector would have greater status and would be better controlled thereby undermining NAL efforts to denigrate that sector,
(c) The advertising for firms interested in the manufacture of hearing aids in Australia, This is seen to be a most important step in NAL expansion and unwarranted intrusion into private enterprise.
(d) The active support for a tariff protection application for the manufacturer of a hearing aid part which would become the thin edge of the wedge for the clients of the private sector who would certainly face higher hearing aid costs as a consequence.
4. The Australian Deafness Council opposes expansion of NAL's free services not because we are opposed to the availability of free aids to more Australians but because we believe there is a much more efficient way of achieving this than by expanding the bureaucracy.
5. The complaints against NAL services are legion and well documented over a long period of time in the records of the Council. Long delays of up to six months for appointments for hearing tests with NAL, limited access to the most up-to-date overseas technology, the total absence of any real service in country areas, the absence of follow up services to NAL clients outside major distribution and fitting areas, the limit on choice of type of aid and the backlog of even maintenance services for existing clients.
6. Those using private sector services do not want to be forced into the dubious position of becoming a NAL client.
7. The Australian Deafness Council does not oppose the development of Australian manufacture. The Council is however aware of the sorry history of the NAL supported attempt to encourage the manufacture of a hearing aid part by a former employee of Danavox in Denmark.
8. The applicant was a manufacturer of a hearing aid part who had only a brief time earlier received an industry award. He had claimed then that he could produce the part in question cheaper than overseas competitors relied upon by private industry. He had been totally supported by NAL in his endeavour. In spite of this he was, by the second half of 1980, almost totally on his knees financially and in urgent need of protection.
9. In spite of this example of the failure of this manufacturer to succeed in even this small way, the Department of Health acknowledged at the December 1980 hearing that a major growth programme for NAL was already under way and that part of that programme was to involve NAL in fostering a major new Government funded hearing aid manufacturing industry that would ultimately produce publicly financed hearing aids for distribution by NAL at no charge to the client.
10. The Hearing Aid Council of Australia (HACA) in its sworn evidence to the December 1980 enquiry, pointed out that further expansion of NAL activity would lead to the demise of the private sector distribution of hearing aids.
11. The Australian Deafness Council representing the consumers (both NAL clients and private sector clients) supported the HACA view in sworn evidence to the enquiry. Both the Deafness Council and the HACA opposed the application for taritfprotection.
12. The continued publicly funded manufacture and fitting of the free NAL aids, have now made the private sector's activities only marginally viable. If NAL's current expansion programme is allowed to proceed most of the private sector distribution will cease within 12 to 18 months.
13. If the private sector founders, the clients of the private sector will be thrown upon the Government. This will in effect achieve what the Whit lam Government promised in

1973 in spite of the commitment by the present Government to scrap such proposals.
14. It expressed the fear that if NAL activities were not curtailed now, clients using the private sector would face increasingly higher costs for aids in the short term and would face the grim prospect of being forced to use NAL's inadequate services in the long term as private industry closed down.
15. The present publicly funded expansion of NAL will inevitably lead to the Commonwealth Government being forced to assume full responsibility for all hearing impaired clients requiring hearing aid fitting and related care. Such a development, including the major expansion of NAL was the policy of the Whitlam Labor Government.
It is clearly against the policy of the current Liberal-CP Government and contrary to its expressed philosophy,
16. The Australian Deafness Council has proposed a grantin-aid scheme as a viable alternative to the present trend. This scheme has the support of every organisation representing the hearing impaired and has the support of the HACA.
The Grant in Aid Proposal:
Rather than an expansion of NAL services, which we believe would further compound these problems for the client group we believe that a 'grant in aid' scheme should be extended to all persons eligible for NAL services both now and in the future.
The grant in aid scheme would mean that clients eligible for NAL services could be permitted a grant, equal in amount to the real cost of producing a NAL aid, to aid them in purchasing the aid of their choice from a private firm if desired.
The advantages to the consumer are seen as follows:
(I) The consumer would have access to up to date technology. (It is recognised that at this particular time, NAL is as close to private industry in terms of supplying and using the most up to date technology as it has ever been. From past record however it can be anticipated that this will be temporary.)
(2) The enormous delays which are legion in the record of clients using NAL services would disappear.
(3) In most states if not all states both pre-fitting and post-fitting services are judged to be better with Private firms than with NAL and the consumer would have access to these improved services.
(4) The consumer would have a wider choice of effectiveaid.
(5) Most of all the consumer would have a freedom of choice which is not now available.
(6) Restrictions 011 travel by NAL staff make services in country areas to consumers very poor. By comparison, private firms provide effective expertise to country clients.
The advantages to the Government are seen as follows:
(1 ) The consumer would be required to make some payment themselves and this is some brake on over use. At the moment there is no such brake on NAL clients, in areas where N AL has offices.
(2) The scheme is consistent with the Government's policy of self help.
(3) The Government can be seen to be reaching more people through expanded services using existing outlets at no extra cost to the Government.
(4) In purely pork barrel terms the Government is seen to be giving a grant to people as opposed to just a free service which most clients now take for granted.
(5) The Government would be stemming an obviously aggressive socialist growth.

Adjournment

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2731

(6) The cost of a grant in aid scheme is more easily calculated and predicted than insidious growth by NAL bureaucracy.
(7) Part of the grant in aid returns to the Government through taxation of the private sector growth."
(8) The actual cost of a grant in aid in anyone year could be deducted from NAL estimates for the following year thereby keeping this area of health care in line with Government party policies.
(9) NAL already claim to be over extended and are clamouring for more staff. Our proposal would relieve Government of that demand.
(10) It would be a major step, in International Year of the Disabled, to assist the Hearing Handicapped.
The amount that we feel the Government should pay by way of grant in aid presents a problem. Logically it should be the amount that it costs NAL to produce an aid. This figure is not known. NAL would have it that an aid can be produced for less than $100. This sum does not take into account the expenses that private industry would have to build in to the cost of an aid. Such items as free Telecom services, free rental of Government buildings, capital cost, salaries of administration personnel, overseas junkets by bureaucracy heads are all part of the cost of an aid and, if included, would in all. likelihood boost the cost of NAL aid to a more realistic figure of several hundred dollars. It is unlikely that the real cost of an NAL aid is much different from that of a privately supplied aid.
This submission leaves questions to be answered. It does so because much of the informatjon germane to the proposal contailwd herein, is not available outside the Government. The submission is also general, in'part for the same reason but also be~ause it is the general principal that we seek to press. If the Liberal Government believes in self help, private industry and a curtailing of bureaucratic growth of socialist services, this proposal sho\lld apPeal to the Government as consistent with these aims, We firmly believe adoption of this proposal will be in the best interest of the health care of the hearing handicapped.
COLIN LAMONT FOR THE AUSTRALIAN DEAFNESS COUNCIL
AUSTRALIAN ASSOCIATlON FOR BETTER HEARING
National Council
1st Floor, Blackall House, 20 NewcOIpen St., Newcastle 2300
Executive Director: Mrs. V. B. Hallinan
P.O. Box 916, Newcastle. N.S.W. 2300
15th May, 1981
National Patron Sir George Halliday
Comments on Submission prepared by Colin Lamont, dated 16th March, 1981:
The Australian Association for Better Hearing objects to the submission prepared by Mr Lamont for the following reasons:
(i) He is using the Australian Deafness Council as a vehicle for his political prejudices;
(ii) he incorrectly claims that he has the full support of the Australian Deafness Council;
(iii) he has made numerous allegations against the National Acoustics Laboratories without providing evidence to substantiate such allegations;
(iv) many of his arguments are illogical.
The Australian Association for Better Hearing considers that a 'Grant in Aid' scheme, if properly carried out, could

benefit many of the hearing impaired peopled who are not eligible to use the services of NAL, or who prefer to deal with the commercial Hearing Aid distributor. However, my association would not agree to any proposal which would damage or do away with any of the services provided by NAL.
In fact, in recent years, my association has been endeavouring to have the services of NAL extended and to some degree has been successful in so far as the 'Invalid' and 'One Parent' pensioners are now covered. We are still pushing to have included:
(a) the unemployed persons, and (h) those persons in the lower income bracket.
(According to the figures quoted by Mr Lamont in his submission-Page 1 'Organisation' paragraphs 2 and 3-the implication is that 666,000 Australians would fall into one or the other of these categories).
My association is also seeking to have the hearing aids supplied. by NAL, made available for sale to those hearing nnpalred persons who are not eligible to obtain them under the present system.
In these matters the Australian Association for Better Hearing has had the full support of the Australian Deafness Council. Therefore the statement made by Mr Lamont (Page 2 'Covert Socialist Growth under Liberal Government' paragraph 4) is incorrect.
While the Australian Association for Better Hearing is fully aware of the delays in appointments for hearing tests with the National Acoustics Laboratories in some cities and of the cutback in services provided in country areas, it docs not agree that this is because of inefficiencies within NAL but rather it is because of restricted staffing due to insufficient government funding. Nevertheless reports indicate that services provided in country areas are equal to or better than any that might be provided by visiting commercial hearing aid distributors. (This could be confirmed with consultation with NAL).
My association maintains that NAL follow up and maintenance services in the city areas cannot be faulted and from all reports received, the postal maintenance service offered to country clients is very satisfactory.
It is the opinion of the Australian Association for Better Hearing that more funds should be provided by the Federal Government to ensure the continuation of and expansion of the services of the National Acoustics Laboratories.
VALERIE B. HALLINAN National Executive Director
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (ll.l7)--When governments attempt to interfere with the running of rival political parties, the very basis of a democratic system is at risk. But this is exactly what is involved in the investigatory powers included in the Wran Government's new legislation to provide for the funding of election campaigns of political parties by the New South Wales State
Government. During the week r went to several
meetings where this matter was of major significance. It was a topic of concern that this legislation, under which taxpayers' money is being diverted into financing political parties to which the taxpayers may be totally opposed, has gone through the New South Wales Parliament, despite massive and widespread opposition, as is evident from opinion polls that have been published in the Press.

2732 REPRESENTATIVES 27 May 1981

Adjournment

Of course, it is strange that these millions of dollars of State funds are to be diverted into Australian Labor Party campaign funds at a time when Mr Wran claims that the State is disastrously short of money because of so-called Federal cutbacks. Either Mr Wran is talking nonsense about these cutbacks or he is being totally irresponsible in giving this money to the Labor Party if there really is such a shortage that essential State services have to be cut. The only party that will benefit from the new law is the Labor Party as the Liberal and National Country parties do not intend to accept the Government's funds or to register as political parties under the anti-democratic Act. This is because they believe the law to be immoral and will repeal it immediately they win office. But a refusal to take the money will not protect the Liberal Party or the National Country Party from the dreadful consequences of the inspection clauses of this Act.
Under the new law the Wran Government will be able to appoint inspectors to probe into the affairs of rival political parties. These inspectors will have the right to enter people's homes and to inspect books, no matter how confidential. But, of course, these new rules will not apply to trade unions which are a major source of funds for the Labor Party. These political spies will be specifically prohibited from inspecting the books of trade unions but they can force their way into people's homes. These inspection powers represent the most serious threat to the privacy and integrity of political parties in Australian political history. The Wran Government's paid political spies represent something we have never had to face in Australia before. Yet this legislation has gone through the State Parliament with a minimum of fuss. The media, for example, which is supposed to be the watchdog of our rights, has given only moderate space to the violent objections by the State Opposition to the new law. This is a matter of major principle that must be resisted. At least we are now seeing in this law the real colours of the Wran Government instead of the semi-Liberal respectable front that it has managed to present to the public for so long.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (11.20)-1 wish to describe tonight the appalling effect that the Government's short-sighted approach to hospital funding has had on the William Angliss Hospital in my electorate of La Trobe. This situation can be directly attributed to the Government's dismantling of Medibank, neglect of community health centres and measures for preventive medicine and the total confusion within the community in regard to health benefits. The William Angliss Hospital in Ferntree Gully is the only

public hospital in the La Trobe electorate. It serves a large local area. This hospital has in the past provided unique community care for the people of my electorate with local medical practitioners being able to treat their own patients, both public and private, within their own local environment. However, with the Government's emasculation of Medibank and the escalating costs of private health insurance, which have forced nearly two million Australians out of private health insurance, the William Angliss Hospital, like so many others, is in dire financial straits.
Families in the local area forced out of health insurance and taking a gamble on their health are now forced when sickness or accident occurs to attend the casualty department of the hospital. The temporary casualty building at the hospital has been hard pressed to cope with the massive increase in patients attending over the last 12 months. It is common for the hospital to treat 100 patients a day in premises designed for less than half that number. Following this initial attendance there is an automatic flow on to expenditure for surgical supplies, drugs, pathology, radiology and increased salaries for additional staff. Even with this greatly increased service, the hospital still has to send serious cases and road accident victims to the Box Hill Hospital, a half-hour drive away. Such an increase can be attributed only to the swing away from health insurance within the population. The hospital is in a'paradoxical situation. The more public it becomes and the more it serves the people of the community, the more in debt it becomes. It is literally being forced to go private.
The board of the hospital believes that its function and role is to provide a maximum of medical and hospital care to the community it serves. In accordance with this belief, the hospital has over the years endeavoured to consolidate and extend the scope of service it can provide with a wide range of surgical procedures being available. Unfortunately for the hospital, under present government policies, the increase in actual payments to doctors for this increase in service has resulted in a grossly inadequate allocation of funds. As the hospital is obliged to meet the medical fees of standard patients, the amount paid to visiting medical staff has increased by 75 per cent as a cost to the hospital. When the cost of keeping a patient for one day has risen from $88.63 to $100.71 and government allocations have been cut back, this effectively means that the hospital is faced with a severe curtailing of services. Thus, the people of my electorate may be denied the use of their own hospital. New government policies
only reinforce this.

Adjournment

27 May 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2733

The 1980-81 Budget allocation of $4.8m is totally inadequate to allow the hospital to operate at anywhere near its full capability. In the areas of medical and surgical supplies, fuel, light and power and repairs and maintenance, the hospital has already exceeded its allocation. Because of the necessity for more staff to clean the vast areas of the new buildings, the board has had to engage contract cleaners at considerably greater cost than direct employees. The situation has reached such a ludicrous position that I have been informed by one local doctor that patients in Chandler House, the geriatric ward, may no longer be able to have their tea cups collected by domestic catering staff. If there are not enough cups the next time tea is served patients may have to go without. The situation at the hospital is so critical at present that the morale of the nursing and domestic staff is being affected. The hospital has been allocated $100,000 less for visiting medical staff fees even though the number of patients has increased phenomenally over the last few years.
The people of my electorate are being effectively cut off from a community facility. The hospital and medical staff are frustrated at being unable to perform their legitimate functions without hindrance. Those local people who decide to seek admittance to a hospital in the city are faced with the problems of being hospitalised many kilometres from their homes and families with all the attendant problems and anxieties that this can cause. Others are obliged to wait. They remain for long periods on their doctors' waiting lists. It is an appalling situation when a hospital which has provided unparalleled services to the community is so compromised. In the past there has been no discrimination between private and public patients in care, attention and treatment. The political manipulation of the Federal Government in such a vital and sensitive area is clearly out of touch with the realities of cost factors affecting hospital services. The Government has a moral obligation either to pick up the tabs for the visiting medical staff or to provide salaried specialists for the hospital's use. The opting out of such areas is a

total abdication of responsibility by the Federal Government.
Motion (by Mr Wilson) agreed to:
That the question be now put.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
House adjourned at 11.25 p.m.
NOTICES The following notices were given:
Mr Fife to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Mr Wilson to present a Bill for an Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Mr Howard to present a Bill for an Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
Mr Howard to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 27 May 1981, pursuant to statute:
Australian Citizenship Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 112.
Christmas Island Act-Ordinances-1981No. 2-Workers' Compensation (Amendment). No.3-Litter (Amendment).
Industrial Research and Development Incentives ActRegulation-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 113.
Public Service Arbitration Act-Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission-Determination-1977C No. 170S-Northern Territory Teachers' Federation, accompanied by a statement regarding possible inconsistency with the law.
Seat of Government (Administration) ActRegulations-1981-No. 12 (Public Health Ordinance).
Senate (Representation of Territories) Act-RegulationStatutory Rules 1981,No.ll1.


