House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 121, 1981 Tuesday, 3 March 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Petitions

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 325

Tuesday, 3 March 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2.15 p.m., and read prayers.
ELECTORAL Mr SPEAKER-I inform the House that today I have issued the writ in connection with the by-election for the division of Wentworth and that the dates fixed were those announced to the House on 26 February 1981.
PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
That funding in the area of children's services, which has been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 Budget, and further, that annual budget allocations in the area of children's services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Cohen, Mr Cross, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Holding, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Charles Jones, Mrs Kelly, Mr Les ,McMahon, Mr Milton and Mr Mountford.
Petitions received.
Travelling Post Office Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the Australian Postal Commission's decision to phase out the Travelling Post Office (TPO) in New South Wales.
The TPO service has given the country people ofNSW a reliable and efficient service for many years. To replace this service with a road system would be a backward step which we believe would result in long delays in mail going to and from country centres.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition to retain the TPO service in NSW.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray,
by Mr Cadman, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Ian Robinson.
Petitions receiv.ed.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble. petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth- ,(',

(I) That merchant seamen have in the past served in theatres of war; they have been decorated for valor following war action; they have been prisoners of war and should therefore be entitled to similar pension rights and medical benefits as regular servicemen.
(2) That by being denied the entitlements, such as pension and medical benefits, which other war veterans receive, they . are thereby being discriminated against.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act (1920) Section 100 (d) (iv) to take account of war-related service by merchant seamen during World War II.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys and Mr Kent.
Petitions received.
Aid to Ethiopia
To the Honourable Speaker, and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we request a review of the Australian food aid to Ethiopia for the following reasons:
(a) Ethiopian involvement in four war fronts resulting in massive exodus of refugees out of the country-from supposed famine effected areas.
(b) Well documented atrocities committed by the Ethiopian Government against its own people and the people of neighbouring countries;
(c) Clear evidence of such aid being diverted for military purposes, away from the areas of greatest need.
That we request that the Australian Government provide aid to victims of the Ethiopian disaster in Somalia, Djibouti and the Sudan, through their Governments and through the Eritrean Relief Association in Eritrea.
That we request that the Australian Government sends economic aid as well as food aid to allow the indigenous governments of Somalia, Djibouti and the Sudan to implement relief work, i.e. transportation, health infrastructure etc,
That we object to Australia giving aid to Ethiopia and the Sudan, whilst failing to give substantial aid to the refugee victims of the war.
That Australia's involvement appears, to us, to be purely political-influenced by Australia's alliance with the United States-and consequently, we request that Australia restricts this aid to the war victims in Eritrea and those refugees in Somalia, Djibouti and the Sudan and that such aid exist on a substantial level.
That we object to the present Australian Government involvement in Ethiopia as un-Christian and a violation of humane law.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Adermann.
Petition received.
Federal Court Proceedings
To the Honourable Speaker and the Members of the House of Representatives of the Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the under signed citizens of Australia respectfully herewith:
Being members of both the Plumbers and Gasfitters Employees Union of Australia and the N.S.W. Plumbers and Gasfitters Employees Union employed on the Macquarie Shopping Centre Complex at North Ryde, N.S.W., request

326 REPRESENTATIYES 3 March 1981

Petitions

e>lery possible endeavour is made for the handing down of the decision in the Federal Court matters Numbers N.S.W. 19 of 1979, and V 23 and V 24 of 1979 thilt was completed before Judge Evatt on 9 May, 1979. We feel that the holding back of this decision is causing unnecessary disruption within the building industry.
Ana your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr John Brown.
Petition received.
Family Law Act
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of tile House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled.
The petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth that allegations have been made by litigants that unjust decisions in relation to ancillary matters are being made at the Family Court of Australia.
We call on the Government to amend Section 79 (I) of the Family Law Act, to allow all Family Courts to be open and publication of details of proceedings permitted, provided names of parties and other identifying information is prohibited from disclosure.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cadman.
PeHtion received.
Rosemount Repatriation Hospital
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of undersigned Australiancitizens showeth:
Rosemount Repatriation Hospital has been of inestimable value to eligible repatriation beneficiaries for many years, and the closure or dispersal of the facilities available at the hospital would be a retrograde step.
The proposed decision to close Rosemount Repfltriation Hospital through active discouragement by Departmental Administrative Officers of any further referrals by Medical Officers of patients for medically prescribed occupational therapy is objectionable.
Closure of Rosemount Repatriation Hospital would severely disadvantage veterans in Brisbane's northern suburbs, as well as their relatives and friends who would be required to travel a great distance in order to visit hospitalised veterans at either of the two alternative repatriation hospitals.
Closure of Rosemount Repatriation Hospital and transfer of patients to Greenslopes would greatly add to the administrative burden of that repatriation and general hospital.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will reverse its announced decision to close the Rosemount Repatriation Hospital.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Social Security Office, Sandgate
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth of Australia respectfully showeth that we protest at the decision by the Department of Social Security to terminate the operations of the Social Security Office at Sandgate, Brisbane. That this decision ignores the interest and needs of the people of Sandgate and surrounding areas, particularly those elderly who find travel to

an alternative office physically difficult and for the destitute and unemployed who find travel financially difficult.
We respectfully request that the Minister reverse this decision in order to achieve greater decentralisation in the provision of services by the department and deal more effectively and personally with the social security beneficiaries and pensioners of the Sandgate area.
And your petitioners do humbly pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.

American Naval Vessels and Aircraft: Use of Australian Facilities

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned Australian citizens respectfully showeth:

That considerable concern is generated by the decision of

the Australian Government to provide facilities in Western

Australia and Northern Australia for the use of American

naval vessels and aircraft involved in the nuclear attack

network;

.

That the extension of facilities to these vessels and aircraft and their potential to carry nuclear weapons can inevitably have the effect of drawing Australia into any potential world nuclear conflict;

That the involvement of Australia in providing these facilities and allowing such aircraft to use Australian airspace further compromises our ability to determine a non-aligned independent position in any continuing hostilities.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will communicate to the representative of the Government of the United States of America that Australian facilities will not be provided to American naval vessels and aircraft which might by their presence in Australia make this country a high priority target in the event of nuclear war.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mrs Darling.

Petition received.

Copyright Act

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned Australian citizens respectfully showeth:

That recent amendments to the Copyright Act will seriously disadvantage the clients served by Australia's special libraries, i.e., thOse libraries which serve the information needs of the staff of government, semi-government, industrial and commercial organisations;

That the amendments to the Act serve to unduly restrict

access by these special library researchers to information con-

sidered vital to the interests they supply.

'

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will further amend the Act to:

Exempt special libraries from certain provisions of the Act which restrict access;

Require copyright owners/agents to show that they have reasonable cause to believe that copyright is being infringed before being permitted to inspect records;

Require copyright owners/agents to declare in writing to the librarian that no information will be divulged to a third party except where necessary because an action is to be brought either under the Act, or at common law, for a breach of copyright.

Petitions

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 327

And impose penalties on copyright owners/agents for any breach of the above proposed provisions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received:
. Trade and Military Arrangements with ASEAN Countries
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth that:
I. Australian Government policy of restructuring the economy, which aims to boost mining and export industries and to eliminate many sectors of manufacturing industries, is aggravating the employment situation in Australia.
2. The transfer by corporations of their operations from Australia to Taiwan, South Korea and the member-nations of the ASEAN (i.e. Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand and the Philippines), where labor is grossly exploited, is detrimental to employment in Australia.
3. In these countries production is conducted mainly by the multinational corporations and for export. This results In onesided industrial development and unemployment in many sectors of the economy.
4. All the above mentioned states have oppressive and undemocratic governments, many of them being military dictatorships.
5. Throughout the region, there are increasingly strong opposition movements which are brutally suppressed.
6. Australia's military arrangements with the ASEAN countries could lead to involvement of Australian military forces in internal suppression activities.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the Australian Government will undertake:
(I) To convey to above mentioned governments its strong objection to their violation of human and labor rights.
(2) To restrict the possibility of corporations transferring their operations offshore.
(3) To prevent in present circumstances a substantial increase of labor-intensive imports to Australia in areas of major employment.
(4) To adopt measures (more spending for welfare, more public enterprises etc) to promote production for Australia's domestic needs and full employment.
(5) To end all military arrangements with the ASEAN countries.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Holding.
Petition received.
Industrial Unrest
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we are completely fed up with the various unions' attitude and lack of consideration for the other citizens of Australia by their continual strike actions. We would request that Parliament takes steps to put an end to this madness once and for all.
It is adversely affecting the lives of every Australian citizen and will eventually bring our wonderful country to complete ruin if permitted to continue.

Even now we must be the laughing stock of the developing world.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Howard.
Petition received.
Labelling of Cosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the Bouse of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of Cosmetic Companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were subjected to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:
Legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:
(I) Whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.
(2) Whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Moreton Island: Mineral Sand Products
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the interim list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed a further mining lease against the advice of conservationists.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse request for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Arbitration Determination No. 503 of 1980
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That the Government's move in attempting to disallow Determination 503 of 1980 which was granted by the full bench of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission has:

328 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Petitions

(a) placed in jeopardy the future viability of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission,
(b) and has created a dangerous precedent for trade unions in general, by refusing to accept the umpire's decision.
2. That the Government has acted in complicity with the Public Service Board in attempting to disalJow Determination 503 of 1980 and is thereby attempting to deny Government employees a fair hearing on matters related to redundancy and retrenchment.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will-
(a) reject any moves to disalJow Determination 503 of 1980 and to exclude arbitral jurisdiction over any aspect of redundancy redeployment, retrenchment and retirement .
(b) repeal existing powers to disalJow arbitration determinations.
And your petitioners as in d~ty bound win ever pray.
by Mrs Kelly.
Petition received.

Plant Breeders' Rights

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of

Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble pet-

ition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfulJy

showeth that:

.

I. there is lack of public information about the content and intention of the proposed legislation on Plant Variety Rights;

2. there is concern that the ethical and moral issues of granting private proprietorial rights over genetic resources have not been properly and publicly considered;

3. there is evidence to suggest that such legislation may lead to a reduction in the existing plant diversity;

4. there is reason to fear that farmers may be restricted in their activities due to the controls placed on the use and propogation of seed stocks;

5. evidence suggests that Plant Varietal Rights legislation will lead to higher costs for the farmer, the consumer, the plant-breeder and the tax payer, and

6. evidence suggests that Plant Varietal Rights Legislation will lead to a further increase in foreign control of Australian resources.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament defer introducing the legislation until fulJ and informed, public discussion of the issues involved has taken place.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

byMrKerin.

Petition received.

Spraying of Poisonous Gases in the Mekong Rher
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(a) The October edition of Reader's Digest written by well known American journalist Jane Hamilton-Merritt refers to the murder of innocent villagers in Northern Thailand along the Mekong River being exterminated by poison gases dropped by communist helicopters.
(b) This tribe of people are dying a slow lingering death simply because they supported the Americans during the VietnamWar.

YoUr petitioners therefore humbly pray that protests be lodged with the Socialist Republic of Vietnam and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics as soon as possible over the spraying of poisonous gases in the Mekong River area of Northern Thailand.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr McLean.
Petition received.
Unemployment
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfulJy showeth:
That as it is clear that unemployment is a long term problem in Australia the Government should extend to the unemployed the same assistance as is given to any other disadvantaged member of the community. There is an urgent need to alJeviate the financial hardship and emotional stress that the unemployed are suffering.
Your petitioners therefore pray:
(I) That the Government adopt positive policies to re- . duce unemployment.
(2) That the basic Unemployment Benefit be raised to at least the level of the poverty line as calculated by Professor Henderson.
(3) In line with other Social Service additional income awards, and in order to encourage work creation schemes and the fostering of initiative and self respect, that the $6.00 per week additional income limit be raised to at least $20.00 per week.
(4) That the financial penalties above the earning of $20.00 per week, assessed on a monthly basis, be calculated at the same rate as other Social Security benefits.
(5) That the Commonwealth grant subsidies to State governments so that the unemployed can be granted transport concessions in order that they are not penalised in job seeking.
(6) That pharmaceutical and medical concessions be granted to the unemployed equivalent to those received by other Social Service beneficiaries.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.
Human Rights Legislation
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfulJy showeth:
We express our grave concern at the terms of the Human Rights Commission Bill 1979 and the Racial Discrimination Amendment Bill 1979.
We note that strong opposition to the form of these Bills was expressed by the majority of our elected Senators. We note that the Bills only escaped amendment because a number of our elected Senators who opposed the Bills could not be in the chamber when the crucial votes were taken.
We note that the Human Rights Commission Bill is totalJy inadequate for a number of reasons which include the fact that the Bill does not permit the Commission to investigate breaches of human rights which occur under State law, e.g. Queensland or Western Australia. Further there is no power to prosecute violations of human rights.

Petitions

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 329

We note that the Racial Discrimination Amendment Bill 1979 is also gravely deficient in a number of respects including the fact that the Commissioner for Community Relations loses his independence, powers and staff.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Legislature will listen to the voices of the Aboriginal and Ethnic communities, women and other disadvantaged groups, who are opposing these Bills in their present form.
We call upon the Legislature to ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. But most importantly in the name of Democracy we call upon the Legislature to send the proposed legislation back to the Senate so that all our elected Senators are able to be present and vote on the legislation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.

Plant Breeders' Rights
The Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth, do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:
I. Note that legislation establishing plant breeders' rights in other countries has had serious adverse effects, namely:
(a) Virtual monopoly contrlll of seed production has paSsed into the hands of a few large international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation.
(b) The va'rieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and will riot grow without the aid of artificial fertilizers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers.
(c) The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, rendering them vulnerable to disease and other environmental threats.
2. Recognise that maintenance of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to preve!)t exclusive control over plant genetic materials from falling into private hands.
3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gardeners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian. farm and garden produce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment of plant breeders' rights in Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Scholes.
Petition received.

Taxation

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of

Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble pet-

ition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully

showeth that:

.

I. Present income tax laws discriminate against singleincomefamilies.

2. It is unfair that families should pay more tax, the more unequally their total income is divided between spouses.

3. All marriages should be recognised as partnerships by allowing spouses to divide their joint income for taxation purposes.
4. The family, which is the natural and fundamental unit of society, should be an economic unit in tax laws.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament will reform income tax laws to allow the joint income of husband and wife to be equally divided between them for taxation purposes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Wilson.
Petition received.

Airline Services

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:

That we protest most strongly against tl]e present two airline domestic policy of the Commonwealth Government.

That this policy has resulted in expensive airfares and poor

service and discourages tourists from the Eastern States visit-

ing WA and vice ,versa.

.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably on our petition and formulate an Airline Policy providing for greater competition so that prices and service are determined by free market forces.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Beazley, Mr Dawkins, Mr Drummond and MrMcLean.

Petitions received.

Taxation: Health Insurance Contributions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of New South Wales respectfully showeth.
That due to higher medical and hospital insurances, the Voluntary Health Insurances Contributors are finding that their weekly buying power is greatly reduced. The contributors are actually subsidising the non-contributors. The contributors are greatly disadvantaged by the present taxation system. We therefore call upon the Commonwealth Government to make the Health Insurance Contributions tax-deductible.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled will take immediate steps to bring about the wishes expressed in our petition.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dobie and Mr Keating.
Petitions received.

East Devonport Child Care Centre
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the State of Tasmania respectfully showeth:
I. That the East Devonport Child Care Centre will close early in 1981 unless the application by the Committee orManagement for the East Devonport Child Care Centre through the Department of Social Security (Child Care Division) for recurrent expenditure funding is approved.

330 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Petitions

2. Such a calamitous happening would rob a major urban area (East Devonport) of child care facilities and put that area at a disadvantage with other areas throughout the Commonwealth where the Federal Government has funded Child Care Centres. '

3. The Committee of Management have demonstrated that there is need for a Child Care Centre in East Devonport in that there is seldom a day that the Centre is not used to capacity.

Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Federal

Government will take urgent steps to have its appropriate

Government Department fund the recurrent expenditure

necessary to support the East Devonport Child Care Centre,

thus removing any likelihood of this important community fa-

cility being closed.

,

,

Arid your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by MrBurr.

Petition received.

Aboriginal Community College
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned 'members' of the community of South Australia respectfully showeth:
That the severe budget cuI, this financial year of $80,000 below the amount needed to maintain the current level of operations, will drastically reduce the effectiveness of the Aboriginal Community College, North Adelaide, South Australia.
That despite ministerial assurances that the College's level of operations would be maintained, the budget cuts will cause the first reduction of student numbers since 1976.
That despite policies of self-management for Aboriginal people, the Aboriginal management of the College and of the Pre-Vocational Training Unit is considered to be under threat.
That the College is not at this time being adequately involved in discussions which concern the evaluation report and the future of this College.
That the indicated take over of the Pre-Vocational Training Unit by the Department of Further Education is contrary to the wishes of the Aboriginal people.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you will
Advise your department to all~cate additional funds to
the College for the current financial year to allow maintenance of the level of operations that have applied since 1976.
Assure the College that it will be fully involved in discussions over the evaluation report and its recommendations before any decisions are taken on the future funding and management of the College, and instruct your department's officers accordingly.
Advise the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs that it is desirable to extend funding of the Pre-Vocational Training Unit for a further year to allow full discussions and negotiations to take place on its future administrative and financial arrangements.
Ensure that the future of the Aboriginal Community College is guaranteed by a permanent source of funding and the effective retention of its management and control by members of the Aboriginal community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Chapman.
Petition received.

Telephone Services
To the Honourable the Speaker of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Macquarie respectfully showeth:
That we consider the lack of service provided by Telecom Australia in Sydney's 047 telephone zone is not only inconvenient but is affecting families, business concerns and employment in the area.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government direct Telecom Australia to provide an adequate service to subscribers and users in 'the 047 telephone zone.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free.
Petition received.
Proposed Intractable Waste Disposal Unit in Geelong District
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The honourable petition of the undersigned employees at Government Aircraft Factory, Avalon Airfield respectfully showeth:
Strong opposition to the building of an intractable waste disposal unit in the Geelong district and in particular the Avalon Airfield area, because the proposed buffer zone includes a working community of 500 employees within i kilometre of the hanger work areas. Also the failure of the E.P.A. to consult with the employees representatives and the possible failure to debate the feasibility of such a unit within the parliaments both State and Federal.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that you will intercede on our behalf to prevent any damage to life or limbmental or physical.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Scholes.
Petition received.
PROPOSED INTRACTABLE WASTE DISPOSAL UNIT IN GEELONG DISTRICT
Mr SCHOLES (Corio)-In accordance with Standing Order 130, I move:
That the petition relating to the building of an intractable waste disposal unit in the Lara district which was lodged by the honourable member for Corio today be referred to the Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation.
Question resolved in the negative.
MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister)--:-Mr Speaker, the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) left Australia on Monday for meetings in the United States and Canada, including a meeting later this week with the United States Secretary of State. The Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) will act as Minister for Foreign Affairs until Mr Street's return on 10 March.

Suspension ofStanding Orders

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 331

DISTINGUISHED VISITOR Mr SPEAKER-I inform the House that we have present in the gallery this afternoon Professor Alfredo Juinio, Minister of Public Works in the Government of the Philippines. On behalf of the House, I extend to him a very warm welcome.
Honourable members-Hear, hear!
MINISTER FOR TRANSPORT Notice of Motion
Mr MORRIS (Shortland)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House censures the Minister for Transport for his failure to fulfil his Ministerial duties by failing to provide essential information and support to the independent public inquiry into domestic air fares and further by repeatedly misleading the Parliament and the public in relation to the purposes and conduct of the inquiry.
PERSONAL INCOME TAX Notice of Motion
Mr GROOM (Braddon)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) expresses disappointment that in 1981 public expenditure is estimated to increase in real terms by 3 per cent, and that receipts will be higher, as a percentage of GOP, than in any previous year, and
(2) is of the opinion that the Government should move quickly to substantially reduce the size and costs of the Federal bureaucracy, so as to allow a cut in personal income tax giving ordinary Australians greater incentive, and more discretion over how their earnings are to be spent.
FRANKSTON RAIL LINE Notice of Motion
Mr CHARLES (Isaacs)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House is of the opinion that additional funds should be granted to the State Government of Victoria to enable work on the partly completed third track on the Frankston rail line to be recommenced, and such work to be completed as soon as practical for the benefit of everyone who lives in the southern bayside region.
SUDDEN INFANT DEATH SYNDROME Notice of Motion
Mr GOODLUCK (Franklin)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(\) is of the opinion that the Government should increase funding for research into sudden infant death syndrome;and
(2) draws the Govetnment's attention to the high incidence of sudden infant death syndrome in the town of Bridgewater near Hobart.
SUSPENSION OF STANDING ORDERS Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (2.24)-1 move:

That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the honourable member for Shortland moving forthwith the motion of which he has just given notice.

Mr SPEAKER-Is the. motion seconded?

Mr Dawkins-I second the motion.

Mr MORRIS-The motion of which I have just given notice--

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:

That the honourable member be not further heard.

Mr SPEAKER-Is a division required?

Mr Scholes-Mr Speaker, on a point of order--

Mr SPEAKER-I am putting a question. The honourable member for Corio will resume his seat.

Mr Scholes-You are conducting a wrong procedure.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. Is a division required? The House will divide.

Question put:

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

67

Noes

46

Majority

21

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D.
Baume.M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W.
Bradfield.J. M. Braithwaite, R. A.
Brown,N.A. Bungey. M. H.
Burr,M.A. Cadman. A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, [an Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J.D.M. Drummond, P. H. Falconer. P. D. Fife,W.C. Fisher. P. S. (Teller) Fraser, Malcolm Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, O. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges. J. C. (Teller) Hodgman. W. M. Howard,J. W.

Hunt.R.J.D. Hyde.J.M. Jarman,A. W.
Jull,D.F. KaUer,R.C. Killen.D.J. L1oyd,B.
Lusher, S. A. MacKellar,M.J.R.
MacKenzie. A. J. McLean,R.M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar,P.C. Moor.,J.C. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe. F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Tambiing, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W.
Viner,R.I. Wilson, I. B. C.

332 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Suspension ofStanding Orders

NOES

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C.
Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert
Charles,D.E. Child,G.J. L.
Cohen,B.
Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Dulfy,M.J. Free,R.V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W.G. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Hurford, C. J. Innes,U.E. Jacobi,R.

Jenkin., H. A. Johnson, Los (TeUer)
Jones, Barry Jones,Charles Keating, P. J.
KeUy,R.J. Kent,L.
Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay,Leo McMahon, Les (TeUer) Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes, G. G. D. Scott,J. L. Theophanous, A. C.
Uren,T. West,S.J. WiUis,R. Young,M.J.

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr SPEAKER-I call the honourable member for Fremantle.

Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (2.35)-Mr Speaker, this is a gutless cover-up of incompetence and official conspiracy--

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:

That the honourable member be not further heard.

Mr SPEAKER-The question now is that the
motion for the suspension of the Standing Orders, moved by the honourable member for Shortland,
be agreed to. The motion is in these terms:

That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the honourable member for ShortIand moving forthwith the motion of which he has just given notice.

Question put.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

46

Noes

68

Majority

22

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Charles, D. E. Child, G. J. L. Cohen,B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Dulfy,M.J.
Free,R. V.
Fry,K.L. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden,W.G.

AYES

Jenkins, H. A. Johnson, Los (TeUer) Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. KeUy, R.J. Kent,L. Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay,Leo McMahon, Los (TeUer) Mildren, J. B. Mihon,P.
Morris,P.F.
Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scholes,G.G.D. Scott, J. L.

Holding, A. C. Howe,B.L. Hurford, C. J. Innes,U.E. Jacobi, R.

AYES

Theophanous, A. C.
Uren,T. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young,M.J.

NOES

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baumc,M.E. Birney, R. J. Bourchier, J. W.
Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A.
Brown,N.A. Bungey, M. H.
Burr, M.A. Cadman, A. G.. Cameron, Donald
Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian
Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P.
ConnoUy, D. M. Cowan,D.B.
Dean,A.G. Dobie,J.D.M.
Drummond, P. H. Falconer, P. D.
Fif.,W.C. Fisher, P. S. (TeUer)
Fraser, Malcolm Giles,G.O'H.
Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N. J. HodgeS, J. C. (TeUer) Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W.

Hunt,R.J.D. Hyde,J.M.
Jarman, A. W.
Jull,D.F.
Katter, R. C. Killen,D.J. Lloyd,B.
Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip
MacKeUar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M.
MCMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T.
Macphee, J. M.
Millar,P.C. Moore, J. C. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L.
Peacock, A. S.
Porter,J. R. Robinson, Ian Ruddock, P. M.
Sainsbury, M. E. Shack,P.D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, J. McC. Spender, J. M. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey,C. W. Vi!ler,R.I. Wilson, I. B. C.

Question so resolved in the negative.

QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

STATISTICAL AND MANAGEMENT INFORMATION NETWORK
Mrs DARLING-My question, which is addressed to the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, relates to a passage on page 70 of the annual report of the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs for 1979-80, tabled by the Minister in the House of Representatives on 2 December 1980, which states:
SAMIN-
That is', the Statistical and Management Information Network-
has been implemented in all CES offices in Brisbane using the Public Service Board's Mandata facilities. An evaluation is being undertaken of the system in an operational environment before further implementation.
Can the Minister indicate what progress has been made in the implementation of SAMIN beyond Brisbane?
Mr VINER-No steps have been taken to extend SAMIN beyond Brisbane. The function of

Questions Without Notice

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 333

SAMIN is still being evaluated against the backhas not been obdurate and it is prepared to discuss

ground of experience in Brisbane.

again the propositions that it put to the unions at

QANTAS AIRWAYS LTD

the end of last week. In other words, Qantas will be continuing to fly, albeit with limited services,

Mr BURR-My question is directed to the with the full and total support of the

Minister for Industrial Relations. I refer the MinGovernment.

ister to the Qantas Airways Ltd dispute. Can the Minister advise the House of the current position

INQUIRY INTO DOMESTIC AIR FARES

following this morning's meetings of unions in Mr HAYDEN-I direct my question to the

Sydney? What course of action is available to the Minister for Transport and refer to the report of

Government and what proposals for settlement the Holcroft Independent Public Inquiry into

should be followed in an effort to stop the inconDomestic Air Fares and its searing indictment of

venience to the Australian public?

the Government's interference with and peremp-

Mr PEACOCK-Quite apart from the meeting of unions this morning, there was the meeting of the Qantas Board with Cabinet at which the Board put to the Cabinet a report on the negotiations that had broken down on the fundamental issue involved in the current dispute. The unions, of course, demand the freedom to take strike action or apply bans. On the other hand they insist that management abandons its right to use staff labour to maintain the integrity of the company's operations. Frankly, the Government sees this as an intolerable situation.

tory termination of its activities. How does the Minister explain the Government's sudden announcement on 26 November last year which pre-empted adequate investigation by the Holcroft inquiry of various crucial factors, especially the role of Ansett Airlines Ltd which did not present any real submission until 22 December? Is the Government's haste explicable on two grounds; firstly, that the inquiry was a cosmetic one to be dumped once the election was over and, secondly, as is apparently the case with broadcasting and television legislation and the two-airlines agreement, the inquiry became less

The unions met this morning and, as most important as the opposition to it of Ansett Indus-

honourable members will probably know, decided tries Ltd became greater?

by a narrow majority to remain on strike. Qantas, however, is determined to do all it can to keep the airline flying. The Government agrees with Qantas in this regard. Cabinet will meet this afternoon to discuss the matter in the knowledge of this morning's vote. In regard to the settlements mentioned by the honourable member, it is relevant to say that within the last 24 hours or so the honourable member for Wills has put forward a

Mr HUNT-The Opposition has an obsession about Ansett Transport Industries Ltd, the principals of that transport organisation and also, obviously, the principals of News Ltd. The reasons for that obsession are probably better known to the Opposition than they are to honourable members on this side of the House. The Government--.

three-point plan, allegedly to cure the dispute.

Mr Hurford-I am glad that you have got to

Mr Kerin-A good one, too.

the question eventually.

Mr PEACOCK-It is a good plan in the sense that none of the ideas reportedly put forward are new. They have all be.en put forward by either the

Mr HUNT-As a matter of fact I was alluding to the last part of the honourable member's question.

management of Qantas or the Australian Council Mr SPEAKER-The Minister will proceed

of Trade Unions during the discussions held bewith his answer. The honourable member for

tween the two parties. Furthermore, although the Adelaide will remain silent.

honourable member appears to be advocating some limited recognition of the employer's right to use staff labour, it would appear that a keyelement in his suggestion is that Qantas must accept bans applied by a union or unions regardless of the nature of such bans, their duration or, indeed, their impact on the operations of the company. That, of course, would be totally unacceptable to both Qantas and the Government. Qantas will be making that clear publicly today through its Chairman; It must not be overlooked that Qantas

Mr HUNT-The Government set up the Holcroft inquiry with good and faithful intentions. The establishment of the Holcroft inquiry was the result of persistent representations by Western Australian organisations and honourable members from this side of the House who represent seats in Western Australia. The Government expected the inquiry to report by January 1981. If there is any doubt about that I would like leave to incorporate--

has put forward propositions to end the dispute. It . Mr Morris-That is a lie.

334 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister will resume his seat.- The honourable member for Shortland will withdraw.
Mr Morris-Mr Speaker, it is a falsehood but I withdraw.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member will withdraw unqualifiedly.
Mr Morris-I withdraw.
Mr SPEAKER-I call the Minister.
Mr HUNT-I received a letter dated 14 November from Mr Warwick J. Holcroft. I will read the first sentence of that letter and then, with the leave of the House, I will table it or have it incorporated in Hansard.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will proceed to answer the question as he proposes.
Mr HUNT-The first sentence reads:
My dear Minister,
In a recent discussion I referred to the fact that the inquiry is unlikely to complete its task by the original date indicated---' January 1981.
I seek leave to have that letter incorporated in Hansard.
Mr Morris-Mr Speaker, I raise a serious point of order which goes to the--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Shortland will resume his seat. I will deal with the matter immediately before the Chair, and that is the question of whether leave is granted to incorporate the letter in Hansard.
Mr Hayden-It is not granted unless the Minister incorporates all of the relevant evidence which explodes the fabrication he is trying to protect himself with.
Mr SPEAKER-Leave is not granted. 'Does the honourable member for Shortland wish to raise a point of order?
Mr Morris-Yes, Mr Speaker; I would like the Minister to refer to his letter to the Estimates Committee in which he completely contradicts the claim he is making now which is opposed to accuracy and truth.
Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order. The honourable gentleman is debating the matter. The honourable gentleman will resume his seat.
Mr Morris-The man isn't telling the truth.
Mr HUNT-Mr Speaker--
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister will resume his seat. The honourable member for Shortland will withdraw. I warn him that if he makes an interjection of the same character again I will name him. The honourable member will withdraw.

Mr Morris-You mean the last statement. I made when I was standing?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member will withdraw.
Mr Morris-I withdraw.
Mr SPEAKER-I call the Minister.
Mr HUNT-If I am not given leave to incorporate the letter in Hansard I would seek to table it.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman does not need leave to table the letter; he may table it forthwith.
Mr HUNT-The date by which the Inquiry was to report originally was understood by the members of the Holcroft committee. It is true that the members of the committee sought an extension of time for the Inquiry because of the large number of submissions it had received and because the Department of Transport had not made its submission to the Inquiry. The committee had resolved to accept submissions on the two-airlines policy. The Government gave consideration to Mr Holcroft's formal request on 14 November and resolved to ask the committee to report by 31 January 1981. I might say that at no time did the Government seek the committee's review of the two-airlines policy. Indeed, in 1978 the Government resolved to support the continuance of a two-airlines policy following the domestic air transport policy review. However, the Minister was given the authority as a result of that review to negotiate a new agreement. There has never been any doubt about the Government's adherence to the two-airlines policy as the best ,~eans of ensuring an efficient, safe, regular and scheduled service over the entire trunk route using the most modern, efficient equipment.
On 20 December 1979 I issued a Press statement announcing moves to negotiate a twoairlines agreement. Six times in this Parliament I made it clear that the Government was negotiating a new two-airlines agreement. Therefore, I am at a loss to understand why Mr Holcroft wrote the following phrase in his transmission letter dated 15 February 1981:
. . , Members of the Inquiry felt in some degree misplaced when learning on 9 September that they had been proceeding with an Inquiry . . . in ignorance of the fact that the Government was meanwhile negotiating a new ten year Two-Airlines Agreement.
For two reasons, I am at a loss to know why the committee was ignorant. Firstly, it was public knowledge that the Government supported a twoairlines policy and was negotiating a new agreement, albeit a lO-year agreement. The present agreement will run for the life of this Government

Questions Without Notice

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 335

and for at least the next five years-a maximum of eight years. Secondly, the Government clearly asked the committee to inquire into air fares on the routes operated by the major airlines and the way in which they are set. The committee was to have regard to the Government's domestic aviation policy.
Indeed, on two occasions I confirmed with Mr Holcroft and his committee that this was the purpose of the Government's decision. The first time was in my office on Tuesday, 3 June 1980, in the presence of officers, and the second wason Thursday, 13 November 1980, in the presence of officers. It was an air fares inquiry which co~plemented the domestic air transport policy reVIew and it was commissioned to report in January 1981. It sought an extension of time until the September quarter of 1981, but the Government did not grant an extension of time. The tone of the letter undoubtedly reflects the bitter disappointment of the committee.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, I ask a supplementary question.
Mr SPEAKER-,-I call the honourable member for Fisher.
Mr Hayden-Supplementary questions are provided for in the Standing Orders, Mr Speaker.
DISABLED PEOPLE: COMMUNICATION DIFFICULTIES
Mr ADERMANN-My question is directed to the Minister for Communications. We note that the Government has endorsed the objectives of the United Nations program 'The International Year of Disabled Persons', commencing on 1 January 1981. We note also that there is a special problem of communication for many disabled people. I therefore ask: Have steps been taken by the various communications agencies to assist disabled people? Are special arrangements being made, particularly with television, to assist those whose hearing is impaired?
Mr SINCLAIR-It is certainly true that in the International Year of Disabled Persons greater attention needs to be given to the extent to which facilities are available through television for people with a hearing impairment. Certainly the multicultural television service Channel 0-28 has been providing a subtitles service which I know ~as p.roved of great help to people with a hearing ImpaIrment. In the presentation of the news it has also assisted by presenting in sign language an eq~iv.alent news service for the hearing-impaired. ThIS IS a very worthwhile contribution to the International Year of Disabled Persons. Other stations are looking at ways in which facilities can

be introduced, and I have received a number of representations. Efforts are being made at the mom~n~ through the Australian Broadcasting CommiSSIon and each of the commercial stations to ascertain whether some subtitling could' be introduced on a joint basis and, if not, perhaps on an individual basis by each of the stations. I can assure the honourable member and everyone interested in this field of disability that there is a real consciousness by the Government in this Year of Disabled Persons that a special effort should be made to provide improved services in that field. I hope that from discussions now under way meaningful progress can be made.
INQUIRY INTO DOMESTIC AIR FARES Mr HAYDEN-I direct to the Minister for
Transport a question which is supplementary to the previous question I asked. Does he recall in a letter, to him dated 1 December 1980 from the Holcroft Independent Public Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares, signed by the three members of that Inquiry, this statement:
When we met you again in Canberra as recently as 13 November, it was clearly the undertanding of us ali--
I presume that includes the Minister-
that mid 1981 was, if anything, an optimistic estimate having regard to the delays and frustrations which the Committee had encountered. The nature of these was fully explained to you.
The timetable stated there, of course, was the most optimistic date for the termination of the Inquiry, if it were to be done properly. Is it a fact that the report of the Holcroft committee makes it clear that among the frustrations and delays experienced were those caused by Government departments, including the Minister's Department, whose submission to the Inquiry was not received until 10 December, two weeks after the Government had moved to wind up the Inquiry, and also the fact that the Bureau of Transport Economics, also under the Minister's control, failed to present any written submission to the Inquiry. In these circumstances, why did the Minister refuse to accept the sound advice ofhis Committee of Inquiry on the most optimistic date for the completion of an adequate inquiry into these matters? Was he ever serious about the matter or, I repeat, was the termination due to outside self-interested pressure?
Mr HUNT-In reply tO,the first two parts of that question, the management of the Bureau of Transport Economics advised the permanent head of my Department that it did not wish to make a submission.
Mr Hayden-That's crazy. What are they set up for, for God's sake?

336 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will remain silent.
Mr Hayden-It is the most expert body in the country and you refused to allow it to give evidence.
, Mr SPEAKER-The Leader of the Opposition asked his question in silence. I ask him to extend the same courtesy to the Minister.
Mr HUNT-With regard to the other segment of the question, it is true that the Committee outlined to me the difficulties it foresaw in concluding the inquiry by 31 January. It was the decision of the Cabinet and the Government to bring that inquiry to a conclusion by 31 January so that the Parliament would benefit from the report in the course of debating aviation policy in this House during this session.
BAUXITE DEVELOPMENT IN WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Mr DRUMMOND-Can the Minister for Trade and Resources confirm Press reports that the Western Australian Conservation Council has initiated litigation in the United States against the Alcoa company and the Reynolds metals company aimed at preventing bauxite mining development in Western Australia?
Mr ANTHONY-I can confirm that court proceedings have commenced in Pittsburgh against the Aluminium Company of America (Alcoa) and the Reynolds Metals company in relation to their bauxite alumina operations in Western Australia. Those developments are proceeding as a result of approvals given by the Western Australian Government and the Commonwealth Government after a very extensive assessment of the environmental factors. The Western Australian Government has laid down environmental safeguards.
The attempted legal action in a foreign court is of great concern to the Australian Government. The development of Australia is a matter for the governments of Australia. We see any such interference as an attack on the sovereign rights of this' country. We will not accept any foreign courts making judgment as to what we should do in this country. This matter is giving us concern. We are investigating to see what action can be taken.
ASIA DAIRY INDUSTRIES LTD Mr KERIN-I ask the Minister for Primary Industry whether he still sticks to the statement he made on the Australian Broadcasting Commission program Countrywide on 22 August 1980 in relation to Asia Dairy Industries Ltd and the Australian Dairy Corporation:

As I said yesterday there is one matter still outstanding and that's being now taken care of.
Mr NIXON-In respect of the various inquiries into the activities of Asia Dairy Industries, I can only add to what I have said previously. A Senate inquiry is dealing with some aspects of the whole of the operations and I make no comment on that until the Senate report. The part of the operations that I have been concerned about was the part that referred to some expenditure by the previous chairman. This was referred to the Federal Police. The Police reported to me. On further legal advice, further questions were asked of the Police. The Police have not yet reported back to me the second time. I repeat what I said in the House last year in respect of the matter. When the final report from the Police is available to me, winding up that aspect of the matter, I will make a full report to the Parliament.
Mr Hurford-When are you expecting that? Mr NIXON-I am not the Commissioner of the Federal Police. Therefore, I cannot determine when that will be.
COMMUNITY ACCESS 80 Mr GOODLUCK-Is the Minister for Communications aware of the disquiet that has occurred in the little fishing town of Dover in Tasmania as a result of the exclusion by the Australian Telecommunications Commission of telephone subscribers from Community Access 80? Will the Minister once again intervene and endeavour to reverse a stupid decision that was obviously made outside-Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. So far his question is in order. I will allow the Minister to answer it. Mr SINCLAIR-I am sure that the very worthy constituents of the honourable member are concerned. I am told that not only people in Dover but also those in Southport are concerned about what they see as a desirable extension of Community Access 80. I can assure the honourable member that neither the citizens of the fishing port nor those of Southport, as I understand the circumstances, have in any Way been denied the benefit of the scheme, for they have already been given access to the town of Geeveston, access which they have enjoyed for many years. The concept of CA80 provided them with community call access to Huonville, so they have been provided, in accordance with the scheme, with access to a community in which all the normal facilities are available. That is the objective of the whole CA80 concept. It is desired to provide to communities the widened access that people

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 337

who live within a city normally can gain by making an ordinary local telephone call. I understand the honourable gentleman's concern and believe it to be important that everyone has access to a local community, as is contemplated by these proposals.
AUSTRALIAN WATER RESOURCES COUNCIL
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)-For the information of honourable members, I present the minutes of the meeting of the Australian Water Resources Council, June 1980.
Mr Jacobi-Mr Speaker, may I move that the paper be noted?
Mr SPEAKER-Moving such a motion would call for it to be seconded. It is a mat~er that the honourable member should take up with the Leader of the House.
Mr Sinclair-Mr Speaker, I regret that I did not know that the honourable member wished to have the paper noted. I move:
That the House take note of the paper.
Debate (on motion by Mr Jacobi) adjourned.

AUSTRALIAN AGRICULTURAL COUNCIL
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-For the information of honourable members, I present the resolutions of the 109th meeting of the Australian Agricultural Council, August 1980.

NATIONAL ABORIGINAL SPORTS FOUNDATION
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs)-For the information of honourable members, I present the annual report of the National Aboriginal Sports Foundation for 1979-80.

AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY PAROLE BOARD
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister .for Employment and Youth Affairs)-For the information of honourable members, I present the third report of the Parole Board of the Australian Capital Territory, 1979-80.

JOINT COMMITTEE OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS

Report

.

Mr CONNOLLY (Bradfielcl)-I present the 184th report of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts.

Ordered that the report be printed.
Mr CONNOLLY-by leave-The report is the product of the long-standing interest that the Committee has had in public administration, in particular the quality of auditing and its influence on management decision-making. In July 1964, following comment in the Auditor-General's report for 1962-63 and subsequently in the Committee's 66th report, all departments were instructed by the Department of the Treasury to examine. critically tasks being undertaken by internal audit staff and to ensure that sufficient staff were maintained for the proper performance of that function. Further continuing references by the Auditors-General to deficiencies led the Committee in 1971 to conduct a general inquiry into internal audit. The results of that inquiry were reported to Parliament in September 1972.
In July 1973, the Public Seryice Board drew the attention of all departments to the Committee's comments and a year later followed up with a survey seeking information on the measures taken to ensure the effective performance of the internal audit function. Nevertheless, criticism by Auditors-General has continued consistently since. A joint management review of internal audit procedures was commissioned by the Public Service Board in 1977. This involved a study of internal audit practices in seven large departments and eight major companies and public authorities in Australia. It also included an evaluation of practices adopted overseas. The results were conveyed to the Board in late 1977 and,after circulation of the report to all permanent heads and discussions with the Auditor-General, a series of recommendations was put forward in April 1979. Aspects of this report are discussed in chapter 6 of the Committee's attached draft paper.
It is a fundamental requirement that in order to obtain the maximum in efficiency, effectiveness and economic operations an enterprise must have an effective internal audit control mechanism. Internal audit is just one of those internal controls, but yet is an important management tool in assessing capacity to reach higher goals. Apart from the importance of internal auditing, especially in respect of the effectiveness of automatic data processing, there is a need for the effective review and appraisal of all operations and verification procedures. Internal auditing must also be concerned with ongoing reviews of overall organisational performance in a manner acceptable to senior management, although not necessarily in-line management. It must include assessments, verification and the sponsoring of suggestions for improvements. Its success will rely

338 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

upon access to senior management, a broad charter for the review of operations, and the technological capability to review and analyse performance. Ultimately it should provide a comprehensive feedback facility to support management's financial and decision making systems. Management may then decide whether or not the objectives of Government policies are being achieved in the manner intended. This discussion paper looks at some of the problems of internal audit, ranging from its historical background to the work being undertaken at present to increase its effectiveness. The Committee hopes that this paper will stimulate further consideration of the broader dimensions of internal audit and its suggestions for the development of a balanced approach towards achieving solutions.
It is patently obvious to the Committee that previous attempts to improve internal audit in the Australian Public Service have been generally unsuccessful. It is just as clear that those failures resulted from insufficient interest on the part of permanent and statutory heads and a lack of support for internal audit by senior management, a situation exacerbated by the low standard of internal audit. The findings of the 1977 review focused attention on the dismal state of internal audit in the Public Service and stimulated renewed efforts to bring about improvements. The Public Service Board has initiated action designed to upgrade internal audit. Its success will depend entirely on the support given by individual departments and authorities and the steps taken to ensure that the improvements necessary in their own organisations are vigorously pursued. It is essential that the heads of departments and authorities cultivate a genuine interest in internal audit and learn to use it effectively. The tendency for many permanent heads to concentrate on policy matters and ignore administrative and financial affairs cannot be condoned.
The Public Accounts Committee is committed to ensuring the necessary improvements in internal audit are brought about. The Committee will use every opportunity to check progress within departments and test the commitment of permanent and statutory heads and management overall towards effective internal audit. It also plans to inititate a review of internal audit to evaluate progress with the improvement program, within selected departments and authorities during the current Parliament. The committee is keenly interested in ongoing developments in all spheres of audit and welcomes any suggestions, information or comments in response to this report. I commend the report to honourable members

and trust it will be a useful document, provoking the discussion intended.
Mr DUFFY (Holt)-by leave-The report of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts on Internal Audit in the Australian Public Service is of great significance to this Parliament and to the electorate. The concept of parliamentary democracy depends on disclosure and accountability, and unfortunately both of these factors in recent times have been honoured more in the breach than in observance. This situation must be corrected. The reality is that the complexity of modern government makes the task extremely difficult. The multiplicity of departments and statutory authorities all pursuing their own policies leave both the Public Service and Ministers far too free from real scrutiny by the Parliament. A stark illustration of this fact is that in 1901 Parliament sat for 113 days to examine a budget of 4m. By 1980, Government outlays had reached $39 billion but Parliament sat for only 53 days.
A further illustration of the problem is to be seen in the Mandata report, whic4 was a previous report of the Public Accounts Committee. It indicated that in a seven-year period there was a 240 per cent staff turnover in the area related to Mandata. It illustrated the position of the left hand not knowing what the right hand was doing. We can no longer accept the proposition of 'Don't ask me, I only work here'. It is essential that the facts are known to this Parliament and to the Australian people. In relation to the report before the Parliament today, I refer honourable members to paragraph 4.4, where the Institute of Internal Auditors has defined at page 11 the responsibilities on internal auditing as follows:
. . .' an independent appraisal activity within an organisation for the review of accounting, financial and other operations as a basis for service to management. It is a managerial control which functions by measuring and evaluating the effectiveness of other controls.
That statement indicates that it is essential that internal auditing measures and evaluates the effectiveness of existing controls. If we .are to maintain more than a facade of parliamentary democracy this report must be implemented. It is a report of substance and quality and deserves the support of us all. Of course, it is essential that permanent and statutory heads act in a responsive way. This will require a change of attitude to that shown in the past to such reports.
In closing, as a new member of this Committee I commend to Parliament the statement made by the Chairman of the Committee, the honourable member for Bradfield (Mr Connolly) and also I express my appreciation to the permanent secretariat of the Committee for the assistance it has

Joint Committee ofPublic Accounts

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 339

given particularly to the new members. Many of the reports we have dealt with have been from previous Public Accounts committees. Without the assistance of the permanent secretariat it would have been extremely difficult to pick up the threads of a somewhat complex report, as is the case in this matter, and also as is the case with other reports with which the Committee has dealt. It would be remiss of me if! did not indicate that the new members of the Committee are very grateful for the assistance that they have been given.
Mr TAMBLING (Northern Territory)-by leave-The major thrust of the recommendations of the discussion paper of the Public Accounts Committee inquiry into Internal Audit in the Australian Public Service is that of accountability. The question which persists is, 'How can we make accountable bodies more accountable?' The report claims that previous attempts to improve internal audit have been unsuccessful, for two reasons-firstly, the lack of interest on the part of permanent heads and statutory authorities and, secondly, a low standard of internal audit. Given the greater use of technology in government departments our audit systems must change and, inevitably, become more complex. It is no longer a matter of selecting a qualified accountant to sift through piles of paper in order to determine the correctness or otherwise of government expenditure and management. With the use of computers, the operations of government departments have become more sophisticated. Regulation is therefore rendered more sophisticated. Skilled officers are obviously needed if an effective automatic data processing audit is to be carried out. The auditor must be able to devise techniques for testing the operation of systems used, and that requires skills such as being able to write computer programs. In the Public Service at present there is a great shortage of auditors with such skills. In the short term, this can be relieved by using supervised computer systems officers or by employing external consultants. The report recommends:
The Public Service Board should continue to give high priority to the development of general standards for ADP auditing in the Australian Public Service.
The problem of finding qualified personnel to be able to properly audit 'data processing' or 'computer systems' is symptomatic of the general standard of auditing. The report states-and this is reiterated by the Coopers-Lybrand report associated with this discussion paper-that in order to attract the right sort of employee, the position should be upgraded considerably so that a senior position is at least that of Level 1 of the

Second Division in the Public Service. This would have a further important effect in that it would give the audit section of the Department credibility and respect and eliminate charges of tokenism and mediocrity.
As mentioned before, one of the reasons for the previous failure of internal audit is that the departmental heads were often not favourably disposed towards integrating the concept into their departments. So that the officer may gain a better understanding of what he is auditing, it is recommended that he rotate within the different areas of the department. The report recommends the establishment of audit committees within government departments and authorities. These would act as they do in private industry.
I started by lauding the word 'accountability'. If auditing is going to be more complex, if government aUditing is going to be done effectively or, more importantly, if government auditing is going to be seen to be effective, to whom must authorities and departments be accountable? Should they be accountable only to the Auditor-General, to the Parliamentary Joint Committee of Public Accounts, to the respective Ministers or to heads of departments? Ultimately they should be accountable to the Australian people. Therein lies a strong argument for the use of expertise from the community on audit committees. These committees should not be entirely incestuous, comprising only public servants and members of parliament. The audit committees should use the expertise of people in private enterprise. Their critical, independent and creative views would be invaluable to the internal auditor. Of course, such a stance would be interpreted in some areas as an attack on the ever-so-cherished financial sovereignty and autonomy of government. The Coopers-Lybrand assessment mentioned in the report goes further than. this, recommending that auditors be contracted from outside the Public Service. It also recommends interdepartmental transfers. Certain departments obviously will be too small to sustain full audit units. The report therefore recommends that these areas be catered for by an internal audit consultancy bureau, auditors in another department or a private consultant. There is an implied and real threat of duplication between the roles of the internal and external auditors. The work of the external auditor should complement that of the internal auditor. According to the report, the external auditor is relying far more on the work prepared by the internal auditor. The external auditor must appraise, criticise and evaluate the works and methods used by the internal auditor.

340 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Joint Committee 0/Public Accounts

For an effective internal audit system to be introduced, first, the experience of the private sector must be taken into consideration; and, secondly, the role of the auditor must be clearly defined. This report is of importance not only to the Commonwealth; it has relevance also to the States and Territories and to private industry. I believe that it should be looked at very carefully from the point of view of the Public Service, the statutory authorities, the many organisationsincluding Aboriginal organisations-that come under the ambit of government, including local government.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke)-by leave -As a member of the Parliamentary Joint Committee of Public Accounts I welcome this report. I believe that its recommendations are important because if they are implemented they will lead to a more efficient and more responsible Public Service. The Committee and its officers have identified the major steps which every government department should take if long overdue internal audit procedures are to be adequate. The approach of the Committee towards the problem of the lack of internal auditing has been positive and constructive. The report recommends the establishment of auditing sections in government departments, the recruitment of qualified personnel from within and outside the Public Service and the general upgrading of audit facilities. This is an example of how an increase in Public Service personnel in a particular area, in fact, can create considerable savings of the taxpayers' money and make for more efficient services. If the Government is serious about achieving such savings within the public sector, and ensuring the maximum value for money, it should adopt these recommendations, even if they involve employing a few more public servants.
It is instructive to contrast the approach towards the Public Service taken by the Committee in this report with that of the Government Ministers and some vociferous back benchers. The establishment of the ministerial inquiry, the 'so-called Lynch razor gang, has provided the opportunity for certain members to engage in disreputable forms of Public Service bashing.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman must keep his remarks relevant to the report.
Dr THEOPHANOUS-Mr Speaker, I am trying to contrast the Committee's report and certain actions of the Government. Such attacks on public servants are totally counter-productive when one is seeking to provide efficient services and

save taxpayers' money. I suggest that if the razor gang is genuinely concerned-- '
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will cease his remarks concerning a so called razor gang and he will deal with the report of the Public Accounts Committee.
Dr THEOPHANOUS-Mr Speaker, this report is relevant to the razor gang and to its activities. The razor garig is concerned with government--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. I have indicated to the honourable gentleman that I will not permit him to continue his remarks concerning something which is quite separate and apart from the report of the Public Accounts Committee: I call the honourable member for Burke.
Dr THEOPHANOUS-Mr Speaker, you hav,e cut out sections of what I wanted to say but I will continue to say something positive about the attitude of the Australian Labor Party to this report. We believe in a public sector of sufficient size.to provide for basic human needs, no more and no less. The simple issue is not the size of the public sector but the efficient administration of it. The Labor Party welcomes this report on internal audit because we are committed to a public service which is properly manned but which, nevertheless, provides increased services and the maximum value for the taxpayer's dollar.
Mr Bradfield-Mr Speaker, I seek leave also to make a short statement on this matter.
Mr Lionel Bowen-No, leave is not granted. There is no arrangement in respect of this matter. There have been two speakers from each side.
Mr SPEAKER-Leave is not granted.
HOUSING FINANCE Discussion of Matter of Public Importance Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letterfrom the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The failure of the Government's policies to ensure an adequate supply of finance at reasonable interest rates for housing in the public and private sector.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number o/members required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr UREN (Reid) (3.34)-1 have said it many times and will say it again and again: This Government has closed its eyes-it wants it that way-to the fact that, after unemployment, the most

Housing Finance

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 341

serious social problem in this country is the shortage of housing, both in the public sector and in the private sector. The housing problem has been serious for several years and it is becoming increasingly more so. Let us consider the extent of the housing shortage. First, there is already a large backlog of neglected housing needs. It is estimated that there are about 140,000 people who are homeless, or 1 per cent of the population living in urban and rural areas, including the aged and the young. There are about 200,000 people living in caravan parks and a further unknown number living in substandard, temporary accommodation. Over 80,000 families needing housing are on lists of the housing commissions throughout Australia. In the State of New South Wales alone, there are 40,000 families on the Housing Commission list.
I want to stress that the Federal Government cannot pass the buck on to the State Government. Ever since 1947 public sector housing, or welfare housing as it was then known, was a direct responsibility of the Australian Government. There was a transferring of funds from the national Government to the States to build public sector housing in our community. The Government has cut those funds drastically. More and more, it is moving away from its responsibility, and it will have to face up to this issue. A significant proportion of the existing housing stock is in need of repairs and improvements, and I refer not only to public housing but also to private housing. We do not know the extent of substandard accommodation in Australia because this Government has failed to conduct a necessary survey into the adequacy of dwellings.
Secondly, there is increasing demographic pressure on the supply of housing, in regard to both quantity and nature. In the past 10 years Australia's population has increased by 2.3 million, or almost 20 per cent, to the 1980 estimate of 14.6 million. The Australian Bureau of Statistics has projected that Australia's population will reach 16.8 million by the end of this decade and over 20 million by the turn of the century. In June 1979 more than 5 million Australians, or 35 per cent of the popUlation, were less than 20 years of age. These people progressively will reach the age where they will form their own households and require separate accommodation and associated infrastructure. It is projected that the population aged 65 and over will increase from 1.4 million in 1980 to 1.7 million in 1991 and to 2.2 million in the first decade after the turn of the century. We need to begin now to make greater provision for housing for the aged. We need to plan now; we need to construct houses now, not at a later date.

Thirdly, Australia has experienced a rapid dislocation of people from their traditional places of living in the context of industrial restructuring. The smaller rural areas are continuing to lose population and many regional centres also are experiencing a net loss and a population outflow. There are a few regional centres such as the Latrobe valley and Portland in Victoria, the Hunter Valley and Lithgow in New South Wales, and Gladstone in Queensland which are rapidly experiencing a population increase as people move to look for work. At the same time, the capital cities are experiencing a population growth. It is projected, for example, that the popUlation of the Sydney metropolitan area, which is currently 3.2 million, will be upwards of 4 million by the turn of the century.
Mr Sainsbury-Shame!
Mr UREN-The honourable member for Eden-Monaro interjects and says -Shame'. The facts are that the growth centres of Albury Wodonga and Bathurst-Orange, which were created by the Labor Government, were scuttled and destroyed by his Government. Between 1972 and 1975 the Federal Labor Government created selective decentralisation to slow the growth of the major capital cities. When this Government came into office its policy was to allow free market forces to operate, and it deliberately destroyed the planning concept of the growth centres in the country. As a result, the population of Sydney will grow to 4 million by the turn of the century.
The problems of neglected housing needs, the changing patterns of population growth, and regional dislocation require forward planning by governments and they require additional housing funds. Last week we saw a further withdrawal by the Federal Government from its housing responsibilities when it cut the advances to the States for public housing by another $85m. That cut comes on top of the fall in net real payments to the States for housing from $515m in 1974-75 to $76m in 1980-81. Because the latest arrangements require that the States repay a higher proportion of the advances and, in particular, interest rates, it is likely that next year some States will be returning to the Federal Government more funds for public sector housing than they actually received. As a result, the waiting lists for public housing will grow longer and there will be less scope for undertaking the kind of planning that is essential if we are to avoid a polarising crisis in the housing sector in the next decade. The problem is made worse

342 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Housing Finance

by the larger commitments of various governments to provide physical infrastructure for resource development projects such as the construction of power stations, dams, railway lines and reinforced roads.
While these huge outlays are being made on physical infrastructure there is barely any spending on the expansion of social infrastructure, especially public housing. In Gladstone, for example, where the population has increased significantly, about one person in four is living in a caravan and some are living in tents and cars. Yet there has been virtually no expansion in public sector housing. One can count the number of new public dwellings in the last three years on the fingers of one hand, and I challenge the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) on that point.
Let us consider some of the problems of the private housing sector. In Sydney, housing prices are beyond the reach of the great majority of people. The current median price of established housing is $83,000, with the bottom end of the market range for a new house and land package in the outer western suburbs being about $45,000. House prices are expected to rise at about twice the rate of wage increases in the present year in most of the capital cities throughout Australia. Most people are unable to save at a sufficient rate to keep pace with housing price increases so that the availability and price of loan finance is a crucial factor in their ability to buy a home. We had a situation before the last election in which the competition for funds on the domestic capital market was crowding out the smaller seekers of finance. The big corporations-many of them foreign-as the Foreign Investment Review Board has pointed out have been taking a larger and larger slice of the capital market to finance their new investments, predominantly loan capital rather than equity capital.
Semi-government authorities also were trying to gain funds from the domestic capital market for their larger infrastructure investments. When they could not secure these funds they borrowed overseas to the extent that this Government's monetary policy was jeopardised. Before the el~c tion, semi-government authorities offered interest rates to investors of about 12.3 per cent. At the time when the rate was set by the Treasurer. (Mr Howard) at a record high level, he said that he had been asked to do it by the Premiers of tbe States so that they could build electricity power stations in order to meet their commitments to the aluminium smelters. Before the election, Australian savings bonds were provided at 10.2 per cent, the building societies offered al1 interest

rate of 10 per cent, and the banks offered 9 per cent. After the election, bank borrowing rates were lifted to 10 per cent and building society rateS were lifted to 11 per cent. The Australian savings bond rate was lifted to a record level of 11.5 per cent, and I understand that not too much money has been raised at that rate. The interest rates offered by semi-government authorities went up from a record level of 12.3 per cent to borrowing at short term at 13.4 per cent and long term at 13.9 per cent. I make the point that over time it is clear which way the funds will flow, in spite of interest rate rises of .the banks and building societies which increase the deposit gap for home buyers and increase the repayment burden for those already paying off their homes. Bigger corporations, many of which have access to the unregulated Euro-currency market, are able to avoid the impact of interest rate increases and borrow at a lower rate on the European and foreign markets.
If a person can borrow money from the bank at 11.5 per cent, on a $30,000 loan repayable over 25 years the payment will be $305 a month. Average weekly earnings are about $250, and about 70 per cent of all single income earners in this country earn less than the average weekly earnings. About 85 per cent of our single income earners earn less than $300 a week. That means that the great majority of single income earners are preventedfrom getting a loan of $30,000. The bottom end of the market range for a new house in Sydney is $45,000. If people have access to a loan of $30,000, they will need a deposit of $15,000. In every State capital, the situation is the same. The position is chaotic. On the one hand the supply of public sector money is being squeezed and, on the other, because of the resource development policy of this Government, the whole basis of the housing industry is under threat. The Government believes that the housing industry is expendable. This is the policy of the Government parties.
I pose the question: Will people put their money into banks and building societies for a ret).lrn of a~out 10 per cent to 11 per cent or will they put their money into' senii-government authorities at 13.4 per cent to 13.9 per cent to support the development of electficityp6wer stations which will service aluminium smelters? Commonsense dictates. that money will flow from the housing industry to support of the corporate sector. This will result from the policy of this Government. The Government cannot blame the States for that as it is responsible for the direction that the, policy takes across the nations. Wage and salaryearners are the ones that will be tightly squeezed when the Government and the Reserve

Housing Finance

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 343

Bank of Australia impose restrictions on borrowings or change domestic interest rates. Within the domestic market, the privileged higher income borrowers have preferential access to available funds and those on higher incomes are more able to afford a second mortgage, say, from Citibank N.A. at around 17 per cent to 18 per cent. The wealthy can afford to pay but the battlers, the great majority of the Australian people, cannot afford that interest rate.
It is clear that the Government has not developed the strategy for managing money supply or interest rates other than to clamp down on the public sector social expenditure. This is the very kind of strategy which will worsen the problems of housing. Large corporate capital movements in and out of the country are continually acting to destabilise monetary policy and interest rate policy and it is the smaller borrowers, especialy the wage and salary earners, who are to carry the real burden. The whole policy of this Government is to throw the great burden onto the Australian people. The problem is one of lack of coordination of industrial development in scale, pace, location and control and the lack of integration of industrial policy with urban and regional policies, particularly housing policy.
I challenge the Government to tell us how it will house the increased population of the peoples of Gladstone, the Hunter Valley, Lithgow, the Latrobe Valley and Portland? How will it deal with the problems associated with driving people out to the fringes of the cities? How will it deal with the social infrastructure and the way in which people will have to live? My colleague, the honourable member for Holt (Mr Duffy), will speak later in the debate about the social problem that has been created by the Government in the eastern corridor of Melbourne. We could talk about the problems that exist in every capital city-for instance, the problems to be found in the western and south-western regions of Sydney. U nless the Government starts to deal with the interrelated issues of proper phinning, the people themselves are the ones who will suffer. That is why this Government stands condemned on its housing, urban and regional policies.
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (3.49)-The Government, of course, welcomes very early in the session the opportunity to debate one of the great requirements people in a modern society, namely, shelter. We are delighted to have the opportunity to correct the record and to indicate to the Opposition and to the people of Australia that the policy statements initiated by the honourable

member for Reid (Mr Uren) are based on a distortion of the fact. He misrepresented the actual position.
The honourable member for Reid in his speech continued with his policy of recent years of bluffing and of manoeuvring his way through the facts. He took right hand turns; he took U turns; he made somersaults and, predictably, at the end of his speech he turned to the left. He made the cardinal mistake of not basing his speech on the facts. His speech contained the fatal flaw of being based on political envy. Heis envious of what this Government has achieved. He did not understand and he is incapable of appreciating the moves that we have made in this vitally important matter. I had hoped that the disease of financial diarrhoea which swept this country with the Labor Government from 1972 to 1975 would have ended. I would have hoped that at least sanity would have been restored to the debate. But this was too much to hope for. We are disappointed and upset at the failure of the Opposition to appreciate our stand. I wish to consider the whole picture. I wish to look at all the issues and not just isolate the issue of finance. We had hoped that we could look at all aspects of the environment.
Let us look at the statistics of home ownership. The most recent statistics available-that is at November 1978-indicate that 73 per cent of Australian people are in the process of purchasing their own homes or have paid for their own homes. I am delighted to refer to a statement made by the Honourable Claude Wharton, the Queensland Minister for Works and Housing. The Courier-Mail of 27 February 1981 reported the Minister as saying:
Housing approvals for Queensland so far this financial year were more than 26 per cent higher than for the same period last year.
They were the words of the Queensland Minister for Works and Housing. Does not the honourable member for Reid know that 118,000 new homes were completed in this country last year? Is he unaware of the fact that the Australian Bureau of Statistics in its report released on 23 February indicated that 240,345 loans for home ownership were made last year by banks, savings banks and building societies which is a record since statistics have been collected in recent times. It is true that, in 1973,244,620 loan applications were approved but, at that time, figures included loans for $10,000 or more made for additions and improvements. Does not the honourable member for Reid know, does he not understand, and does he not want to accept the truth that, in 1966, 50 per cent of people under 35 years of age in Australia

344 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Housing Finance

owned their own home and that that number had increased to 65 per cent by 1978?
The honourable member for Reid talked about interest rates. I wish to lay before this Parliament, so that the Australian people will know, the history of interest rate increases. Let us go back to the common denominator concept. In December 1972 the interest rate charged by building societies was 8 per cent. In December 1975, it was 11 per cent. It is true that the interest rate in Victoria was 12.5 per cent. But who was the responsible Commonwealth Minister at the time? It was the man who just completed his speech. In 1972 the interest rate charged by banks was 7 per cent. It was 11 per cent in December 1975. In February 1981, the interest rate charged by building societies was 12 per cent and the interest rate charged by banks was 11 t per cent. During what period did the increase in interest rates occur? It was in the three years of the Labor Administration which resulted in the ordinary Australian, the battler, the fellow below average weekly earnings, paying $16 a week more in 1975 after three years of the financial diarrhoea which swept this country.
Of course. no one likes to see increases in interest rates. But the honourable member for Reid did not tell us that such a person living in the United Kingdom would not pay 12 per cent or 11 t per cent but would pay 14 per cent for his home loan. If he lived in America he would pay 15 per cent and if he lived in Canada he would pay 15.5 per cent. In December 1980, a person on average weekly earnings who took out an average sized savings bank loan with a 25-year repayment period paid 26.1 per cent of his earnings in repayments as compared to 27.1 per cent of his earnings in 1978. Once and for all, that exposes the shallowness of the honourable member for Reid's argument. He does not want to face up to the facts. He does not want to acknowledge what this Government has done in providing shelter for Australian people. He talked, as I said, about finance. He did not talk about the wider issues. He did not acknowledge the sound economic policies of the Government. He does not realise because he does not want to know. The Opposition does not want to understand; it certainly would not admit to the truth-that would be foreign to it.
The most recent statistics provided by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development show that the rate of inflation in Australia last year was 9.2 per cent, whereas in America it was 12.4 per cent and it averaged 12.3 per cent in the OECD countries. One of the great things that we have going for us in the provision of

home ownership in Australia is stability of economic activity. When people take out loans they can be secure in the knowledge that come what may in the years ahead they will have less difficulty in repaying those loans on account of the stable economic policies of this Government. The honourable member for Reid did not mention that in November 1980, compared with November 1978, the Government provided 311,200 more jobs for Australian people, giving those people access to home ownership.
I was disappointed when the honourable member repeated a statement which has been repeated in the highways and byways of Australia over the last three weeks. In this regard I refer to the Commonwealth-State Housing Ministers Conference held last Friday in this Parliament House. I want to nail once and for all the vicious lie about a cut in the Commonwealth's contribution that is permeating Australia due to the irresponsible attitude adopted by several of the State Housing Ministers. One can appreciate why a gentle soul like myself should become upset. I am not used to exposure to lies, deceit and distortion of facts. I will be kind to the honourable member for Reid. Certainly, he is not a monkey riding on the back of a pony, but he did parrot this mischievous information. I want Hansard to record the truth. The Government has not cut housing funds for welfare purposes in Australia from $285m to $200m, as has been said by the honourable member for Reid. For him to say that indicates that he has either an abysmal lack of appreciation of the truth or a lack of knowledge of accepted procedures and the facts. The fact of the matter is that the Commonwealth Government has told the States that as a base amount-the honourable member for Reid cannot understand the difference between a base and a total amount-the Government will provide $200m, with extra funds being provided as part of the Budget strategy.
It is a good idea to give the State Housing Ministers a little bit of advice occasionally so that they can go back to their States and talk to their Premiers. I put this proposition to them: 'If you believe welfare housing is of importance, as does the Commonwealth by its positive actions and deliberate contributions and activities, you should go back to your State Premiers and tell them that when they come to Canberra for the Premiers Conference they should make the No. 1 item on their shopping lists the provision of funds for welfare housing. Tell them to cut back some of their allocations for health, education, roads, water conservation, et cetera'.
Mr Uren-Who is telling the lie now?

Housing Finance

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 345

Mr McVEIGH-The honourable member for Reid does not like it when I correct him and indicate that he has not told the whole truth. The Government provided a base amount of $200m. It is wrong and bordering on the deceitful to indicate that that base is the final amount. The final amount will be determined in the Budget context. The honourable member conveniently forgot that funds for welfare housing come from three sources-the Commonwealth Government, the State government and surplus funds made available over the years through the Commonwealth advancing welfare housing finance to the States at highly concessional rates of interest. The most recent information available to me indicates that over the years the sum of $157m has been built up in the surplus revolving funds in the States. It has been built up not on account of the contribution of the States but on account of the determined ambition of the Federal Government to make housing welfare funds available at highly concessional rates of interest. Indicative of this is the fact that the Commonwealth Government, under proposals outlined by me last Friday, will make available $200m-$54m as a grant-an absolute giftand $146m at 4t per cent interest. Where else in this country could one get a loan at 4t per cent interest? The States will on-lend that amount at considerably higher rates of interest, depending upon a person's income, up to the rate of one per cent below 1l.5 per cent. A pertinent point, an indication of the heart and pulse of the generosity of the Commonwealth Government, is that it is making money available at an interest rate of 4t per cent, whereas anyone else would have to get such a loan at 11.5 per cent. It disappointed me to hear the sort of diatribe addressed to me about this Government being lacking in concern. A loan at an interest rate of 4t per cent would be the cheapes~ loan available anywhere.

Government to ensure that welfare housing needs are met. The Government's proposals have also made a significant contribution to the autonomy of the States. Honourable members will recall the days of the Whitlam adminstration when everything was channelled through Canberra. The Whitlam Government dictated where houses were to be built. This Government has given the States complete autonomy to meet every situation. The States can allocate those funds as they see fit.
I have had to sit in this House and take on board a speech which could be described as an agony of irritated tedium from someone who believes in his infallibility and who will not face up to the facts of life. The honourable member for Reid failed to mention the changes that I channelled through this Parliament in my first week as Minister for Housing and Construction. He referred to the Homes Savings Grants Scheme and talked about the inability of people to save for a deposit. He failed to acknowledge that if a married couple with one child saved even $30 that couple automatically qualified for a $500 grant, and that a married couple with two children qualified for a $1,000 grant. These are all meaningful contributions for people seeking to buy a home or seeking to place a deposit on a home.
The final point I want to make-I want to talk about all things relevant to housing, not just to isolate a particular point-is that, in a case before the Australian Arbitration Commission, Mr Evans of the Metal Trades Industry Association of Australia said only yesterday that if standard hours were reduced to 35 a week it would lead to an increase in costs of 21 per cent. In that circumstance-a circumstance which has the implied support of the Opposition-we would see the cost of a home in Australia explode through the sound barrier.

The honourable member for Reid mentioned that the number of people looking for rental accommodation is escalating. Again, he failed to refer to the totality of the achievements. I will quote a few more statistics available to me. The honourable member has not really quoted the real statistics-the ones that are.vital, the ones that are important, the ones that are applicable and the ones that are honest. In December 1973, not long after the Whitlam Government came to power, 85,537 people were seeking rental accommodation in Australia. In June 1975, 104,110 people were seeking rental accommodation-a record. I do not know how that could be measured against an Olympic high jump record, but it is a record for Australia. By 3 June 1980 that figure was down to 81,151, indicating the concern of this

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The Minister's time has expired.
Mr UREN (Reid)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation. I claim to have been misrepresented.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member may address himself to the point on which he has been misrepresented.
Mr UREN-The Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) used loosely the certain words 'honesty' and 'lies' in referring to my speech. I want to set the record straight in regard to the availability of money at 4t per cent interest. That level was set by a Labor Government. In constant terms, cuts were made from $709m in 1974-75--

346 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Housing Finance

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Reid is pursuing the debate. I granted him indulgence to explain specifically how something he said during the debate was misrepresented.
Mr UREN-I gave net figures as to where cuts had been made. I said that there was a cut in net terms from $515m in 1974-75 to $76m in 1980-81. I went on to say that a cut from $285m to $200m had been suggested this year. I was dealing with net figures.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member is pursuing the debate. The provision to make a personal explanation on the basis of being misrepresented relates to a statement made by a subsequent speaker and that explanation must relate to a remark, a statement or an assertion allegedly made during the course of the debate. In this situation the honourable member for Reid has not identified where a remark was misrepresented. He is suggesting that the thrust of his debate is misrepresented. That does not warrant the indulgence of the Chair.
Mr McVeigh-Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr Uren-With due respect, Mr Deputy Speaker, I want to take objection to what you have just said. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! Both honourable gentlemen will resume their seats. If the honourable member for Reid or the Minister is taking a point of order, the Chair will hear the point of order. But the Chair is not prepared to enter into debate on the issue. The Chair has ruled. Mr Uren-Mr Deputy Speaker, I object to the comments that you have just made. First of all, I have said clearly-Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Is the honourable member for Reid taking a point of order? Mr Uren-Yes, if you want it in those terms, I will take-Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Reid will resume his seat. Mr Uren-I take a point of order just to put the matter in order. Mr Deputy Speaker, you gave a ruling in relation to what I said about cuts in housing expenditure from $51 5m-I am talking in net terms-in 1974-75 to $76m last year and then a further proposed cut this year. The Minister used the term 'nail the lie'. The words 'nail the lie' can be a reflection on only one person, that is me. I was the person who spoke. If I cannot answer that remark in broad terms then, clearly, something is wrong with the experience I have had in this Parliament.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member for Reid will resume his seat. The Chair is aware that in the course of debate the word 'lie' was used. It was not, in the view of the Chair, directed to the honourable member for Reid in a strict personal sense. The word is unparliamentary. The Minister should refrain from using that word as should all other honourable members. In the view of the Chair, the phrase did not impugn the integrity of the honourable member for Reid but rather the quality of his debate.
Mr Uren-Mr Deputy Speaker, you are saying clearly that I was parroting the words of somebody else and, therefore, their lies.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Reid will resume his seat. The Chair has ruled on the matter. There is no point of order.
Mr Uren-Mr Deputy Speaker, I want to make my personal explanation.
Mr McVeigh-Mr Deputy Speaker, just to assist--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-There will be no further indulgence. I will hear the Minister.
Mr McVeigh-1 will just assist the honourable member for Reid. He is obviously terribly confused and we apologise for that.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I ask the Minister not to be provocative.
Mr Uren-Mr Deputy Speaker, I ask you to rule on that. I am sick to death of a National Country Party Deputy Speaker protecting a National Country Party Minister. This is a Parliament and you should represent the Parliament.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There will be no further discussion on the matter. The Chair has ruled. I call the honourable member for Holt.
Mr DUFFY (Holt) (4.8)-Mr Deputy Speaker--
Mr Uren-Before anyone speaks I want to make the point that if anybody has been lying it is the Minister who has been lying. I clearly state that.
Mr McVeigh-MrDeputy Speaker, I ask the honourable member to withdraw that statement.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I suggest that both honourable gentlemen would serve the Parliament well if they resumed their seats and remained silent.
Mr DUFFY-I propose to deal with two aspects of housing in this debate. The first is the issue of housing finance and the second is welfare housing, in particular rental accommodation. For

Housing Finance

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 347

those in the community today who are fortunate enough to have a deposit there is still a grave problem because of the decrease in the availability of home loan finance coupled with high interest rates. The pressures that have caused that situation were dealt with in considerable detail by the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren). I do not propose to go over that ground again.

For those people who do not find themselves in the position where they have a deposit the situation is tragic. Not only are they forced to borrow on first mortgage finance which at present is at an interest rate which is far too high but also, of course, they are forced into the second mortgage area where they are borrowing at exorbitant rates of interest in order to make up the deposit. The anger shown by the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) during his speech is of very little consolation to those people, particularly those in the outer suburban areas, who are attempting to buy houses at high prices. Even if they do have a deposit they are faced with the difficulties that I outlined earlier. If they do not have a deposit their situation is hopeless.

The Australian Labor Party during the last

election campaign proposed a scheme which

would have been of real assistance to those

people. I put it to the Minister for his consider-

ation that until this Government acts to give

people, particularly those on average weekly

earnings and lower weekly earnings, the oppor-

tunity to be placed in a position where they can

pay a deposit and then obtain finance without

being pushed into the exorbitant money lending

area of second mortgages then this Government

has not achieved anything in the area of housing

for those people. They are forced now to go to

areas where services are not available. They can-

not buy houses in areas where" in fact, services are

available. That is for one reason only-the high

cost of housing.

'

The Minister made considerable play of the fact that there is a high percentage of home ownership in this country. I would like to draw to the Minister's attention the fact that that may be a matter which he will not be able to continue to put forward in this Parliament as something of which this country can be proud. I refer the Minister to a work which has been prepared by Ross King of the Centre for Environmental Studies at the University of Melbourne. The work is called: 'Interest Rates, Energy and House Prices, Some Aspects of the Melbourne Housing Market 1966-80'. Mr King outlines in that work the fact that the Melbourne housing market between 1966 and 1980 was becoming increasingly unobtainable

for newly forming households. Unless the household has substantial asset backing, access to owner occupancy tends to be dependent on two incomes today. The wife must work if the family is a newcomer to the housing market. That is the issue which the Minister today missed in his speech. In fact, it is becoming almost impossible for somebody in the capital cities-I am dealing with Melbourne at the moment; the situation is the same or probably worse in some ways in Sydney-to own a home. It is all very well for the Minister to say that there is a high proportion of home ownership. That situation will not continue. The work by Ross King to which I referred dramatically emphasises that.
I refer the Minister to these facts: A household on 1.5 times average male earnings which in 1972 could buy an average priced house in any suburb of Melbourne's 55 local government areas, by 1977 was excluded from virtually all the eastern and north-eastern suburbs and from the middlering bayside. What, in fact, has been put in that work is that in that period a person earning 1.5 times average weekly male earnings was able to buy a house in any of those 55 local government areas. The position now is that that person is excluded from virtually all of the eastern and north-eastern suburbs and from the middle-ring bayside. This comes back to what I said earlier and to what the honourable member for Reid was saying. Those people are then forced into the outer suburban areas. They are still buying at prices which are far too high, but they cannot buy anywhere else. Services are not being provided to those areas and their problems are compounded.
It is worth mentioning at this stage, in relation to that work by Ross King, that the household on average male earnings in 1972 had an available range of 44 of those local government areas. By 1977 that range was reduced to one area. Those people could afford to buy a house in one of the previously 44 available areas of Melbourne. The choice for those on 0.75 times of average male earnings dropped from more than 20 areas to nil. By 1977 twice the average male earnings were inadequate to obtain an average priced house. Twice average male earnings were not sufficient to buy an average priced house in Prahran, Hawthorn, Kew, Brighton, Doncaster and Templestowe.
The performance by the Minister of being extremely angry with the honourable member for Reid is understandable. He did not respond to the point put by the honourable member for Reid, that is, that this Government placed people in a position in which they are unable to buy a house. I put it to the Minister that unless action is taken in

348 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Housing Finance

this area the statistics that he gets so much pleasure out of quoting in relation to home ownership in this country will be a matter of the past. The Minister will not be able to come into this House and continue to quote them. The facts are there. The Minister is smiling. He must have a very good sense of humour. Some of the people listening to this debate today no doubt are in the terrible bind of trying to buy a house and will not share his humour. I do not know whether the Minister is smiling with cynical amusement, but he had be~ter answer the sorts of arguments put forward independently by people like Ross King in the work to which I have referred.
In the few minutes left to me I wish to make a specific point. The Minister kept referring to statistics. In order to respond to some of the matters raised by him I will isolate to a specific area what I have to say. The Minister can then look at it and see what he comes up with. The fact is that in real terms housing funds allocated to Victoria in 1977-78 totalled $104m. By 1980-81 that figure was reduced to $67.9m. The result, and what will continue to be the result, of that sort of situation can be seen by looking at a specific area. I shall refer to the area supervised by the Ministry of Housing, Dandenong District which is in the south-eastern suburbs of Melbourne. The present situation in that area is that over 3,000 applicants are on the waiting list for house purchases. The waiting time for the rental of two bedroom houses is four to five years and it is 3t years for three bedroom houses. The waiting time for the rental of a ground floor flat by a lone person is four to five years. People prepared to climb upstairs-if they are able to at their age, which is unlikely-may get a house within a year. For Darby and Joan flats, there is a waiting time of three to four years for ground floor flats and one year for upstairs flats. Those are the facts and the Government stands condemned for the inability of people to buy houses. They are unable to get welfare housing because there are waiting lists. As I have said, in an area of south-east Melbourne the stage has been reached at which there is a waiting list of 3,000 applicants. There is no pleasure for those people in what the Minister has said today.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr CADMAN (Mitchell) (4.19)-1 believe that when we are discussing this topic, honourable members opposite should look at the exact situation in Australia today and should not fabricate one. Anybody who makes a close examination of the number of commencements and the number of approvals in housing over the last two years can

see that more houses are being built, more people are being accommodated and the housing industry market Australia-wide is buoyant. The facts are that the housing industry in Australia today is in very good health; more people are buying houses and more people can afford to buy houses. For instance, if we inspect the figures for the second half of 1980 we find that the incredible number of 39,000 homes were approved in the December quarter. If we extrapolate that figure, which I do not suggest honourable members do, it indicates a level of 160,000 homes a year in Australia. The level of commencement and construction has not been running at that level; it has been running at about 130,000 to 135,000 per annum and is stable. The number of commencements expected for 1980-81 will be 135,000, an increase of some 2,000 homes on the 1979-80 figures. In the 1979-80 year numbers of commencements in fact increased by 11.7 per cent, using the September quarter and comparing the figures for each year. There was a 6.1 per cent increase in the figure for the June quarter of 1980 compared with that for the previous year. The figures for each quarter and each year appear to indicate that this Government is successful in providing additional homes for the Australian community. There has been a slight population growth but people are seizing the opportunity afforded them by a stable economy to improve their positions and their way of life by moving to larger homes or constructing new homes. Only a responsible, stable government with a concern for home buyers is able to create a climate in which, as we have seen, there is a significant increase in the number of people seeking homes and the number of people buying and building homes.
Home ownership levels in Australia are significant and are something of which we as a nation should be proud. The increase in the level of home ownership has been significant over the last few years. In 1966, 50 per cent of married persons under the age of 35 years owned their own homes,but in 1978, 65 per cent of people in the same age group owned their own homes. If we . look at the total level of home ownership in Australia, something like 73 per cent of Australians own their own homes. By world standards, that is a very fine record. Australiais close to the top of the list in respect of world figures for home ownership. However, it is my view and I believe the view of the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) that we should not rest until Australia has the highest level of home ownership in the world. We must attempt to see as many Australians as possible achieving their dream of having and owning their own homes. If

Housing Finance

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 349

we look at the facts and figures of home ownership we can see that in the early 1970s access to home ownership became very difficult in Australia. The report of the inquiry into the cost of housing clearly shows and proves that the period of the Whitlam Government, the Labor Government, was detrimental to home ownership. But every year since the dismissal of that Government the level of home ownership has improved. It has improved to the extent that many more Australians are now building and seeking to own their own homes.
If we look at the matter raised by the Opposition with regard to interest rates, we have to acknowledge that interest rates have increased slightly over the last 12 months. There are good reasons for this. There is increased pressure on inflation, there is increased demand for finance in the Australian market to gain capital for many exciting projects. This country is on the move. People are backing this country with their money. There is competition for financial resources, for mining and mineral development, for the great pastoral industries and also for housing. Over the last 12 months part of the problem which helped to produce that slight increase in the inflation rate has been excessive wage demands and industrial unrest. It is not the purpose of the debate today to discuss those subjects, but they all compound the rate of inflation and the level of interest rates. In each of these areas the Government has moved to stabilise the market. In fact, the Treasurer (Mr Howard) repeated his commitment in the 1980-81 Budget when he said that all those who are credit worthy should have access to home finance. Again and again the Government has made a commitment to the Australian community that it will ensure to the utmost home ownership for every person who is credit worthy.
If we turn to the welfare program, we see that the Government has committed itself to a massive program, a record program by Australian standards. An amount of $1,OOOm has been committed to welfare housing over.a period of five years. No previous government has made a commitment of that sort. No previous government has made a commitment to underpin welfare housing to that extent on a consistent basis. It means that State housing commissions and trusts have a capacity to plan ahead for five years. They know the minimum basis of their funding. They know that every year, in each Budget, consideration will be given to topping-up funds for welfare housing.
The Government has an outstanding record in welfare housing. One has to look only at the shift away from loan funds to straight-out grants to the States for welfare housing. The change took place

in 1979-80, when grants increased from $14m to $105m. That was a very significant change which relieved the States of the burden of having to repay to the Commonwealth Government funds for welfare housing which are now in the form of grants. If one looks at the Australia-wide applications for rental accommodation one can see, that since the election of this Government, a declining number of people have been seeking accommodation on a rental basis through housing commissions. However, I qualify my comment to the extent of saying that in the half-year to June 1980 there was an increase in those seeking rental accommodation. This increase is not significant and I know that it will be contained.
This Government has a fine record of providing assistance for people either in the welfare area or in the home purchase area. The Government's program commits $274m to welfare housing in 1980-81 and makes further commitments of $1,OOOm over five years as a minimum basis for welfare housing. The Government has increased significantly the funding for the Homes Savings Grants Scheme. In fact, funding increased from $20m in 1978-79 to $52m in 1980-81. These are the concerns expressed by this Government for people buying houses. The value limits for the Home Savings Grants Scheme have been increased, further attention has beeri given to the needs of families, and home ownership has stabilised. Rental payments in Australia at the moment are a smaller proportion of average weekly earnings than they have been for many years. All in all, I reject the propositions put forward by the Labor Party. I think that they are in line with the gobbledegook that is often spoken by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden). For example, on 5 June 1980 he said:
In such a cluttered, imperfect economy with time rapidly running out in which to put our economic house in order, tinkering with the edge of our economic problems in the belief that market forces will then prevail to bring about a happy maximised equilibrium is foolish fantasy.
The propositions of the Opposition are, indeed, foolish fantasy.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired. The discussion is concluded.
TARIFF PROPOSALS
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs) (4.29)-1 move:
Excise Tariff Proposals Nos 1 and 2 (1981).
Excise Tariff Proposals No.1 (1981), which I have just tabled, formally place before Parliament alterations to the excise tariff. The alterations were introduced during the summer recess by

350 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Commonwealth Employees Bill

Gazette Notice No.3 (1980), under the authority of section 160B of the Excise Act.
Proposals No.1 (1981) increase the excise duty on stabilised crude petroleum oilfrom $157.21 to $174.08 per kilolitre, operating on and from 1 January 1981. This alteration followed determination of new import parity prices by the Minister for National Development and Energy (Senator Carrick). The determination accords with the Government's policy on import parity pricing for Australian produced crude oil.
Proposals No. 1 (1981) also reduce the excise duty on naturally occurring liquefied petroleum gas from $43.48 to $36.67 per kilolitre operating on and from 1 January 1981. This change followed a new average wholesale price for naturally occurring LPG being set by the Minister for National Development and Energy in accordance with Government policy.
Proposals No.2 (1981), which I have also tabled, create a new excise tariff item for blends of fuel ethanol and petrol. The new item provides the administrative basis for the excise treatment of ethanol/petrol blends as a separate transport fuel in its own right. Until now each component of such blends had to be separately entered for excise tariff purposes. It is the Government's policy that the ethanol content of blends will be duty free, subject to regular review.
I commend the proposals to the House. Debate (on motion by Mr Keating) adjourned.
COMMONWEALTH EMPLOYEES (REDEPLOYMENT AND RETIREMENT)
AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Bill presented by Mr Viner, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister) (4.31)-I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
This Bill will have the effect of removing from the Public Service Arbitrator the jurisdiction to make determinations in relation to matters covered by the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979, hereafter referred to as the Act. There is a motion standing in my name to move for the disapproval of Public Service Arbitrator's Determination No. 503 of 1980, which relates to redeployment and retirement, and at an appropriate time. I will be seeking leave of the House to cognate the debate on this Bill with the debate on that motion.

The Government believes that it is essential in relation to matters as fundamental as the efficient and economical use of staff in the Public Service that the Parliament should lay down and be seen to lay down the rules and regUlations appertaining thereto and not some other body.
It was and is the Government's intention that Determination No. 509 of 1977 should operate in conjunction with the Act. Together they would provide a code of practice and benefits which would have to be followed by the Board and Departments in the handling of redundancy situations. The Bill seeks to amend section 24 of the Act and, as I have already pointed out, it will, in effect, remove the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator to make a legal determination for or in relation to the matters comprehended by the Act. Its true effect will be that any future change which might be thought necessary to the code of practice and benefits applicable to the situations referred to will have to be brought about by the government of the day by legislation and thus, it will, as it should, make the Parliament the ultimate arbiter on matters relating to redeployment, retirement, termination and other aspects covered by the Act and Determination No. 509 of 1977.
As the House is no doubt aware, a Bill relating to these matters was initially introduced in this. House in 1976. The proposals in that Bill had been the subject of debate and consideration by the Royal Commission on Australian Government Administration and, in particular, had in 1976 been the subject of specific recommendations by members of that Commission including Mr Paul Munro, now Federal Secretary of the Administrative and Clerical Officers Association. I refer the House to Appendix 3M of the report as to Mr Munro's views. Against this background, there seemed at the time of introduction of the legislation in 1979 to have emerged a general acceptance of the appropriateness of the proposed revised arrangements for redeployment and retirement. Sub-section 24 (3) was included in the Bill to facilitate adjustment of existing arbitral determinations in the light of the revised framework introduced by the Act. The provision also allowed retention of existing arbitral determinations dealing with matters related to redeployment and retirement of government employees. I have already referred to the code of practice which the Act and Determination No. 509 of 1977 provide, and I remind honourable members of some of the fair, even generous, provisions of that Determination. They are:
(i) Consultations with relevant organisations on redundancy situations

Commonwealth Employees Bill

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 351

(ii) six or 12 months' notice on full pay that a permanent office is excess to requirements of service
(iii) Board required continually to seek to redeploy excess staff
(iv) Income maintenance of six or 12 months for temporary employees transferred to a lower level or terminated
(v) further one month's notice on full pay before a permanent officer can be transferred to a lower level or terminated.
The Act, moreover, provides for appeal procedures for the protection of employees from arbitrary or capricious action.
What happened as a result of discussions with staff organisations, following the introduction of the Bill initially in 1976 and the subsequent revision of the legislation, was that instead of there being a general acceptance of the fair and reasonable revised arrangements, ACOA, in particular sought determinations under the Public Service Arbitration Act which would undermine the practices and procedures provided for under the Act so as to take out of the hands of management its rightful prerogative for the efficient and economical management of the Public Service as provided for under the Public Service Act.
The Government has therefore decided, in order to ensure the integrity of the operation of the Act, to preclude future determinations from detracting from what are, reasonably and properly, management prerogatives. This amendment will leave unaffected the powers of the Public Service Arbitrator to make determinations in traditional areas such as wages and salaries, annual leave and hours of duty.
This Bill will, as I have pointed olit, leave in operation Determination No. 509 of 1977. It will also preserve the provisions of other determinations, in particular clauses specifying notice periods which have already been made by arbitral authorities. It will also permit the parties to these determinations to be varied.
The Government considers that the provisions of Determination No. 509 of 1977, taken together with the provisions of the legislation, are fair, just, adequate and appropriate to protect indiviquals and to see that they are fairly treated in relation to redeployment and retirement. Certainly, many outside the Public Service would like to have such conditions.
I refer to two other aspects in relation to this matter. Firstly, my comments in relation to this Bill need to be seen in the context of remarks that

I will be making in support of the motion for disallowance of Determination No. 503 of 1980. Secondly, it should not be forgotten that the Act introduced voluntary early retirement at age 55, a right which the Government believes will be shown to be an important right for public servants in the future. I commend the Bill to the House.
Debate (on motion by Mr Keating) adjourned.
GOVERNOR-GENERAVS SPEECH
Address-in-Reply
Debate resumed from 26 February, on motion by Mr Spender:
That the following Address-in-Reply to the Speech of His Excellency the Governor-General be agreed to:
May it please Your Excellency:
We, the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled, desire to express our loyalty to Our Most Gracious Sovereign, and to thanK Your Excellency for the Speech which you have been pleased to address to Parliament.
Upon which Mr Kent had moved by way of amendment:
That the following words be added to the Address: " but note that the Government:
(I) has failed to adequately respond to-
(a) record unemployment; (b) a high and worsening level of inflation; (c) reduced and falling family living standards, and (d) the highest taxation burden in the nation's
history;
(2) allows unsatisfactory administration of foreign investment guidelines which permit an uncritical and opendoor policy to the takeover of Australian industry and resources to continue, and
(3) makes no long-term provision for assistance to manufacturing industry and farming industries, which are likely to be severely disadvantaged as a result of successive exchange rate revaluations and substantially increased imports in the context of resources development'.
Dr KLUGMAN (Prospect) (4.39)-Before turning to the matters which I wish to discuss in the Address-in-Reply debate I wish to refer to the final sentence of the second reading speech of the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) on the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Bill. He stated that the Act 'introduced voluntary early retirement at age 55, a right which the Government believes will be shown to be an important right for public servants in the future'. I do not propose to comment on the question of public service retirement and redeployment so you need not worry, Mr Deputy Speaker. I merely suggest that the Government should also consider making retirement voluntary in certain other cases. I refer to making the age pension, subject to a means test, available to persons of the age of 60

352 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

who wish to retire. I emphasise that such retirement should be voluntary. That would obviously be of advantage to many ordinary people in the community who, at 60 years of age, wish to retire. It may well be advantageous to some businesses keeping men on only because they feel some obligation to them in view of the fact that they are not eligible for the age pension until they reach 65 years of age. I believe that it would also make available a significant number of additional jobs for younger people in the community-and, after all, everyone of us is concerned about unemployment and about how to deal with it.
I wish to congratulate those honourable members, especially those that I heard last Thursday, who have made their maiden speech in this debate. Many of those speeches were excellent. I do not wish to sound paternalistic, but I was impressed by them. I have only only one piece of advice to offer, and it applies to honourable members on both sides of the chamber. It is that usually issues are not simply black or white, as the Minister at the table, the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman), and some honourable members on this side also, might be keen to suggest. I remind them of what is my favourite saying: 'It aint necessarily so'. There are two sides to every proposition and, although expressing one particular attitude may help honourable members to win pre-selection, the people at large are not really impressed by the proposition that all political wisdom resides in one particular political party. My own view is that at the last election we did much better than we did in 1975 and 1977 because our leader seemed a more rational, reasonable and less confrontationist person than did our previous leader. One thing I have learnt in politics is that often governments do not behave in the way in which they are expected to behave; that oppositions, when they become governments do not do so either. One of the reasons is that the Liberal and National Country Parties, when they attain office, know that the manufacturers, the Confederation of Australian Industry or whatever the appropriate body may be called, are not as powerful politically as we might be led to think. Similarly, Labor governments do not believe that militant unions can deliver or withhold votes in the particular way in which they threaten to be able to. Therefore, governments often behave in a manner that is opposite to what one would expect.
I wish in the main today to deal with the question of immigration-and specifically IndoChinese-to Australia. I do not wish to devote the whole of the quarter of an hour remaining to me to that topic but would like to make a number of

points concerning it. My electorate of Prospect contains-unfortunately, we do not know the exact number-of the order of 6,000 to 8,000 Indo-Chinese refugees. They have, in the main, settled in the Cabramatta area of the City ofFairfield. That is a very large proportion of the approximately 14,000 such refugees who have settled in New South Wales or of the 40,000 who have come to Australia as a whole. 1 emphasise that I am strongly in favour of the admission of Indo-Chinese refugees. One of my main disagreements with many on my side of the chamber during the Vietnam conflict was based on the question: 'What are you going to do with the people who do not want to live under communism, under the Viet Cong, when that faction takes over? Are you prepared to admit them to this or other countries so they can get away from that particularly ruthless regime'-as I saw it-'which is likely to take over there'? In fact, that regime has taken over, so we should be prepared to accept these refugees.
My proposition is that in their own interests and in the interests of the people of Australia as a whole, they should not all be placed in one particular area of New South Wales, I illustrate that by quoting some findings from the Keys Young report on the question of Indo-Chinese refugees in my particular area. These references are to be found from page 77 onwards of the interim report. The first one to which I wish to refer reads as follows:
Clearly the government needs to address the nexus between unemployment and continued migration and to integrate the policies and practises relating to both these issues. In addition, it needs to publicly argue the case that migrants can contribute to economic development and can generate jobs not simply usurp a finite number of existing jobs. For this to be effective the argument must be reiterated over and over, for the contrary view is very widespread. Also, if this proposition is put to the public, it will be necessary to demonstrate that the proposition is true.
One point that has always annoyed me about those who put forward the proposition of zero population growth, and who are led by the sorts of people who are now associated with the Aus-. tralian Conservation Foundation, is that in the years before 1974 when Australia had over-full employment they would argue against the admission of migrants into Australia because they felt that for the first few years after the families arrived in Australia they were using up labour resources; they were not producing enough of the sorts of things they were using. In other words, they were competing for goods and labour. After 1975, when unemployment became an issue, they argued against the admission of migrants to Australia but they took exactly the opposite view. They took the line that each migrant who came to

Governor-General's Speech

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 353

Australia would compete for a job and would not provide any employment. I do not know which of these propositions is correct, but both of them cannot be correct. It is deplorable that people connected with, and still prominent in, the ACF have put both points of view, and they have been subsidised by the Government for doing so. They just hate people. I come now to another point involving refugees in my area. Again I quote from the Keys-Young report. It states:
Most respondents in Fairfield are quite aware that their area has a disproportionate number of Indo-Chinese settling there and for some this appears to be an inequitable situation and a source of justifiable anger. Thus the concentration, per se, of the refugees is a source of some concern. The fact is that Fairfield residents have witnessed an extraordinary change in their locality. Within a few short years there has been a sudden and large-scale introduction of a completely new ethnic and racial group into their community. The rapidity of the change, the scale of the change and its high visibility have been dramatic. In many ways it is a testimony to the tolerance and/or flexibility of the existing population that this changeover has met with so little overt antagonism. This study suggests that people are experiencing anxiety, anger,hostility, etc. over this (invasion) but that there still exists a significant capacity for people to adapt to and accept newcomers. The government's neglect, to date, of the impact that refugees are having on existing communities stretches the forbearance that exists and strains the good will required of existing residents. In the absence of any intervention, and in the face of likely increases in the size of the refugee population, strains within the community are likely to increase in the future.
One factor here is that people living in the vicinity of the hostels and refugee settlements are also subject to the effects of rumour mills that take half-truths and blow them up into sources of real dissatisfaction. (Thus rumours about housing assistance results in stories about refugees getting $15,000 towards a house, etc.).
The Government should publicise the facts. I am pleased that it has now brought out a leaflet entitled 'Facts and Figures September 1980: Australia's Policy on Refugees'. It answers many of the furphies which have been circulated in the community, and I hope it gets wide distribution. It is very important that the Government does publicise these matters. The report continues:
One tool that the government has at hand is some control over the kind and amount of information made public about refugees and migrants.
The report indicates that at present information is almost non-existent. It continues:
It follows from this that the government should strengthen its public information role. For example, a widespread cause of hostility towards r\lfugees (including people living in areas where no refugees reside) is the notion that they are all welle to-do, not 'real' refugees. Another cause of hostility is the supposed special benefits made available to refugees. As neither of these things is correct, it is possible that better information could mitigate some hostility amongst some people. It is also critical to attempt to individuate migrants and refugees to the public, that is to portray them as individuals rather than as two-dimensional blocs of people.
Those are important points that have to be emphasised. I would like to pay tribute especially

to the present Mayor of Fairfield, Keith Dunn, a previous Mayoress, Janice Crosio and the aldermen of the Council, for taking a very reasonable attitude to what has become a very significant problem. I am not one of those who generally pay tribute to people, in my own party who are opposed to my attitude, the so-called lefties, but I would like to pay tribute to them in this instance because they could have taken advantage of the anti-refugee feeling in the community and merged that with their objections to the people who have left Vietnam, people with whom they disagreed politically. They have not done so and as far as I know they have all taken very reasonable attitudes to the refugee problem.
I have made my views known to the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee) and to the Secretary to the Department, and I know they have been sympathetic to the proposition I have put to them. There are three migrant centres in my general area-the Cabramatta, Villawood and East Hills hostels. All the Indo-Chinese refugees in New South Wales went to those hostels. There are other migrant centres or hostels in Sydney and in New South Wales. It is important that these people be distributed among them,in line with the Government's own recommendations. I hope some pressure will be put on the Minister for Administrative Services and the Department of Administrative Services, which controls Commonwealth hostels and has some inhibitions about spreading IndoChinese refugees among other areas. I hope it does so urgently and also provides back-up for my area to help deal with these extremely unfortunate people who have to start a completely new way of life in this country. I think they will be very good citizens, but we have to help them. It is important that we do not encourage what are, in the main, extreme right wing organisations, such as the National Alliance--
Mr McLean-The League of Rights.
Dr KLUGMAN-And the League of Rights, as well as other groups. 1 am sure the honourable member for Perth knows of similar groups in his State which are trying to take advantage of this extremely racist anti-foreign attitude. As far as I can see, as a whole the members of the media have taken a very good attitude. They have not played up the odd differences, or the odd fights, that have occurred.' I congratulate them for restraining themselves and not going in for the sensationalism we often expect from the media. I raised this issue last year at a seminar on migration, and spoke on Radio Australia about it, but my remarks did not receive much publicity. I wish to quote one

354 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

further paragraph from the Keys-Young report. Page 81 states:
While the sheer concentration of certain ethnic groupsparticularly the Asian refugees-clearly eases their problem of transition into Australian society the long-term value of this is quite questionable. The lessened need to learn English and the increased opportunity to recreate a self-sustaining community must inhibit the rate at which assimilation into the larger society occurs. Moreover the rate of assimilation will be a key factor in determining the hostility engendered in the host community. The government needs to seriously examine the long-term effects such concentrations will have and attempt to identify ways of modifying this settlement pattern.
That is an extremely important point. I have been criticised on many occasions, possibly because of my own non-Anglo-Saxon background, for disagreeing with the proposition that we should encourage people to stick to their original languages. Whilst obviously there should be no discrimination against people, they and their children should be encouraged to learn English. The main proposition of which we must be aware is that if a person wants to get a fair share of thecake in the Australian society-I speak now in social and economic terms-he has to accept the proposition that he must be able to speak English and fit into, or be part of, the society. It is an unpopular point of view since ethnicity-whatever that word may mean-has become a popular slogan amongst governments. It is easy to get research and other grants on the basis of investigating ethnic affairs. I think that it is wrong and not good for either the Australian society or the migrants if we emphasise that point of view.
Once more I appeal both to the Government and to Government members, who obviously do not want the problems associated with racist politics, to exert pressure especially on the Department of Administrative Services to co-operate with the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs to spread the intake of Indo-Chinese refugees more fairly throughout the Australian community.
In the few minutes available to me I would like to make two points. Firstly, I dare not use the word 'hypocrisy' when referring to the attitude of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser), because when I last used that word I was ruled out of order. I leave it to the House to decide what term it would apply to him. On 3 December 1980, in asking a question of the Prime Minister, I criticised the then proposed expenditure of huge amounts of public moneys for such purposes as the staging of the 1988 Olympic Games and Expo 88 in Australia. I asked:
Why should a taxpayer on the average minimum weekly wage rate pay $40 a week tax to enable trade exhibitors and so-called amateur sports competitors to boost their incomes and egos respectively?

In reply the Prime Minister said that he was very sorry to hear that I did not want to participate in those celebrations and suggested that I should go back to Europe that year. He further said:
. . . that the honourable gentleman--
That is me:
might like to move a motion in this Parliament giving effect to the substance and the meaning of his question to see how many of his colleagues would like to support him.
In other words he wondered how many of us would support the abandonment of Expo 88 and of the Olympic Games. Let me draw honourable members' attention to a question asked by the honourable member for Casey (Mr Falconer) in the House on 25 February this year which took the opposite line. Of course in the meantime the Prime Minister had also taken the opposite line. The last sentence of the Prime Minister's reply stated:
If honourable gentlemen in the Australian Labor Party want to support raising that sum for the Olympic Games and the $1 ,200m for Expo they will only confirm the attitude that the Australian public has of them, that is, that they are a group of utter spendthrifts.
In other words the Prime Minister took exactly the opposite point of view from that which he had taken on 3 December last year when he replied to my question. The Prime Minister does that, he changes, but I dare not use that particular word which I used in the House at that time. I am pleased to see that Senator Chaney, the Minister for Social Security, when speaking last week to the Institute of Public Affairs raised a question which ought to concern all of us; that of giving social welfare benefits to the needy and to use taxation only for essential purposes. This is an extremely difficult subject and both sides of the House always play politics with it. I think it is a very depressing problem because the net result is that the needy people do not get all they need and many of them in fact have to pay very high taxes, which they are unable to afford. At the same time many people receive benefits which they do not need. Two examples of this concern family allowances and age pensions. As far as I am concerned it is ridiculous to pay either the family allowance or the age pension--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr PORTER (Barker) (5.0)-Firstly, I would like to welcome new members to this House. I congratulate those who have given their maiden speeches and I hope that each one not only will enjoy his or her time here but also find it fulfilling. It would be remiss of me not to thank the electors of Barker for returning me as their representative

Governor-General's Speech

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 355

in this Parliament. l hope that I may, be able'to
successfully pur~ue policies which will not only improve the standard of li~ing of my,constituents and indeed of all Australians" but also will enhance the prospects of each individual to improve his own lot. This Address-in-Reply debate gives me an opportunity to discuss the prospects and the policies for the rest of this decade. I intend to look specifically at the economy because I believe it is the health of the economy which predetermines the welfare and standard of living of individuals within the community.
It is tempting in undertaking a wide ranging look at Australia's prospects to start by looking back and asking whether the dec,isions the Government has taken have been the right ones? For example, it is probably relatively easy to say now that more should have been done to reduce the size of the Commonwealth Government in 1976. However, looking back with the benefit of hindsight is of limited value in developing policies for the rest of this decade. It is, however, essential, in order to be able to look forward, to know exactly where we are at present. The 1980 Budget papers show how Commonwealth outlays expanded rapidly between 1973 and 1974. Measured as a percentage of the gross domestic product, outlays increased by almost five per 'cent in: one year. This was a rapid increase in the size of the Commonwealth spending as compared with the rest of the economy.
The increase in Government outlays at the Commonwealth, State and local government levels were met in part during the 1970s by increased borrowings. The public sector borrowing requirement increased in the early seventies from two per cent to six and a half per cent of GDP in 1975-76. Those enormous borrowings have now started to decrease because of the Government's control on spending and a determination to bring down the deficit. Overall we can see that from the record levels of the 1970s measured as a percentage of GDP the Federal Government has obtained hard earned but small reductions in spending, with larger reductions in the deficit and also in the public sector borrowing requirement. I might add that those reductions have not been easy. Commonwealth Government spending gains a certain irresistible momentum once programs are started and peoples' expectations are raised. It is extremely difficult but essential that the size of the Commonwealth Government's expenditure be restricted to that with which the economy can reasonably cope. The facts are, however, that there has been a reduction and it is my hope that more will be done

in this area' in the forthcoming year; for two reasons, but more of that later.
,The Liberal Party'sphilosopny is based on the promotion of the individual, allowing him or her to choose within normal constraints how he wants tolive and how he wants to use his own resources. Of course, to meet that aim, control over the power of the Government and the strengthening of the private enterprise system goes hand in hand. This Government has now been re-elected on three occasions with policies promoting the control of government spending, effective management of the economy and restrictions on the power and interference of the Government in the lives of individual Australians. Those policies are directly related to the Liberal philosophy. I am one who believes that an increase in the size of the Government sector, that being all three tiers of Government-the Commonwealth, State and local government-will have repercussions in the private sector. The Government sector uses money taken from people by way of taxes or it borrows from the people in order to regulate and control, to pay welfare and to provide services and .other benefits. In obtaining and spending these funds the Government will affect both the individual and the private enterprise system as a whole. The individual will have less control over the spending of his OWn money and the private sector will find itself in' competition with the government sector. This competition can be in the capital market for funds, in the goods market for equipment and in the labour market. This competition will either have the effect of crowding out the private sector-the productive element of the economy-and reducing the ability of the private sector to compete, or else it will involve the bidding up of prices. In the bond market that will mean higher interest rates and in the goods and labour market, it will mean inflationary pressures on prices and wages.
It should not be interpreted from what I have said that the Government does not have regulatory, welfare and other roles to play. Rather, it is my view that now is the time for us to consider deeply our economic and philosophical stance. As a result of past and sometimes painful but necessary government action,the economy is starting to improve. The signs are all there. Real incomes are growing and business investment is up about 15 per cent in real terms. Consumer spending is buoyant and there have been welcome increases in employment. The inflation rate has been held down. For the 1980 calendar year in Australia it was 9.2 per cent compared with the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development average to November of 12.4 per cent. The signs are

356 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

that we have climbed out of the economic recession. We must now endeavour to turn the economic buoyancy into strong economic growth. Put starkly, I believe, firstly, that strong economic growth in the private sector of Australia is at risk without further reductions in government spending on the macroeconomic front.
Mr Keating-Tell us how.
Mr PORTER-Secondly, there ought to be more incentives for the individual to keep more of the marginal dollars he earns on the microeconomic front. Looking firstly to the size of the government sector, it is apparent that with increased economic activity in Australia, there will be an increase in revenue for the Commonwealth Government. If real gross domestic product grows this year at about 3 per cent and next year, providing there are no more calamatous droughts or the like, at, let us say, at least 3t per cent, there is likely to be quite an increase in Commonwealth Government revenue. Given that the level of activity has been depressed and we have not had full employment or the full utilisation of our capacity to produce, as economic recovery takes place employment will increase as will personal income and company income and the level of private sector expenditure. This will mean less unemployment benefits to be paid, more income and company tax and more indirect taxes will be paid without changes to the levels of taxation. If, therefore, government can restrict its spending at the same time as having the prospect of an increase in revenue, it should be able to maintain a low deficit Budget and apply some of the increased revenue to tax cuts.
This may be considered to be a rather simplistic view of the future and all predictions in this area are extraordinarily risky. However the Government, having decided that it is not going to change the tax base, can now only reduce the incidence of income taxes by cutting its own expenditure and promoting increased economic growth. A number of points ought to be made. Firstly, the Commonwealth Government's reduction in expenditure, and hopefully taxation, will be in vain if the State governments step into the field vacated by the Commonwelllth Government. Secondly, there are real anti-inflationary advantages for the Commonwealth Government in pursuing a course of real restraint in expenditure. It will reduce the competition with the expanding and productive private sector and so reduce inflationary pressure on wages and prices. This is particularly important in a period of increasing growth where the inflationary push of wages and pull of prices can negate the advantages of economic growth if those forces are allowed to push up the rate of

inflation. Smaller government will also reduce the need for the public sector to go to the money market for funds. This is significant, as I am sure all honourable members will be aware, if we consider
the large number of capital raisings which are taking place at present whereby mining companies and other associated ventures are endeavouring to raise funds in order to undertake new and expansionary developments.

If we now take a look at the microeconomic

aspects of such a reduction in government expen-

diture leading to a reduction in taxation, we can

see again that this is squarely in line with Liberal

Party philosophy. In fact, the Prime Minister (Mr

Malcolm Fraser) outlined exactly this aspect on 5

December when he said:

.

The Government is concerned to maximise the degree to which people have control over their own lives and their own resources, to c:nsure that it is their choices which are decisive,
not those of politicians, of bureaucrats or union officials or corporations.

To this end, the Government is concerned to limit the role and reduce the power of the State, and as part of that to restrain taxes and to contain public expenditure. The State must remain the servant, not the master, of the Australian people'.

A reduction in income taxes would meet our philosophy as well as provide a worthwhile incentive for individuals to increase their work effort. Des Keegan, writing in the Australian recently said:

It is likely the Government could hold the same tax harvest by levying a lower rate, which would call forth more effort, more supply and hopefully, more honesty.

He was referring to tax evasion. He went on to say:

But middle Australia is out there paying for the second car, the weekender and the boat and is not impressed with government which takes too big a bite out of its overtime and earnings.

There is another good reason why there should be a concentration on a reduction in income tax. In the past two decades, Australia has come to rely much more heavily on direct taxes. In 1959-60, personal income taxes accounted for some. 35.6 per cent of Commonwealth taxation revenue, while in 1980-81 the estimate is that they will account for about 54 per cent. This probably would have been higher without the oil levy. This increased reliance on personal income tax needs to be re-assessed. The Government has brought the deficit back to manageable proportions. As I have suggested, the size of the Commonwealth Government expenditure ought to be brought back to the comparative 1970's level. Similarly, our reliance on the stifling levels of income tax ought to be corrected.

Over time we have corrected many of the fundamental imbalances in the economy which we inherited in 1975. It has been a steady process,

Governor-General's Speech

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 357

which is as it should be. Sharp shocks to the economy have a destabilising effect. They undermine business confidence. They upset investment plans, and generally are to be avoided. I therefore argue for a continuation of this gradualist approach with the fundamental goal of a reduction in the overall size of government and a worthwhile reduction in income taxes. 'We are going through a period of fairly rapid change and the Government has been responding to that need. The deregulation in the banking industry announced by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) and the Campbell Commission of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System are good examples of the Government moving in the right direction. More needs to be done in this area. For example, the average cost of all government paperwork to each small business was given to me during the hearings of the Estimates Committees last year as being $604.
Finally, it would be irresponsible for me to call for continued restraint of government spending without giving an indication of how this can be done. The honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating) asked how it could be done but he left the chamber without hearing the answer. It is clear that without restraint, government spending would continue to grow. Programs would be continued, extended, widened, more would be employed to implement them and so it goes on. The Government is rightly undertaking a review of its functions. Hopefully that will eradicate programs which have outlived their usefulness. In addition to that review, it is necessary to ensure over the next few years, that we direct the money that the Government takes from the people into areas where it is most heeded. We tended during and following the Whitlam Government, to find in the community a belief that everyone should receive benefits from the Government. If everyone is to receive benefits then everyone will have to pay more to provide those benefits. Honourable members should remember also that some of the taxes will be taken up by administrative costs.
There are not many people who would agree that they ought to pay more taxes for more general benefits. However, the Government does have a duty to provide welfare and other benefits to those in real need. It is this criteria to which I believe we ought to return. A good example is that some people may desire to have a tax deduction equivalent to but instead of a benefit, whilst others would be unfairly disadvantaged by such an arrangement and would opt to keep their benefit. That is the sort of proposal which the Minister for Social Security (Senator Chaney) raised last week, and I think the Minister has done

the community a service by opening debate in this area.
This is only one area of government spending that needs to be addressed, but it is a fastincreasing area. In 1951-52, for example, 12 per cent of the Commonwealth Government outlays went to social security and welfare, and in 1979-80 about 28 per cent of outlays in the Commonwealth area were spent on social security and welfare. Clearly, this reflects in part an increase in our standard of living and a sharing by the whole community in the wealth produced in this country, as is right. However, we should take care that our desire to ensure that everyone benefits from the increased wealth in Australia does not result in the productive element of our community being sapped of its ability to produce that wealth to be shared.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! Before I call the honourable member for Lilley, may I remind the House that this is the honourable member's maiden speech and that the usual courtesies of the House should be extended to her.
Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (5.17)-1 am honoured to stand in this chamber as the representative of the people of Lilley. Yet I am humbled by the dual respoQsibility of my position-a responsibility not only to tune into and to interpret the needs of the people who elected me but also to ensure that those needs are translated into parliamentary aCtion. The courtesy and support that I have received to date from honourable members on both sides of the House lead me to believe that I am not alone in this ambition.
I should like to speak of the. people of Lilley. The 66,278 people enrolled in Lilley are as diverse as human nature itself. I am proud to represent pensioners, business people, lone parents, home makers, wage earners, and the 'unemployed. I number among my constituents sporting people, the handicapped, artists, tradespeople, the racing fraternity, the professions-all typical Australians, both old and new, people proud of their local communities. It is surely true that we are here only as extensions of our electorates, regardless of party preferences. The role of the parliamentarian is justifiable only as a tool in the interests of democracy. We are here to express the will of the people. That, at least, is the time honoured theory. However,in Australia 1981 it is not the time-tested reality. If it we,re we would all be quite assured, both as parliamentarians and as politicians working in our own constituency, that our presence in the House will be justified by the work we can do for the people in our

358 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

GOVf!,rnor~Genera/'s Speech

constituencies-remembering that when we come here we are absent from our home areas. To be quite frank, I have seen no evidence in the Australian electorate of the ritual pilgrimage of parliamentarians to Canberra meeting the needs of the people. I am not saying that work is not being done. I would not be so naive or so unfair. Of course it is. But what is the point of all the hours of travelling, all the committee meetings, and all the hot air that is generated in this chamber if the needs of the community are not being met?
Back in my electorate of Lilley young people by the hundreds are slowly and painfully giving up hope of ever having a job, after weeks, months and years of queueing, applying and being rejected for work. They have been forgotten. Some are in their twenties and have never held a job. There are people in their forties and fifties who have been stood down from steady employment and cannot gain re-employment. Theyhave all been forgotten. I know single parents who are struggling to exist on $64 a week. They get $5 a week rent allowance and are paying $40 a week for meagre accommodation. I know aged people who just cannot afford to upkeep their modest accommodation and have given up. They have had to sell out. Parents who are caught between the dilemma of whether to pay for expensive health insurance or expensive medioal fees, are going without necessary medical treatment. I know small business people and service station owners who have had to close their doors because they have been crippled by rents, taxes and low profit margins. I know handicapped people with tertiary qualifications who are expected to say 'thank you' for receiving $2 a week for performingtrained work at a sheltered workshop. This is disgusting. It is not a picture out of a Dickens novel. It is a real and unsentimentalised picture of people who have elected me to this Parliament to protect their interests.
What does the Government do about their plight? It brushes aside their real concerns with a bland public relations front. Does any honourable member sincerely believe that the best thing we can do for our unemployed is to offer them empty promises of job training without the remotest possibility of that job training leading to jobsand while available facilities for real job creation lie idle? Well, I do not! I am a teacher and I value job training as far as it goes. I commend the Government for its tardy but welcome attention to a previously neglected area of youth education. But I am also a parent of teenage children. I know

that, without work, pr~~eI1}plpyment courses, preapprenticeship coursesl!-~c\, school to work transition schemes ate a cruel ,farce. They are nothing
but window dressing by ,a government that is ready and willing to pass ,the, buck on to the over-
burdened shoulders ofiq~ educationists., In my electorate a major portion, of the Eagle Farm works depot of the Department of Housing and Construction presently'lies dormant. Skilled tradesmen there are literallY dying off and taking their skills with them. Wi\h a little foresight and a little planning we ,could give these skilled tradesmen more productive work. We could use existing facilities, and I am talking of facilities in over a dozen categories of trade work, and we could give our young people the jobs they deserve. Such a use of existing resources surely is only logical; but I am afraid thaUn some circles logic is not as highly regarded as political and personal expediency and the use of available resources for the benefit of Australians, has not exactly been this Government's strong point.
Tak~ our natural resources. The Government has embarked on an extensive campaign to import overseas skills for what it calls the new resources boom. What excellent managers they are. Right under their collective noses thousands of Australia's greatest resource, out youth, looking for jobs that are not there. Does the Government train them for what it anticipates are the ne,eds of the future labour market? No, it does not. Showing the same mentality and enterprising skill which turned Australia into cheap resource fodder for overseas capital and overseas profit, the Government, we are told, plans t<;l take advantage of our resource boom by importing overseas labour. It is as though the Government feelS cursed rather than blessed, with oUf naturalre" sources. Instead of taking the initiative in financ~ ing our resource development and negotiating the highest pl'ice on the world market, too often our State and Federal governments take a back seat to overseas interests and adopt the policy: 'Let us get rid of as much of the stuff as soon as possible for as
little as they win give us'.
I hope honourable members will excuse my parochial analogy but Australia has become a 'Jack the Slasher' in the market-place o.f raw materials. It has been said that Australia's bjg business, probably because of years of over subsidy, is not among the world's most enterprising. I believe it was, Roderick Carnegie who said that Australia's big businessmen will not back a horse until after it has won the race. AustraHa:slack of large scale entrepreneurial skills is damaging but it should not lead us to the conclusion that We must import the capital and export the profits in

Governor-General's Speech

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 359

order to exploit oui natural resources. At least one man in the recent history of this Parliament had the vision to see that Australia could and should reap the reward of her own riches. Rex Connor's inspired, nationalistic, patriotic vision of Australia's future was not buried with him. It lives on as a tribute to his memory and, because of plain common sense, my party has enshrined the concept of Australian development of Australia's riches for Australians in its platform. For us, it is a solemn, unshakable article of faith. There was a real political visionary.
But what of this Government? I believe this Government has never had a vision of what Australia should and could be. All it has envisaged is what it as the Government might be able to get away with. The result of this lack of foresight in Government planning-or lack of planning-has already been felt by a growing and largely unseen section of the Australian popUlation-the hidden poor, the people of independent spirit but dwindling means, people who weep behind closed doors but who for me have recently been as close as the other end of my telephone. I wish that I were only exaggerating for the sake of politics but I am not. I know these people. The fact remains that this is a lucky country in which for many the luck has run out. The chasm developing between the haves and have-nots in this country is not just a by-product of governmentpolicy; it is a clear policy goal.
I am concerned by the number of people victimised by injustices and inconsistencies within laws which were intended to protect-not to impose upon the weak. This is particularly true in the area of social security. Under the Social Services Act pensioners must inform the Department of increases to any income other than their pensions. No such obligation is imposed on pensioners if their extra income decreases, Anomalies abound in the Department of Social Seeurity. I am concerned' because it is always the pensioner-the have-not-who suffers. It is as if the Act were passed to protect the strong-the bureaucracy-from the people whom it. was created to serve instead of vice versa. De facto relationships are one such instance. As far as the Department of Social Security is concerned, female pensioners may live together, male pensioners may live together, but a man and a woman of similar age, drawing benefit or pension, are placed in a separate category. Despite all the protestations to the contrary, the Department does make a moral judgment. In addition, whilst the Department of Social Security recognises a de facto relationship to the extent that those in such relationships receive a married rate of pension,

the Taxation Office on the other hand does not recognise the relationship and does not allow claims for deductions for dependants in the relationship.
There are many other examples of anomalies. It is time that they were eliminated. They are bad enough because they are inefficient and because they cause inconvenience and confusion. But, worse, they traumatise those people least able to bear it. Each individual, however much in need of government assistance, must be assured that his or her dignity, self-respect and privacy will be preserved. I believe pensions and benefits are already' too low without also lowering the standard of service to our pensioners. But lowering of standards is exactly what is occurring as a result of Public Service staff ceilings and the sort of muddle-headed logic which has seen the closure of the Sandgate social security office in an area of dense pensioner population in Lilley and of the Rosemount Repatriation Hospital which offers the only day care service to veterans on the north side of Brisbane. Keeping social security offices overworked and understaffed not only lowers standards but also is false economy, because as departmental personnel have already pointed out to me the incidence of undetected fraud is bound to increase. I wish to have it on record that I will be devoting much of my time and work as a member of this House striving to convince honourable members of the humanitarian and realistic need to increase all categories of social security payments ' to a more reasonable level, to raise supplementary assistance which has been static since 1974 and to return to a pension free of means test for pensioners over 70. It is grossly unfair that people who pay into superannuation all their lives should be penalised in their old age. I will also be striving to convince honourable members that the means test should be raised substantially in all social security categories.
Mr Deputy Speaker, I can almost hear honourable members saying 'where is the money coming from?' I have heard that catch-cry before. I believe a country iS,as strong as its weakest person. We enrich ouselves as a nation by raising the living standards of our poor. But this Governme{lt seems incapable of grasping the reality that, in a well-balanced mixed economy, support should be given not only to industry, business and commerce-the producers of our wealth-but also to our consumers. It is time that we treated our senior citizens, our veterans and our less fortunate, with the dignity they deserve.
I would also like to give notice that I will be doing all that is possible within the powers of a new back bencher to persuade the Government to

360 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

honour its promise to introduce a natural disaster insurance scheme. I have come close to the heartbreak and suffering involved in getting lives back
to normal after such an event in the Brighton area of my electorate of Lilley. I believe the problems which I have encountered in Lilley extend to the Australian electorate. Are we, as an institution, equipped to meet these problems? Our political institutions-principally the institution of
parliament-do not have the confidence of the people. Petitions bearing thousands of signatures are ignored. Notices of motion are meaningless.
No honourable member of this Parliament really expects such a notice to be followed by debate on the next day of sitting or any other day. And what could be more meaningless than the debates themselves?- I mention this because I question whether the time and attention of the nation's Parliament
warrant such procedures. Can the Parliament more constructively exercise its time and forms? I believe it must aim to do so. The only way the Parliament can ever project itself as the authoritative voice of the Australian people is for it to earn the respect of the people. In my opinion this means a more relevant and professional approach to the business of Parliament. It means also that this Government must stop putting the erection of monuments to itself and public works before people. If We are not careful the Brisbane
Airport-the largest public work under way in Australia, situated in the electorate of Lilleycould end up as an example of this brick and mo~ tar mentality. Let me say at the outset that the Australian Labor Party and I are totally committed to the redevelopment and upgrading of the Brisbane Airport. But it must meet the highest standards of air safety, aircraft noise and runway alignment. We must not only have a new airport
but it must be the best one possible.

as great a monument as a new military academy or a new parliament house..,
A right honourable member of this Parliament said in his maiden speech 25 years ago: 'If we are to tackle these problems, not as six independent States, not as different groups of people pulling in different directions, but as one nation, as the one people we are, we cannot fail'.
But we have failed. He has failed-he, and the Government which he now leads. For this man and his Government have divided Australia between the haves and the have-nots. If they do not recognise this division and create policies to cement it, it will widen and worsen until we as a nation shall surely break. I believe it is past time that this Government raised monuments of policy to the jobless and to the poor.
Mr BRADFIELD (Barton) (5.35)-ln rising to speak in the debate on the Address-in-Reply to the Governor-General's Speech, I take the opportunity once again to thank the people of my electorate for electing me for the third time to represent them in this Parliament. In the turmoil before elections the community does become divided-in myelectorate it become equally divided-but once persons are elected the people unite and we go forward once again as Australian people undivided. I certainly appreciate that and I will certainly represent all the people of Barton from that point of view.
I am pleased that the Governor-General's Speech focused great attention on unemployment, particularly on youth unemployment. The Governor-General said:
The first element of that program to which I wish to draw particular attention is the provision it contains for overcoming unemployment in general . . .

Mr Deputy Speaker, the major unhealed sore
at the heart of our nation is the neglect, the complete spurning of a growing number of citizens fighting just to survive rather than thrive in the
midst of all our advertised bounty. The thinking of most Cabinet Ministers in this Government appears to be dominated by a vision of their honourable and right honourable names engraved on brass plaques embedded in some monument that will stand forever as a tribute to their own administrative ingenuity. It would be so refreshing to see a Minister just as enthusiastically unveiling a policy initiative to combat the canker of hidden poverty in this country; or a policy in which concern for school buildings is at the very least matched by concern for the ratio of students to teachers; or in which a job creation scheme is seen

In order to appreciate the task that this Government has before it to overcome the unemployment situation it is necessary to have an understanding of the nature of the unemployment. It is necessary to have an understanding of the various classifications that make up the unemployment. Unemployment is not overcome simply by creating jobs, although that is part of the solution. Help, education and a healthy economy are also required to overcome unemployment. When one analyses the cases of those people who are unemployed one finds that a considerable percentage of them, often through no fault of their own, are simply unemployable. They have suffered a life of bad luck or ill health and there is no way that they can cope continually in a permanent position in the community.

Governor-General's Speech

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 361

The honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling) touched on the second category of unemployment in her speech. The second category is caused by an imbalance between education and the opportunities that exist in our country. The fact is that many people are doing degree courses in fields in which job opportunities do not exist. People are not taking the opportunity of training for one of the trades that will be in even greater demand in the future. The people who make up the third category of unemployment are those who want to work and who, for some reason or other, are unable to get a job. In considering the unemployment situation one should look at where the future job opportunities will be and look at the great advances that have been made in the employment situation in Australia since 1975 through the initiatives of this Government. Perhaps some members of the Opposition will doubt that statement, but if one looks at the figures for the employed work force in 1975 one will find that an additional one million people are now employed in Australia.
Mr Young-In part time jobs.
Mr BRADFIELD-Not in part time jobs. We have been able to arrest the unemployment spiral caused by the previous Labor Government. We have been able to cope with the 130,000 school leavers each year and take them into the work force. That is why the total number of people employed in Australia today is one million more than it was in 1975. This has been brought about by the initiatives of this Government in implementing training schemes-not the artificial employment schemes that the Opposition wants to promote. I refer to the National Employment and Training scheme, the Special Youth Employment Training Program, the Education Program for Unemployed Youth and the very successful Commonwealth Rebate for Apprentice FullTime Training. All of those schemes are helping to turn training in Australia to where the jobs are, that is, in the trades. Those schemes are working.
Let us look at some of the statistics available in Australia today to back up just what I have been saying. Let us look at a few comments from some of the bodies whose economic knowledge we tend to hold high. A recent bulletin of the ANZ Banking Group Ltd states:
Recent statistics on consumer and investment spending, along with surveys of business opinion, confirm that the Australian economy is experiencing a fillip to demand and employment.
A Treasury statement dated February 1981 states:
The Consumer Price Index increased by 2.1 per cent in the December quarter 1980 and by 9.3 per cent over the course of 1980.

It went on to state:
Both retail sales and new passenger vehicle registrations showed strong growth in the December quarter.
That is good news. The statement talks about private dwelling approvals rising further in the December qua~ter. On the subject of unemployment, which I have just been talking about, it states that unemployment continued at about half the level of a year earlier. It also refers to the growth in employment and the fall in unfilled vacancies. All that is an indication of the success of our policies. It is an indication of the success of Australia. It is an indication that employment growth in Australia will continue into the future. This growth in employment has not been achieved by artificial policies. We have had the right policies to achieve it.
I move to another area about which I have great concern, an area that certainly affects the people in my electorate of Barton and I am sure affects other people in Australia. The matter was touched upon one day last week by the honourable member for Bradfield (Mr Connolly), the person whose seat I would dearly love to have. I refer to a suggestion which would bring about an alteration to the investing habits of many of the Australian people. Historically, Australians have concentrated on a handful of large financial repositories as the custodians of their savings. I do not deny that our large financial repositories are a safe and ideal place for people to put their investments. Presently these large financial institutions, such as the life insurance offices, the superannuation funds, the bank nominee companies and the trustee companies, are growing at a great rate as repositories of people's money.
As an example of the magnitude of these repositories, I refer to the life insurance offices within Australia. They currently have $3 billion invested in shares. They have over $4 billion invested in government and semi-government loans. They have about $1 billion in company debentures. If we consider the various superannuation funds throughout Australia we find that combined they have about $4 billion invested in shares and debentures. They have over $2 billion invested in State government and local government securities. That is an example of the investing habits of the Australian people and of the few hands in which people place their money for investment.
When this is coupled with the national banking recycling system, under which money tends to be lent back to the community in larger amounts than the individual amounts deposited but to a lesser number of borrowers than the number who

362 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

deposited the funds, the historical pattern of what me, spoke with great concern for pensioners.

investors have done with their money is There is a lot of pensioners in my electorate of

highlighted. These ongoing processes certainly Barton; there is a lot of pensioners in Australia. I

maintain maximum Australian investment-the speak of a special investment scheme or a special

same amount of money is kept in Australia-but government loan designed for pensioners, in

what it does is to destroy instead of maximising which they can invest their money and interest on

the incentive of the Australian investor. He or she that money can be disregarded when determining

is not able to see clearly what his or her investtheir eligibility to receive fringe benefits. Unfortu-

ment is doing and what reward is being earned.

nately, over recent months interest rates have

I hold in the highest regard the banks, the life insurance offices and superannuation funds as places in which people should invest their money.

risen. When I say unfortunately, I mean that it is unfortunate for people who have borrowed money.

But if through legislation we could encourage more Australian people to invest their money directly the people would be more aware and feel part of the future of the country. I suggest that we could encourage Australian people to invest directly by changing the taxation laws to provide for a partial rebate of dividends received by permanent Australian residents from corporations and enterprises formed and registered within Australia. That would provide an incentive for Australian people to invest in Australian companies. In conjunction with such a scheme, we would have to provide strict guidelines to protect those investors, guidelines that would allow them to invest only in companies which met certain standards, perhaps public companies which were audited. If we encourage people to invest directly in companies we also will have a duty to provide safe investments for those people.

Many pensioners in their final stages of life have invested funds. The increase in interest rates has caused tremendous worry and embarr!lssment to many of them in my electorate of Barton, as I am sure it has to many pensioners throughout Australia: This has happened through no fault of theirs, through no manoeuvring on their part and through no alteration to their investments. All of a sudden, they are receiving increased interest rates on their investments and, to their alarm, they have become ineligible to receive fringe benefits. That is a tremendous loss. Fringe benefits are of great advantage to pensioners. By offering a special government loan in which pensioners can invest their money, perhaps attracting lower than the market interest rate, we might alleviate that problem. Such a principle is not one which has not been adopted by the Government in the past. We have had special schemes for

Such a scheme would also encourage workers farmers, including issuing drought bonds which

throughout Australia to invest in the enterprises have enabled farmers to level out their incomes.

for which they work. Appropriate legislation could open the way for this and could provide a worthwhile incentive for the workers. I recall in 1976, as a member of a Government committee looking at some of the worker participation programs in Australia. I recall visiting a company in Victoria and a large manufacturing company in Sydney. Both of these companies had their employees share, to a known quantity, ill. the company profits. All I can say is that such a scheme provided very worthwhile rewards for the employees. It made them happy and gave them an interest in their work. Also, in every instance, it resulted in a most efficient company which competed easily and is still competing easily with other companies which existed then. Both companies have grown since those days in 1976. If such a scheme could be developed in Australia

Such a scheme as the one I have suggested would bring to the Government a lot of money that otherwise would be kept under carpets and in .jam tins at pensioners' homeS. That money is put there by terrified pensioners who value greatly their fringe benefits. They are forced by the limi~ tations on eligibility to receive fringe beriefits to put their money in places often which are unsafe. Often those people are the preyof burglars. Often, through their fear of losing their fringe benefits, they become the prey of investment people who are more interested in looking after themselves than they are in looking after the pensioners. A scheme such as the one I suggested would work throughout Australia. It would be of tremendous advantage to pensioners and to Australia as a whole.

there could be an amazing change in the attitudes of people. As I have said, such a scheme would be a strong possibility through a change in legislation.

It has been my pleasure to speak in the Address-in-Reply debate. I am looking forward to my next term in Parliament representing the

I take the liberty of referring quickly to another people of Barton. I am well aware of the needs of

scheme that I would like to see implemented. The the community in my electorate. I am well aware

honourable member for Lilley, who spoke before of the needs of the individual. I can only assure

Governor-General's Speech

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 363

the people in my electorate that while I am in Parliament I will do my utmost to represent them in a manner befitting the electorate of Barton.
Sitting suspended from 5.53 to 8 p.m.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) (8.0)-The House is debating the Address-inReply to the Governor-General's Speech and the amendment moved by the Opposition. I will address my remarks to those matters. But at the outset I extend my congratulations to all those 'honourable members who have made their maiden speeches, as i~ the custom, during the Address-in-Reply debate. I am delighted to see so many new faces on our side of the chamber. I think you will agree, Mr Deputy Speaker, that the people of Australia have shown commendable judgment in giving us the support we now have. The speeches that have been made indicate that the Government can do much more.
The Governor-General's Speech attempted to show the humanity and compassion of the Government but the reality is somewhat different. There are weaknesses in a number of areas of Government policy, not the least of which are in the foreign policy and economic policy areas. We say to the Government that we accept the decision of the Australian people. We think we fought a good fight and we lost the election very narrowly. But the problems are still there. The Government will lose its Senate majority on I July but, as a party of principle, we will not refuse Supply for that reason. We make it very clear that if the Government has a mandate to introduce certain legislation we will not obstruct it. But we warn the Government that it cannot expect our support for legislation for which it has no mandate, which favours sectional interests or is against the interests of the Australian people.
We think constitutional and electoral reform are important. These matters will certainly be pressed in the Senate. We have also noticed the tensions in the Government. Since the election there have been no fewer than four vacancies in the Ministry. One was due to the tragic death of Eric Robinson. Nevertheless, the pressures, tension and disarray of the Government are obvious. We do not think it will end there. We think that the Government should be able to indicate unity, concern, equity-particularly in matters such as taxation-and vision. We will watch with interest. We suspect that in perhaps three years time the Government may not have achieved any of those four aims. I will draw attention to significant aspects of the Governor-General's Speech, particularly in the foreign affairs area. The Speech was notable for what it did not say.

The Speech which the Government gave the Governor-General to read said nothing about
overseas aid, human rights, uranium safeguards, Kampuchea or the erosion of our national sovereignty and independence.

The reason that list is conspicuous is that the

Government has failed in all those areas. Let us

look at them. I refer to two in particular, the aid

program and the uranium export safeguards. In

those areas the Government's policies are scan-

dalous. The administrative changes now reported

to be under consideration by the Government are

not likely to make bad policies_ better; they are

likely to make them worse. Both issues arise from

the activities of the so-called Lynch committee or

razor gang. The ministerial committee reviewing

the functions of Commonwealth departments is

apparently posing threats to the independence of

the Australian Development Assistance Bureau

and the nuclear safeguards branch of the Depart-

ment of Foreign Affairs, not to mention the Aus-

tralian Safeguards Office of the Department of

National Development and Energy. Our foreign

aid agency is already suffering from ,a reduction in

funds. Our contribution to aid programs which

are designed to help the poor, the sick, the hungry

and the deprived majority has been cut to the very

miserly level of a mere 0.42 per cent of our gross

national product, the lowest it has ever been.

These reductions have been imposed by a govern-

ment which says it is committed to moving

towards the agreed target for overseas aid of 0.7

per cent. The Government is not moving towards

the target; it is backing away from it. Not content

with that, the ministerial committee is calling into

question the very independence and autonomy of

the aid agency. This is happening at a time when

the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) is

adopting a posture with fine words about his con-

cern for the Third World and progress on North-

South issues. He is preparing to host the Com-

monwealth Heads of Government Meeting later

this year.

'

The second area suggested by the razor gang in which cuts could be made is even more disturbing.
It is reported that the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr
Anthony), whose minority party already holds and wields a fist full of powers out of all pro-
portion to its numbers, wants to take over the
uranium export safeguards policy to the exclusion of the Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) and the Minister for National Development and
Energy (Senator Carrick). To hand control of safeguards on the destination and use of our uranium to the very department whose prime
interest is in selling it is like putting the poacher in
charge of the pheasants. Already, the safeguards

364 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

policy has been bent and breached by proposals to sell uranium to South Korea and the Philippines, two countries whose governments have standards and stability which are suspect. Further, we also sell uranium to France which continues to despoil the Pacific with its nuclear tests and whose pipeline of uranium supplies leads straight to nuclear weapons.
A crucial part of the uranium industry and the future of all Australians is the decision which must shortly be taken concerning the development of uranium enrichment facilities in this country. Other governments are considering the same question. Other governments have uranium enrichment industries. But this Government is the only one in the world to abdicate its responsibility and to pass entirely to private corporations, the giant mining companies, the question of whether we should have a uranium enrichment industry.
The double standards of this Government are nowhere more apparent than in the gap between the Prime Minister's rhetoric on the North-South dialogue and the fact that not one substantial initiative has been taken by the Government, in the context of those negotiations, to assist the poorest of countries. There is an urgent and substantial need to talk about how we can help these people. I refer particularly to the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. The immediate past President of the World Bank, Mr McNamara, recently called for the establishment of a food import finance facility to assist some of the poorest and most deprived of our neighbours. If there were one ounce of sincerity in the Prime Minister's much proclaimed commitment to the NorthSouth dialogue, here was an opportunity to do something constructive. What happened? Not only did Australia's representatives to the recent meeting of the World Bank not support the proposed food import finance facility; they also actively opposed it. When' I asked the Foreign Minister a question about this matter he seemed to be unaware of the proposal. If this is the best the Government can do, the Prime Minister is deluding himself in his hopes for an invitation to attend any North-South summit convened later this year.
Australia is not a great power but it has tremendous wealth. It is of rapidly increasing significance. Given the presence of United States bases on our soil, we have a special right and obligation to speak out as a vigorous supporter of detente. Detente is not an outmoded option, it is our only option.
This brings me to an issue of crucial importance to the entire nation, namely, the existence of

United States bases in this ,country and the surveillance and other purposes which are the reasons for their existence. I place on record that the Labor Party is not anti-American. It has never been anti-American. It was a Labor government which initiated the United States alliance. But the Labor Party will continue to demand an informed, more independent and legitimate foreign policy.' It is essential that the Australian people be informed by the Government of the reasons for fundamental decisions taken on their behalf. This has not been the case since this Government took office. Recent changes in the strategic doctrines of the United States and in the facilities at the United States bases in Australia emphasise this point. It is an affront to the Parliament and to the citizens it represents that vital information affecting the security of those citizens and their children should become available only through leaked documents or investigations by journalists.
Washington does not demand subservience and our national interests do not allow it. All Australian political leaders must have the courage publicly to recognise, and to question, the fact that the existence of the United States bases creates for us a potential risk. Their presence now apparently qualifies us as a high priority Soviet target in any nuclear exchange with the United States. There may be good reasons why Australia has to live with these new and changing risks, but Australians are entitled to know the facts on which those decisions have been taken by their political leaders.
The first task of the Foreign Minister, upon arriving in Washington this week, should be to obtain a detailed explanation of the role and purposes of these bases in the current strategic circumstances, circumstances which the Prime Minister himself says have changed so drastically since the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Anything less constitutes a derogation of our national sovereignty and represents irresponsibility to the people of Australia and to the future of this country. Certainly, the Foreign Minister should return with a briefing on the new Navstar system, elements of which, we note, are now reported to be sited 30 kilometres from Adelaide. United States experts have warned that the Soviet Union may well regard this system as facilitating an American pre-emptive attack. In a 1979 report prepared for the United States Congress it was stated that Navstar would so significantly improve the accuracy of American submarine launched ballistic missiles that:
The Soviets could see it as facilitating a United States preemptive attack.

Governor-General's Speech

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 365

Therefore, the Australian people should be perpetuate the existence of a regime which, ac-

clearly informed of the general purposes and cording to the testimony of the United States Am-

functions of this system.

bassador, has slaughtered thousands of its own

I turn now to another glaring omission from the Speech. I speak of the failure even to refer to the tragic problems of Kampuchea. Labor places on record the fact that it does not endorse Vietnam's intervention in Kampuchea but accepts the reality that without it the genocidal Pol Pot would have continued killing Kampucheans. We call for the withdrawal from Kampuchea of all outside
forces and the disarming of Pol Pot guerrillas. It is absurd for anyone to suggest that only the Viet-

citizens. The Foreign Minister should not be afraid to say that bluntly when he is in Washington. We best serve our allies by offering independent, considered opinions, not by following them up every blind alley. We foolishly followed the United States into the quagmire of Vietnam. We should make it very plain now that we do not support the ominous first steps being taken by Washington into what could well be a Latin American disaster.

namese should withdraw, thus leaving a vacuum for the murderous Khmer Rouge. The heart of the matter is self-determination for the Kam-

At his first Press conference, the new American Secretary of State, Alexander Haig, said:

pucheans. What is urgently needed now is a broad international effort. As a forerunner, we suggest a conference convened by Australia, through an

International terrorism would take the place of human rights in our concern, because it is the ultimate abuse of human rights.

independent initiative which would bring together No one asked General Haig why the United

the Association of South East Asian Nations and States Government had to choose between the

Vietnam, with ourselves as honest brokers. That two, or how, if international terrorism really was

could be a forerunner to the further development the worst of human rights abuses, he could speak

of peace and security in the area.

of one taking the place of the other. It is not only a

I note with pleasure that the Government is to increase by$3m its official aid to Kampuchea and say that that is not before time. There must be a disarming of the Khmer Rouge guerrillas and the only direct way to bring that about is to strip from their leaders diplomatic support and all hope of international help. They retain their hold on their 30,000 armed peasant youth only by their access to supplies and spurious claims to power. Take those away and Pol Pot will lose all international credibility. His regime has already lost any sup-
port among his own people. In fact, it has earned the hatred of the Kampucheans. Labor again ad. vocates the resumption of Australian economic aid to Vietnam. This would not endorse all or any

matter of principle. It is in this nation's long term interests that we oppose abuses of human rights wherever they occur, be it Indonesia, Latin America, the Soviet Union, China, or even our
own country. There is a school of thought, one to which the Labor Party does not subscribe, that commercial, political and security interests are the only ingredients of foreign policy. It is the exponents of this line who want us to tread softly
when our journalists are murdered and others are expelled. What criminal, unprincipled rubbish . that isl It is the exponents of this line who believe, although they never say so openly, that we are entitled to defend our own freedom by supporting regimes which deny freedom to their own people.

of Hanoi's policies, just as Australian aid elsewhere does not signify political approval. The general shunning of Vietnam, particularly by the United States and despite President Nixon's
promises of massive post war aid, has inevitably pushed Vietnam towards the Soviet Union.

The double standards of the Prime Minister are again thrown into relief when one compares his posturing against apartheid with our rapidly increasing trade with South Africa. On the one hand he assures his developing country colleagues that we are observing the spirit of the United

In summary, it is essential that Australia, with Nations resolutions when dealing with South

its regional influence and interests, should pursue Africa. On the other, we can say that he connives

an independent and principled policy in Indoat, or condones, a major West Australian trade

China, for the sake of both its own people and mission to South Africa leaving in March. We see

theirs. This is particularly important now when that during the last three years, during the

under the Reagan administration, pressure for Government's international grandstanding,

further international isolation of Vietnam is likely Australia's exports to South Africa have doubled.

to harden. Again, the Labor Party rejects totally, No doubt this will not be on the agenda when the

as an instrument of foreign policy, the propping Commonwealth heads of government meet later

up of oppressive regimes, be they right or left wing this year, but they will know the situation, which

dictatorships. The current situation in El Salvador shows clearly that the government's foreign pol-

is a classic case. The United States has no right to icy, which is dominated by the Prime Minister, is

366 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

not one of principle but rather of cynical expediency.
One of the few things that the Governor General's Speech did say was this;
My Government believes . . . that Australia . . . should play its part in strengthening the international forces working for stability at the global and regionallevels.
Yet several weeks ago, when South African forces invaded Mozambique and killed 12 leaders of the African National Congress, the movement which is fighting for a democratic South Africa, this Government did nothing. It is difficult to imagine a more destabilising act in this region, yet the Government not only did nothing, it also said nothing. That makes the fine words in the Governor-General's Speech sound very hollow indeed.
I have already referred to the question of Australian sovereignty, but there are other areas in which our sovereign rights have been slighted and our independence diminished by those whom we call our friends. I have time to mention only one of them. The United States Government continues to insist that some of its laws, particularly its anti-trust laws, have extra-territorial effect, that their writ runs throughout Australia. This is outrageous and it is time we told Washington so in the plainest terms. The Westinghouse litigation is a classic case. Australian companies are still being dragged through American courts, our blockingC legislation notwithstanding. What is the allegation involved? It is that the Australian Government, in concert with these corporations, acted to protect a national industry of vital economic and strategic concern to us. Our American colleagues must understand that the attempt to apply their antitrust laws to Australia is quite repugnant to our national independence. The Westinghouse case seems typical of American double standards on trade. In the United States view, there had to be protection for American industry at the expense of foreign uraniu'm sellers, including Australia. In fact, it set up an American cartel to guarantee that no uranium could be sold within America, to give Westinghouse the sole rights to the market. But when the Westinghouse Corporation found that foreign uranium suppliers did not offer the terms that it sought for overseas supplies of uranium for its reactors, the Corporation, wanting a cheap price, went straight to the United States courts to have the United States anti-trust laws applied outside that country. In other words, to put it in a nutshell, it is a case of high protection for the United States but enforced free trade for outsiders. Of course, we reject that, just as we reject other spurious, so-called free trade strategies

that are now being pushed on Australia by the multinational corporations, most of which are owned by Americans, or based in America. The gap between rich and poor nations has doubled since 1960, and that doubling is due to a number of the operations of corporations such as that. The gap is still widening.
One response of this Government is to assume that the solution for the developing nations is for them to pursue industrialisation for export. It is also assumed that the trade involved should be subject only to so-called market forces, or free trade. The evidence shows that these assumptions are nonsense. In 'our region much of this new industrialisation is concentrated in free trade zones. Over 100 of these zones now exist in West, South and East Asia. (Extension of time granted). I thank my colleagues and the House.
The establishment of the free trade zones has coincided with policies which concentrated on rapid and excessive mechanisation of agriculture and wholesale displacement of millions of people from the countryside. Those displaced from the rural areas congregate in huge slums ringing the major cities. They are told the free trade zones will provide jobs for them. But, to attract production and investment to these zones the host governments offer the following: Firstly; exemption from tax for up to 10 years; secondly, the infrastructure is paid for by the host government; and, thirdly-but above all-there is a huge supply of very cheap labour which is kept cheap by the supl'ession of any rights of effective union organisation and the absence of minimum wage, health or safety laws. There is no real democracy. It is a complete contravention of the convention of human rights. The international corporations, the mobile giants of the world, are quick to exploit this. I quote Mr George Ball, of Lehman Brothers. He stated:
We are able for the first time to utilise world resources with an efficiency dictated by the objective logic of profit.
This internationalisation of prod,uction has proceeded so rapidly that according to United Nations estimates, 55 per cent of world trade in manufactured goods is simply parts and products transferred within each giant corporation. We cannot blame the corporations for maximising profits. It wQuld be naive to expect from them allegiance to any single nation. With a few notable exceptions, most obey the minimum requirements of the laws of the nations in which they operate.
However, it would also be naive to expect them not to canvass all profit options. These options are, firstly, trading off one country, region or state against another in a world wide option in which

Governor-General's Speech

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 367

all who seek investment are required to offer: The cheapest wages, the longest working hours, the lowest working conditions, the biggest tax concessions, the most generous provision of infrastructure and the cheapest energy; secondly, operating transfer pricing to move profits around and to minimise tax-we have had an example before the High Court of Australia; and, thirdly, moving capital in and out of national economies in quanties large enough to effect exchange rates and speculating on the variations in those exchangy rates. The trade pattern, the terms of trade, the balance of trade and even the type of a nation state's industrial base can be greatly influenced by the, global strategies of these corporations.
Since these new practices dominate over half of world trade, and affect national trade, industry, tax, employment and exchange rate policies, one would think that the Government after five years at least would have developed some co-ordination or some national policy. All the corporations have their plans for as far ahead as 20 years but it would be foolish to assume, as the Government does, that somehow these corporations will give maximum advantage to' Australia. The Opposition does not believe, as this Government does, that we would simply wait to see whether we accidentally benefit from these processes. The corporate ideology of so-called free trade and the advent of free trade zones ideally suits the corporations but the results for many countries are far from ideal.
The result of this pattern of production and trade in our region is growing inequality within most of our neighbouring Asian states. The majority has slipped further into poverty while a wealthy elite has become more affluent. It is no accident that democracy and civil rights are low on the agenda of these countries. It is also no surprise to find that, in eight countries in this region, foreign ownership of industry has risen from one-third to two-thirds in the last few years. Australia is under considerable pressure; both domestic and foreign, to speed up these developments by dismantling protective barriers an~ adopting a so called free trade policy. Those who OppOSy this are accused of callous disregard for the industrial aspirations' of the developing nations and, supposedly, of consigning them to permanent poverty.
This ignores the reality that these developments have not only failed to benefit the majority of people in our region but also in Australia itself have led to the destruction of industries, considerable loss of jobs, erosion of the living standards of those in the industries, affected, and the' implementation of government tax, budgeting and

incomes policies which further increase inequality. The successive recommendations of the Industries Assistance Commission and the planned production of the world car are examples. The scenario is very clear. This is the logic and consequences of the so-called free trade under market forces championed by this Government. It ignores the fact that trade is no longer free but largely intra-corporate and that it is not market forces we are dealing with but forced markets planned well in advance.
I turn now to the way Government policies relate to assets, incomes, jobs and prospects. Take assets and wealth. In Australia, the wealthiest 10 per cent own 60 per cent; in other words, the richest 2,000 people own as much as the poorest two and a quarter million people. It is said that the wealthy do not pay very much tax. Recently a National Party member of the Queensland Parliament was moved to say: '
Fraser and Howard apparently want tax serfdom for ordinary workers who they see as easy prey while being happy to build castles for the privileged few who are rich enough to escape through tax loopholes.
Of course, the Government can reject that assessment because it came from the National Party, but can it question Professor Mathews of the Australian National University? He stated:
The taxation system has become a major instrument for redistributing income and wealth in favour of the rich.
What are the statistics? In the last five years those paying tax on personal exertion have faced a 73 per cent increase in tax whereas those paying tax in the same period from what o,ne might call nonpersonal exertion faced only' a 31 per cent increase in tax. The increase in incomes for the latter group has been twice that of the former group in the same period.
Professor Mathews estimates that the wealthy avoid or evade at least $2.7 billion a year in tax-a figure confirmed by Treasury and the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet. If there is one industry which has grown, it is the tax avoidance industry which now employs numerous specialists in the art of robbing the majority on behalf of the minority.
We hear much about the approaching minerals and resources boom and how we will all benefit, but over 60 per cent of value added in the mineral sector is foreign owned and controlled with benefits accruing to foreign shareholders. Anyone who believes that the rest will be shared equitably amongst Australians is dreaming. In the absence of a resource tax, and given that although the number of shares has increased by 30 per cent but the number of people who hold theI)1 has

368 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

decreased by 10 per cent, how can the GovernLabor Party was last in government it used inter-

ment explain to the Australian people that they national influences as the excuse for every error it

will benefit from such a boom? The Governormade. The Deputy Leader of the Opposition, for

General has said that the policies of the Governthat part of his speech which I heard, cannot have

ment are designed 'to work for the well being of it both ways. We are part of an international

all Australians'. But the evidence shows quite world and we are an international trader in absol-

clearly that the foreign affairs, trade, industry, ute terms of importance. Therefore we have the

taxation, budgetary, incomes, assets and resources problem when we talk of international cartels and

policies benefit the wealthiest 10 per cent to the international relationships of understanding that

detriment of the great majority. This makes a we as Australians live with international

mockery of the claim by the Prime Minister that: influences. It is norisense for the Deputy Leader of

'We govern for no class; we are beholden to no the Opposition to go on as he did in that part of his

special interests'. There is not equal opportunity speech which I happened to hear; that is, in simple

whether it be in regard to health care, employterms.

ment or education. We know that well. The speeches made by those who have recently become members of this Parliament clearly come from the heart and illustrate how the people in their constituencies see the problems. Ids for that reason that I have much pleasure in supporting the amendment.

In taking this opportunity of joining the debate of the Governor-General's Speech to the First Session of the Thirty-second Parliament on 25 November, I would like to move away from the grand international conversation that we have been having and comment on an issue which I think is important and which has been featured

Mr DOBIE (Cook) (8.30}-I have much pleasure in not supporting the amendment. That will not come as a surprise to honourable members opposite. I thank the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen) for having his speech extended which allowed me to come into the chamber in time. I am sorry that I was not able to extend to him the courtesy of hearing his whole speech, but I promise to read it in the morning. The Deputy Leader of the Opposition talked of

throughout the national dailies in recent weeks. I refer, of course, to the possibility of his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales holding the important and significant post of Governor-General in Australia. I believe that it would be most inappropriate to limit the activities of the heir to the throne to that of the monarch's representative in Australia. His responsibilities now and in the near future are wider than anyone country of his future realm.

international involvement. (Quorum formed). I Mr Barry Jones-Intergalactic.

thank the honourable member for Hotham (Mr Kent) for his courtesy in getting me an audience. I think I should point out to him that when I made my maiden speech some 14 years ago I did not have an audience anywhere near the size of the present one. I think that this is the largest audience I have had in the succeeding 14 years. It is really quite a humbling experience to have the Deputy Leader of the Opposition and all the new honourable members present, and I thank the honourable member for Hotham for his involvement. However, I hope that the honourable member for Hotham, having made his maiden speech, will appreciate that some of the courtesies extended to new members in the past no longer exist. I ask him to contemplate that point when he .next speaks in this chamber.

Mr DOBIE-I will ignore that Star Wars interjection. I believe that the Prince of Wales has a most important role to play in Australia. It is obvious that he holds Australia in special regard and affection. His visits, and those of his parents and other members of his family in recent times, have done much to deny the small republican cause in our country. The monarchy is firmly entrenched .in our way of life. Despite the dour prognostications of certain members of the Parliament and the public, I believe that we shall see Prince Charles ascending to the throne in due time and his heirs and succes:..ors thereafter. As much as I admire this young Prince, and staunch and unashamed a monarchist as I am, I do not see the cause of the monarchy being necessarily enhanced by an early appointment of Prince Charles to the

\

Before the quorum was formed I was in the middle of expressing my apologies to the Deputy Leader of the Opposition for the discourtesy of not hearing the whole of his speech. The Deputy Leader of the Opposition mentioned international

Australian Governor-Generalship. In 10 years or so perhaps there could be different circumstances, but as of now I see no advantage in such an appointment coming from Her Majesty the Queen.

involvement. I remind him, and the honourable I also take the opportunity of this debate to pay

member for Hotham, that when the Australian my tribute to' the present incumbent and his

Governor-General's Speech

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 369

charming wife. Their Excellencies Sir Zelman and Lady Cowen have; worked unceasingly and untiringly since their appointment late in 1977. The mind boggles when one reads the vice-regal column in the daily Press and notes the amount of travel and the number of engagements they undertake. There would not be one of us in this Thirty-second Parliament who has not been impressed by the quiet dignity of Sir Zelman and his lady and the level of intelligent participation which they bring to each occasion and function which they grace.
I believe that the Governor-General's Speech to the nation on Australia Day some w~eks ago was a significant comment on the responsibility which faces all Australians, whether in parliament or not, in the International Year of Disabled -Persons. His references to such outstanding personalities as Sir Lorimer Dods and, by implication, Dr George Burniston, C.M.G., OBE., the President of the newly-established Australian College of Rehabilitation Medicine, which was inaugurated in February 1980, reminded us that we have had and do have outstanding achievers and achievements in the field of caring for the welfare of those who are disabled within our community. One would hope then that during 1981 there will be an increasing awareness by as many Australians as possible not only of what remains to be done but also of what is being done and has been done.
As Federal legislators, as well as being Federal politicians, we must be certain that 1981 will be viewed in the years ahead as a time when a significant step forward was made in the care and welfare of the disabled not only by governments-Federal, State and local-but also by the community itself. As of now we must ensure that any move into new activities in the care and welfare of the disabled is not seen as one of activity to meet some passing commitment to a resolution of the United Nations. We must ensure that any new undertaking in 1981 is used as a strong base for increasing and maintaining the active interest of all Australians in the development of those fellow Australians who are less favoured. I believe that it is important for handicapped persons to continue to be positive in their statements. They should play an increasing role in the services being developed for their greatest needs.
Health care and rehabilitation services for the disabled continue to improve throughout the country but many areas still need urgent attention such as the provision of orthotic devices, including wheelchairs and other expensive equipment. Special hostel accommodation for the spinal

injured and the brain damaged needs to be vastly improved. Even though this was not mentioned in the Governor-General's Speech, which we are debating this evening, I am anxious to see that the Federal Government not only accepts its obvious responsibility in this area but also that it acts as a catalyst for State and local governments and the many voluntary and welfare agencies whose concern lies in this region. I take hope from that part of the Governor-General's Speech which stated that the list of activities he gave under the heading 'Caring for People' was 'illustrative rather than exhaustive'. I hope that funds and stimulation will be forthcoming from the Federal Liberal Government, of which I am a proud member, for the development of special hostel accommodation for the spinal injured and the brain damaged who live among us.
I wish to make another comment on the subject of the International Year of Disabled Persons. I hope that during 1981 the vast number of government and non-government organisations undertaking a large number of proposals do not lose sight of the basic fact that the successful outcome of any rehabilitation service is the integration of the disabled and those close to them into the community around them. Too often this factor is ignored and not considered by officialdom. Too often the care of the disabled is undertaken in some kind of limbo, away from the rC3.lity of the daily problems of community life. I have been informed that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) will be opening the first scientific meeting of the new Australian College of Rehabilitation Medicine early in May. I am pleased to hear of this because it will serve to emphasise the knowil interest of the Government in the care and welfare of the disabled and those professional and allied workers who devote their lives to the support of less fortunate Australians.
I have spoken about other aspects of the Governor-General's Speech. I have spoken about unemployment in this House on several occasions and I do not intend to repeat myself. Suffice it to say at this time that I was pleased to see that nearly a quarter of a million Australians will be the subject of specific training programs this year. Assistance by way of programs which have been organised to aid young people in their quest to seek employment must continue and must be broadened. I have been a most active participating administrator of the Community Youth Support Scheme in my electorate of Cook for the past four years. I believe the CYSS scheme should be developed even more decisively throughout the land because one of the great gaps that has been

370 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Governor-Genera/'s Speech

found is the alarming degree to which young people are unaware how to apply for jobs.
Of course, I have spoken on the subject of illiteracy among the chronically unemployed young people in our community and I found myself in deep water with educationists on this subject as long ago as 1977. This problem has been reduced in the past three years since I first spoke about it. It is a regrettable fact that illiteracy remains and continues to show up strongly among the chronically unemployed. Perhaps during the International Year of Disabled Persons some further studies should be undertaken by education authorities throughout Australia to see to what extent such illiteracy is congenital or to what extent remedial teaching should be made even more available. I believe that the problem of illiteracy has not been understood properly. Educationists have leapt to their own defence unnecessarily when it has been said that they have not been teaching properly. People who are concerned with remedial teaching have also leapt to their own defence and have said: 'We are doing a good job'. Be that as it may. The harsh fact remains that illiteracy is one of the major factors for young people not being able to find jobs over a long period. It is something which has to be faced not just by governments, Opposition parties or by honourable members in this House. It has to be faced by social workers across the whole gamut of social involvement.
Mr Barry Jones-But it has to be faced by your Government too.
Mr DOBIE-Be that as it may--
Mr Barry Jones-It must be.
Mr DOBIE-There has been an improved process. I say to the honourable member for Lalor who is concerned about this matter-I am deeply concerned about it-that it is being ignored by the community as a whole. Pressure is not being brought on the Government-Federal or State. We are finding that arguments concerning the illiterate in the community are based on old fashioned social attitudes which are wrong. But we must in fact face this problem. Perhaps during the International Year of Disabled Persons we may be able to encourage departments other than the Department of Social Security to look at the long term problems that face people who have this disability. Honourable members on both sides of the House, through personal involvement with people in their electorates, will know that the illiteracy problem among the young unemployed is an issue that most local communities care to ignore. If tonight I have inspired people at a local level to be involved with this unfashionable problem then

my speech will have served some purpose. The other great issues which reh,lte to the unemployed are not for me to debate tonight. But I do want to make the point that these unfortunate people find themselves in a chronically unemployed situation through no fault of their own. They receive no encouragement from governments or from social welfare institutions in the community which do not care to look at the problem. The problem is real; it exists. In 1981 I hope that some people will apply themselves to this problem.
In this debate several speakers, in their enthusiasm, have spoken of the need for greater governmerit action. Of course, no honourable member in this House would deny that more action needs to be taken. I commend to those of my colleagues in this House who have not already done so the opportunity that they have, with the CYSS scheme, to work personally among and to assist in a very practical way those who are chronically unemployed in'their own electorate.
Mr Young-You keep cutting the funds for it. Mr DOBIE-That is not true. Mr Young-It is true.
Mr DOBIE-It is not true and the honourable member for Port Adelaide knows it. I say to the honourable member for Port Adelaide that he is completely wrong. The fact is that funds went up. The honourable member for Port Adelaide is not right and he knows it.
Mr Young-Have Ii look at the books. Mr DOBIE-I have looked at the figures and I speak with some strength in this regard. I will not repeat what I have already said in this place about the tragedy of those who remain unemployed. I say to the honourable member for Port Adelaide that personal activity in the field locally is a far better contribution than the finest rhetoric in this House. Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired. Mr WEST (Cunningham) (8.50)-1 must say that the Speech delivered by the Governor General neatly sums up this Federal Government's concern for our environment because there is no mention of it. Whilst busily promoting the virtues of resource development projects, the Government washes its hands of environmental responsibility, preferring to give all the respollsibilities to the States. Only New South Wales and Victoria, though, have the machinery to deal with environmental planning on the vast scale proposed for resource development.:ln the past two years Western Australia and Queensland

Governor-General's Speech

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 371

',have significantly weakened what little environ-

mental legislation thdse States had. The Federal

Government's acceptance of the situation is yet

another cop-out in a long series of environmental

cop-outs.

'"

The environmental I protection legislation of 1974 provides for the Protection of the environment in relation to projects and decisions of or under the control of the Australian Government and for related purposes. The Fraser Govern-
ment's policy has been to shirk its responsibilities and, to ignore the Act wherever possible. Natibnal inquiries under this Act have never been initiated
by the Fraser Government. Only about 2 per cent of environmentally Significant projects have called for environmental impact statements.

It has been argued that the States have prime responsibility for environmental matters. However, the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation made this recommendation in its report on the environmental protection legislation:

. . . Commonwealth involvement in environmental protection be restricted to areas under the direct control of the
Commonwealth-that is, Commonwealth territories, works and activities, activities which the States have referred to the Commonwealth and, matters consideredby the Commonwealth to be of national significance.

That is a hefty slice ofresponsibility. In fact, the powers are there already in the Constitution, particularly if we use associated Loan Council authorisations and export licence powers to ensure that federally there is environmental protection and that these needs are met whenever and wherever necessary.

Whilst I do not believe that the Federal Government should be involved in every environmental issue in the country, it should use its powers to deal with those areas which are of national significance.' 'But what is the Federal Government doing to maximise the benefits of resource development to the Australian people? The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) stated during the recent McPherson by~election that the Government would ensure that this would happen but refuses to explain how. He refuses to consider a resource rent tax which would give some
return to the Australian people. Many of the projects in the resources boom are of national importanCe. For example, I refer to the explosion in a number of aluminium smelters. Yet the Government has not given the States or the companies concerned any guidelines to, follow. So massive social problems wi\1 result. These have already 'started to appear at places such asOladstone, the Latrobe' VaHey and the Hunter Valley.

Queensland and Victoria have these problems because of bad planning. However, the problems have not been redressed by the Federal Government. It has simply adopted its usual trick of saying it is a State problem and therefore ignores it.
Let me look at this Government's record. There have been two federal inquiries into development projects, both initiated by the former Federal Labor Government-the Ranger inquiry into uranium mining and the Fraser Island inquiry into mineral sand mining. To the present Government's credit, both inquiries were continued. Sand mining was halted on Fraser Island. This was the first of just three environmentally sound decisions made by the Government in five years of office. In case honourable members opposite cannot remember, the second was the decision to ban whaling in Australia and to press fot the ban to be worldwide. The third was last week's decision to go along with New South Wales in its campaign to introduce lead-free petrol in Australia. But none of these decisions was made without considerable pressure being brought to bear from outside lobby groups and concerned people. But now, after having made those three creditable decisions, the Government is flat out avoiding the numerous new environmental issues associated with resource development that are emerging. It aims to keep the issues separate and isolated and to avoid a devastating overall picture. Just as the Prime Minister and his Ministers refuse to deal with resource development as a whole, they also refuse to deal with the consequential environmental problems as a whole.
'Environment' as defined by the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act 1974, includes all aspects of the surroundings of man whether affecting him as an individual or in his social groupings' and 'environmental' has a corresponding meaning. This means that we must look at the social as well as the physical aspects of development. The Federal Government, by avoiding its responsibilities in regard to development planning, is creating enormous problems for the future. The costs of such a policy are only just starting to be realised. The picture will continue to worsen until this Government abandons its policy of inaction.
Examples of environmental issues related to resource development currently being swept under the carpet include uranium mining and the nuclear power industry, the expansion of the aluminium industry. the possible damming of the Franklin River and other wild rivers in south-west Tasmania, Queensland coalition government proposals for sand mining on Moreton Island and, I could add. oil drilling on the Great Barrier Reef.

372 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

The Government's policy to promote the development of more uranium mines and eventually to introduce nuclear power plants in Australia is directly contrary to the mountains of scientific evidence on the lack of permanent waste disposal, the proliferation of nuclear weapons, the outrageous cost of nuclear power plants, their dangers and the enormous environmental and energy costs of reprocessing and enrichment. The decision to allow reprocessing of Australian uranium is an open invitation for the production of weapons grade plutonium. The so-called safeguards agreements will not stop nuclear proliferation, yet the Federal Government pushes ahead regardless to try to flog its uranium to a glutted market.
Today's newspapers carried front page stories on the plans to introduce nuclear power to Australia. Such a policy is as stupid as it is dangerous. Beside the enormous costs involved and the toxic and radioactive wastes produced, there is no need for nuclear power in Australia. We have about 25,000 million tonnes of economically demonstrated coal reserves for electricity generation available ata much lower cost. The most recent uranium project awaiting approval, the Honeymoon project, involves a new type of mining, namely, solution mining or in situ leaching whereby acids are added to water and pumped into the ore body to leach out the uranium. The draft environmental impact statement is an illustration of the contempt the mining companies have for the federal environmental protection procedures., This type of mining is untried in Australia, yet its environmental effects are given no more thana cursory mention. Such disregard for environmental ass'essment procedures must be condemned and the Federal Government must be censured by us today-it will be censured by millions of people in future generations-for its haphazard approach to the protection of the Australian environment.
The Australian Labor Party has a firm policy on uranium and nuclear power. I seek leave to incorporate that policy in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-

Recognising-

URANIUM

That the provision of Australian uranium to the world nuclear fuel cycle creates problems relevant to Australian sovereignty, the environment, the economic welfare of our people, and the rights and well-being of the Aboriginal people.

Believing that, having regard to the present unresolved economic, social, biological, genetic, environmental and technical problems associated with the mining of uranium and the development of nuclear power, and in particular-

(a) to the proven contribution of the nuclear power indu~

try to the proliferation of nuclear weapons and the

increased risk of nuclear war; and

,I

(b) the absence of procedures for the storage and disposal

of radioactive wastes to ensure that any danger posed

by such wastes to human life and the environment is

eliminated,

It is imperative that no commitment of Australia's uranium deposits to the world's nuclear fuel cycle should be made until-

(a) a reasonable time has elapsed for full public debate on, and consideration of, the issues;
(b) the ALP is satisfied that the above mentioned problems have been solved; and
(c) the Australian Government endorses Recommendation 6 of the First Fox Report, which states:

'a decision to mine and sell uranium should not be made unless the Commonwealth Government ensutes that the Commonwealth can at any time
. . . immediately terminate those activities, permanently, indefinitely or for a specific period.'
Accordingly, a Labor Government will-
I (a) declare a moratorium on uranium mining and treatment in Australia; ,
(b) repudiate any commitment of a non-Labor Government to the mining, processing or export of Australia's uranium; and
(c) not permit the mining, processing or export of uranium pursuant to agreements entered into contrary to ALP policy.
Mr WEST-This Government would be very wise to adopt this policy. It certainly must reconsider its policies on uranium which are most criminally irresponsible and can lead only to further proliferation of nuclear weapons and the production of radioactive wastes which will remain toxic for hundreds of thousands of years.
I turn now to the aluminium industry, Australia is the world's largest producer of bauxite and alumina and proposed developments will make Australia one of the world's leading producers of aluminium. Yet the Government refuses to look at the total economic energy use and environmen- . tal effects of these industries, which are an integral part of what the Government says is to be a $33 billion resources development program, The aluminium industry will require at least $8,000m of capital expenditure if the proposed developments go ahead, with approximately $3,000m required for power generation. However, the Government refuses to initiate a national inquiry to investigate the long term social, environmental and economic effects. The States make an absurd spectacle of themselves by making their own microeconomic decisions about these massive projects, underpricing their power at 1.6c or 1.7c a kilowatt hour, and then demanding Loan Council funds to provide the infrastructur~ for the power.
A Federal Treasury paper' to be given thi~ Friday to the Senate Standing Committee ,on

Governor-General's Speech

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 373

National Resources, which is investigating the aluminium industry, will state that the States are selling power at less than the cost of production. That means other consumers must pay more. Even if they break even, the black coal component will be only $14 a tonne in some cases. I wish to state very clearly that if State governments will not implement correct energy pricing policies we should impose a Federal resources rent tax on profitability or, alternatively, a levy 011 tonnages exported. I cannot accept that environmental problems should be examined in isolation by companies' environmental impact studies and individual and localised public inquiries. There should be a regional approach so that areas such as the Latrobe Valley in Victoria, the Hunter Valley in New South Wales, the Darling Ranges in Western Australia, and the Gladstone-Bundaberg area in Queensland are examined overall in a regional approach and not by way of individual company development applications.
We should refuse also to accept, for instance, the Pechiney group telling a public inquiry in New South Wales that unless its environmental proposals are accepted the project will not proceed. Whether or not the company's environmental safeguards are adequate, we must not tolerate such standover tactics. For instance, the Department of Science and Technology told a Senate committee that potential exists for serious environmental impacts in three areas of the industry-bauxite mining, alumina refining and aluminium smelting. The Department said that the impact of mining involved disruption and often irreversible effects on the flora and fauna in the areas surrounding the mine and on soil erosion and underground water systems. Alumina refining may result in problems associated with air emissions and, more specifically, the disposal of bauxite residue or red mud. The Department had a chance to deal with these problems when it considered the environmental impact studies for the Wagerup and Worsley alumina projects in Western Australia. Either the Department said nothing or it was overrule<:l by the Federal Government, since both projects were approved. We now have the ludicrous situation whereby a voluntary group, the Conservation Council of Western Australia, has launched a class action suit against Alcoa for alleged environmental damage to the jarrah forests in Western Australia during its bauxite mining operations. It is strange that a department with power to act should only warn while a conservation group with no power to act should seek to use the laws of a foreign country and not those of Australia.

I turn now to an issue which is not only of regional and national significance but also of world significance. The preservation of the wilderness in south-west Tasmania is a major national issue. The Federal and Tasmanian governments have recognised the importance of the south-west by placing it on the register of the National Estate and will be nominating it for the World Heritage List. This Federal Liberal Government is in art awkward position, with its recognition of the wilderness as internationally important but with the State Liberal Opposition in Tasmania vociferously attempting to destroy the wilderness, using tactics reminiscent of the 1975 coup. The Hydro Electric Commission of Tasmania proposes to dam the Gordon River and the Franklin River to generate cheap power to meet Tasmania's future electricity needs. This would entail flooding the beautiful Franklin River, one of Australia's last trl..lly wild rivers, and it would greatly reduce the south-west wilderness area. The project would involve massive public expenditure, for a State the size of Tasmania, of $I,300m. The Hydro-Electric Commission in Tasmania has demanded approval of its scheme by the Government. It sees no other scheme option as viable nor does it place any value on the wilderness to the people of Tasmania, Australia, or the rest of the world. The Hydro-Electric Commission of Tasmania forecasts a required capacity of 1650 megawatts for Tasmania by the year 2000, which means that, after the Pieman scheme is completed, another 550 megawatts to 600 megawatts will be needed. The great integrated scheme will add only another 340 megawatts, and the stage 1 project pushed by the recalcitrant Tasmanian Legislative Council will add only 180 megawatts. Even if the Hydro Electric Commission wins this argument, either thermal power or power via an interstate energy grid will be necessary to solve Tasmania's future long term energy needs. .
Mr Good luck-Who is going to pay for the power for Tasmania?
Mr WEST-That is a matter this Government will have to consider to see what it can do for Tasmania, instead of supporting the opposition in Tasmania which seeks to frustrate the wishes of an elected government. The Tasmanian Government made a decision to save the Franklin River and to declare the wild river a national park. Its proposed power development will include an energy conservation program and a dam on the Gordon River above the Olga. This would preserve much of the south-west while still providing sufficient power for the needs of the State, in conjunction with co-generation and thermal power

374 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

options. This, option was passed through the Tasstrong central Federal government to integrate all

manian lower House, the House of Assembly, but factors into a total developmental picture. The

was blocked by the, upper House-the most unsize of the projects involved in the resources de-

democratic upper House in Australia-which velopment program, the cost and influence on

wants the Franklin River flooded. The Tasmanian Australian society as a whole, is too great to allow

Labor Government is committed to its plan, and I Messrs Court and Bjelke-Petersen to call the tune.

hope it will stand firm at the committee of manWe must act as a nation and face our responsibili-

agers meeting over the next two weeks. The Libties and our future. We must not act as isolated

erals in the Tasmanian upper House are using the' enclaves, Machiavelli's Italian states, and watch

issue to misuse

otrfyptoowfeorr.ceThanereeleicstiaonn, ewedhictho

is a gross save the

ourselves degenerate into a series of banana republics, squabbling and cutting each other's

south-west wilderness in Tasmania. The Federal throats to tempt and bribe overseas investors to

Government has shown little iriterest in the issue exploit our irreplaceable resources. We must look

and, except for the South-West Resources Study, to Australia's future and act together now to pro-

it has not come forward to help Tasmania pretect, preserve and plan with vision and fore-

serve its wilderness. South-west Tasmania is a thought, to present a unified approach to the

national asset and the nation should bear the shaping of the future of Australia.

financial cost of preserving it.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)-

I wish to conclude by mentioning the Great Order! The honourable member~s time has

Barrier Reef. When the Fraser Government expired. Before I call the honourable member for

grabbed power in 1975 there was legislation on Maranoa, I remind the House that it is the normal

the books to allow for the progressive declaration practice that a member making his maiden speech

of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park; Instead of is heard in silence. I call the honourable member

proceeding with the declaration of sections of the for Maranoa.

park, the Federal Government continually caved in to obfuscation by the reactionary Queensland Government. Only after much opposition and public pressure in 1979, which led to ,the resignation and reshuffling of Federal Ministers, did the Federal Government finally declare 2.4 per cent of the Great Barrier Reef region as the Capricornia section of the park. The Cairns section of the Park has been shelved now for over a year, due to the protests of the Queensland Government over landward boundaries. It is likely that it will be a long time before it is

Honourable members-Hear, hear! Mr IAN CAMERON (Maranoa) (9.10)-1 am honoured to have been given the opportunity to make a maiden speech in the House of Representatives. To represent Maranoa is a privilege for me and I hope I am able on behalf of my electorate to make a meaningful contribution to the governing of Australia. I thank all those people who have given me their support and who worked so hard to make my preselection for the National Party in Queensland the success it has been.

declared, now that the 'elections are over. The I pay tribute on behalf of Maranoa to Jim

Queensland Government is calling the tune on the Corbett and his wife Ethel. They both gave ster-

issue of the Great Barrier Reef, and it is anyone's ling service to the electorate and I am sure that all

guess as to how long it will be able to continue to honourable members who served with Jim wish

bully the Federal Government to block the decthem well in their retirement in Miles, one of the

laration of the park. The only way of preserving many pleasant country towns in my area. Jim was

the reef from the ravages of oil drilling and the the National Country Party Whip for a number of

Queensland Government is by decl~ring the years and, as the present Whip, the honourable

entire reef region a marine park. This. must be member for Mallee, Mr Peter Fisher, can vouch,

done before the Coastal Waters (State Titles) Act it is' a very demanding job. I am sure that. Jim

is declared, giving Queensland ownership up to Corbett carried it out with absolute integrity.

the three-mile territorial sea limit.

Of those other honourable members who

The Federal Government has left the control of represented the seat of Maranoa, Sir Charles

resource development to the market forces in the Adermann, the father of the honourable member

States. Clearly; such abrogation of responsibility for Fisher, Mr Evan Adermann, would have been

should not be tolerated. If it is tolerated, it will the greatest influence on my political career. Sir

have crippling environmental, social and econCharles was undoubtedly an outstanding Aus-

omic effects in the future. I am afraid that the . tralian and he had enormous influence on the

States consistently show that they cannot act expansion of the National Party in Queensland. It

together..Overall environmental and economic is now my privilege to be seated beside Evan in

planning" therefore, should be carried out by a this Parliament. Roma in my electorate is the

Governor-General's Speech

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 375

birthplace of the Country. Party, as it was then known, in Queensland. It spawned sorne wonderful individuals who have contributed enormously to the progress of Maranoa. Mr Charles Russell and Mr Bill Brimblecombe are two other outstanding members who come to mind. I also pay tribute to all the National Party members of the Queensland State Parliament within my electorate from Bill Glasson, the Minister for Lands and Forestry in the far west to Premier Joh BjelkePetersen in the north-east. In between there is Neil Turner, the member for Warrego, Don Neal in Balonne, Ken Tomkins, the Minister for Water Resources and Aboriginal and Island Affairs, from Roma, Neville Harper in Auburn, Peter McKechnie in Carnarvon, Tony Elliott, the Minister for Tourism, National Parks, Sport and the Arts, in Cunningham, Tony Fitzgerald, Bill Gunn and Mr Vic Sullivan, the member for Condamine and the Deputy Leader of the National Party in Queensland. I believe that a Federal member cannot be elected without their support at the State level. I look forward to working with them. I also wish to give a special warm welcome to Senator elect Flo Bjelke-Petersen. As one of my constituents I am sure that she will make a very significant contribution to the Senate.
At this stage, to talk of bananas, as did the previous speaker, the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West), I mention that the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization has spent millions researching that product in Queensland. That Organisation has definitely come to the conclusion that the banana bends to the right. As the first representative to come from the ranks of the Young Nationals in Queensland, I acknowledge the happy time that I had in the then Young Country Party and the great contribution all the junior arms of political parties have made in raising the standard of politics in Australia.
Although I never knew my grandfather, Dr S. S. Cameron, who was a director of the Victorian Department of Agriculture from 1911 to 1931, he gave my father, who passed it onto me at a very early age, a great interest in the workings of politics. My grandfather also had a very close association with another great Australian, Sir Owen Dixon, from whom I derived one of my Christian names of which I am justly proud. I have been fortunate to have experienced the National Party machine in Queensland, for good or for bad-for the good, I hope. I have been able to learn something from Sir Robert Sparkes, Joh BjelkePetersen, whom I mentioned, Mike Evans, who is the State Director of that Party, and a host of

other politically articulate people within our organisation. I now look forward to working with my colleagues here in Canberra. All new members have that desire in common. I look forward to their friendship on this side of the House as well as on the other. For democracy to survive, we must have a good appreciation of the views of those on the other side and realise that they must govern also-not that I look forward to that experience.
My purpose in Parliament will be to fight for justice for country people and to help prepare us all for the rapid changes which will occur. We of the inland still suffer from bad communications and the enormous costs involved in changing to new up-dated services. The cost of subscriber trunk dialling installations should be equalised. It is unjust that anybody outside the given 16kilometre radius should be asked to pay up to $6,000 to $10,000 to have their existing phone changed over to STD. Most cannot afford it and, if they do not change, they are left without a phone as the old exchanges close. The iniquitous rent charge of $500 should be allowed to be capitalised so that when a subscriber has paid the capital cost of his telephone he is dropped back to the standard rent. Presently that $500 continues on ad infinitum. I believe that we should fight very hard with Telecom Australia to try to achieve a reduction in that charge.
The Government is to be congratulated on the initiative that it is taking with satellite television. If it is good enough for us to spend $50m on an ethnic channel in areas where people already have the choice of two, three or four channels, we must ensure that everybody in isolated Australia is able to make full use of all the wonders that the satellite will bring without those people being burdened with any enormous cost in receiving all the different types of signals that will be transmitted. The Isolated Childrens and Parents Association of Queensland deserves special mention for the amount of work that it has put into seeing that outback children will get a higher standard of education when the satellite commences to operate.
As a member of the Tara Shire Council for nine years-and I note that some .councillors from Maranoa have been meeting in Canberra today with their New South Wales counterparts-I believe that we must be more realistic with Federal funding of roads. A sliding scale should be adopted to keep pace with inflation and the escalating costs of road building which are exacerbated as one moves inland. There is not much use in using the Consumer Price Index to increase funds when hardly an item involved in road building is listed on the Index. The Government should be congratulated, I believe, for increasing to 2 per

376 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Gavrnor-General's Speech

cent the amount ofpersonal tax being allocated to local authorities. It is absolutely essential that more funds be allocated to water storage in this, the driest continent in the world.
It was interesting to read Jim Corbett's maiden address as, when he first entered Parliament, Maranoa was in the grip of drought. At this time large areas of my .electorate are suffering the worst drought ever. ~ome areas have not had decent rain for three years and there are other areas, like Dalby and the Darling Downs, ;that have suffered disastrous flooding. Our Government deserves praise for the. national disaster funding arrangement. I was pleased to hear today that the Queensland graingrowers have been able to persuade my own Government in Queensland with, I like to think, some prodding fromme, to reduce the interest rates from7 per cent to 5. per cent for flood relief and from 5 per cent to 3 percent for
drought relief. I can assure honourable members
that for the Premier, Mr Bjelke-Petersen, to change his mind on something like that is quite a credit for us. Today it was announced that this has happened. lam very pleased for the graingrowers because the Queensland Government has brought the interest rate down to more realistic levels for those people who really need help.
An amount of $200m over five years to the States for water conservation is just not enough. Irrigation on the Darling Downs and' down the Condamine to St George is a rapidly growing industry and more wat.er is needed. We have just announced a grant of $1 billion over five years to Papua New duinea. This is the sort of moneythat ~hould be allocated to water. The amount of money being poured down the non-productive drain is frightening. So far this year, soCial security payments are $650m over the amount spent in the same pedod last year. This trend must stop. I only hope the 'razor gang' is successful in achieving some cutbacks.
Of all the great industries in my electorateincluding the grain, wool, cotton, tobacco, apple, tourist, small business and peanut industries-it is the beef industry that continues to find itself in the most 'unstable position. I believe that, as with most other products that are traded on the .world market, we must have amongst world exporters of beef.aninternationalmeat agreement that'fixes a minimum price for beef. We already have, through the General. Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, a minimum tonnage to be traded with the United States of America, our biggest export market. Unless we can arrange a minimum stable price the industry, from producer to processor, will plunge to disaster, with no long term benefit accruing to anyone. This is the greatest challenge

facing agriculture in the!1980s. We must come up

with something betterLtfian the present system

that will give all sections of the industry more

stability.

;:i,::

'Resources' is the current in word here and throughout the nation.-The previous speaker, the honourable member for Cunningham (Mr West), mentioned it in his address tonight. It has always been of great interest :to 'me, having studied geology at school and having been taught that oil would never be found in Australia, that the first commercial oil flow was discovered at Cabwin No. 1 on our property' boundary at The Gums. From there Moonie was' discovered and developed. We are now 75 per cent self-sufficient in crude oil. I have been critical of the Government's oil pricing policy andIcontinue to believe that it is a tragedy for Australia that we have not used our energy resources to our advantage.

I have never been able to understand why we should not have our own price for crude oil to give us an advantage over our competitors on world markets. This is probably the first time since Macarthur developed the merino that we have had an advantage to help us.in trade. We have successfully banished the wool industry through imposing enormous costs and taxes and we have now practically lost the energy advantage we enjoyed. Honourable members are used to quoting figures and I must give some. It is estimated that by 1985 we will be exporting 77 million tonnes of oil equivalents of energy, made up of 46 MTOEs of coal, seven MTOEs of gas, 20 MTOEs of uranium and four MTOEs of oil. Our oil imports will total 18 MTOEs, whir.h wi111eave us with a surplus of 59 MTOEs. It IS this surplus of energy export that we as a nation must make use of if we are to make any gains from our resources boom.

I am totally opposed to any new increase in indirect taxation. I believe that tax anomalies existing in rural Australia, such as zone allowances and sales tax levied at the point of sale rather than at the point of manufacture, ought to be changed before any new tax is introduced. If a new tax must be used, I believe a resources tax on exports ought to be levied to balance out the tax on local crude oil consumption. If the Government does not introduce this tax, I believe the people of rural Australia ought to be given a 20 per cent investment allowance on fuel consumption to allow us to remain competitive in world trade. In the interests of fuel conservation, crude oil producers should be able to sell oil directly to farmers for use in grain drying, brigalow spraying and tractor fuel. Moonie crude is centrifuged, filtered and used in motors to pump oil to Brisbane. It is unjust

Governor-General's Speech

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 377

that people from that area cannot buy crude oil donations-millions of dollars-to the coffers of

for their own use andi thus save on the current the Government parties. The multinational

price of fuel.

companies, the mining concerns, that are operat-

I support all that the Governor-General said in his address and I believe my constituents congratulate the Fraser Government on its fight to control inflation. In conclusion, I thank all my

ing in this country, together with Rupert Murdoch, enabled those parties to stay in power by winning a few more votes than the Labor Party won.

friends and supporters who live in the Hannaford, The Gums and Tara' districts and who have encouraged me to enter politics. My very sincere thanks go to my parents for giving me the opportunity to be able to enjoy my great hobby, politics. I also thank my wife, Jill, and my children. I just
hope they do not suffer too much from my absence, for it is they who make the greatest sacrifice. I look forward to my time in this House and to my developing a friendship with you, Mr

By any standards the electoral laws of this country are a disgrace. It is a disgrace that anybody can make a donation to a political party in this country in the manner in which they are made. We are now witnessing occasions when the
Australian Labor Party is outspent by something like $10 to $1 by the Liberal and National
Country parties. The National Country Party candidate in the recent McPherson by-electioh spent upwards of $200,000 in that by~election.

Deputy Speaker, and with all my colleagues on Something has to be done about the electoral laws

both sides of the House.

of this country so that we can establish democracy

Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide) (9.26)-1 also as it ought to be established. The laws should be take the opportunity of congratulating all honour- . altered. If the Liberal and National Country par-

able members who have made their first speeches in the Thirty-second Parliament. A number of honourable members on this side of the House made excellent speeches, particularly the honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling), who this afternoon made a very compassionate speech on behalf of the disadvantaged people in her electorate. I am sure she will represent them for many

ties are receiving those vast amounts of money, the Australian people are entitled to know who is giving the money and for what reason. We know that the Liberal and Country parties will do absolutely anything for some of those companies to operate in Australia. The people are entitled to know what is happening. Sooner or later the laws affecting political donations in this country will

years to come. The quality of the new members have to be altered.

who have come here to assist the Australian Labor Party in its bid to be the government of this country in 1983 means that we will be a vastly different team between 1980 and 1983 than we were between 1977 and 1980. We will be a much stronger team, a better balanced team, a more representative team and certainly a team that will
enter the 1983 elections with far more confidence.

I think we made one very major mistake during the general election campaign; that was that we decided not to spend some of our meagre financial
resources trying to push further the issue of unemployment. It seemed to me that between 1977 and 1980 unemployment remained the No.1 issue in the minds of the people of Australia. Today, according to the Commonwealth Employment Ser-

The first thing I wish to say about the 1980 elecvice, 500,000 people are still registered as unem-

tions is that the vote was extremely close. There ployed. That has been the position for two years.

was very little difference between the number of There has been no overall improvement in the un-

votes for the Liberal Party of Australia and the employment figures in this country. Indeed, when

National Country Party throughout this cOuntry honourable members opposite give us the figures

and the number of votes for the Australian Labor of growth in employment in this country, they

Party. The difference in the result can be refuse to recognise that what is happening ,in

attributed to one significant factor in the election Australia, as is happening in most' parts of the

and that is the vast amounts of money-the tens world, is that the major proportion of the jobs

of thousands, in fact millions of dollars-that being created at the moment are part time. jobs.

were made available for campaigning. That, comOne of the reasons for these part time jobs is that

bined with the influence of people, particularly two incomes are needed to buy a house. This point

Rupert Murdoch, meant that those parties stayed was made in debate this afternoon. That is forcing

in power. They did not stay in power because of more and more women to go to work. We are

their performance between 1975 and 1980; they forcing more families to seek two incomes in order

did not stay ..1 power because they promised betto put a deposit on a home. In many circum-

ter policies for the 1980s; they stayed in power bestances the part time job suits the new entrants to

cause the electoral laws in this country are so rotthe work force. They are not full time jobs. The

ten that people can make very considerable Minister for EmplQyment and Youth Affairs (Mr

378 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Gov.ernor-General's Speech

Viner) does not even recognise unemployed people who are looking for part time work. When he speaks about the Australian Bureau of Statistics figures he never mentions the people who are looking for part time, work but when he gets the figures for growth in the work force he is only too happy to say that an extra 165,000 people have entered the work force in the last 18 months. What he does not tell us is that 140,000 of them are working part time. That is the sort of illness we are living with as we enter the 1980s.
The band aid solutions we have been trying to apply in Australia for the past 10 years will not work in the future. What we need is more radical thinking"about the problems which will occur in Australia and what we will do about them. This is of major importance to the Labor Party because it i1' the only political party which has the decency to think about these problems and try to come up with the remedy for them. We should not be talking about whether there are 490,000, 470,000 or 510,000 people unemployed. The big question mark hanging over Australia today is whether we can find employment for all the people who want to go to work and, if we cannot, what we will do with those who cannot enter the work force. The establishment of a minimum wage in Australia is something that Australia will have to look at. If we are to face the reality that we cannot find jobs Ifor all, as was the case basically between 1945 and .1974, we need some more radical thinking, rather than describing the half-million people who cannot find work as dole bludgers or people who are not wanted in the community.
Another issue which we will have to attack in the 1980s is the health system. Everybody knows-it is recognised and accepted by every person in the community-that the health insurance system at the moment is in an absolute muddle. Nobody really knows what his insurance is all about. The States are in a mess over their relationships with the Federal Government concerning hospitals. What we want to see-we on this side of the House have to fight for it-is that everybody in this country has health insurance. That was the concept of Medibank which was emasculated by a Liberal controlled Senate in 1974. It still remains basic to our philosophy on health insurance. The people who are dropping out of health insurance at the moment are those on high incomes because economically it is better for them not to be insured or those people on very low incomes who cannot afford it. The whole thing isa complete mess. Our approach to health insurance will remain. We have to devise a concept whereby everybody is covered by health insurance.

Another matter which must come under scru- "tiny is the argument that we have to reduce our intake of doctors because. we have too many. Some universities have already done so. Can honourable members believe that people in this country are suggesting that everybody in this country can go to a doctor whenever he likes and that the service will be there? The Aborigirial people have half the life span of the white population. They have one of the highest infant mortality rates of any race in the world. Yet we talk about having too many doctors. We may have too many doctors who want to remain on their present very high salary levels but we do not have too many when we consider the services needed in this country. There may be too many doctors in Toorak and Bellevue Hill. There are not too many in Port Adelaide, Footscray or Blacktown. We have to get our priorities right about providing services to the whole community and not just to those who are lucky enough to be in the high income brackets.
I turn briefly to the question of industrial relations. It has been fashionable in the last fortnight for the media and spokesmen on behalf of the Government to try to belittle and criticise, without any restraint, Mr Cliff Dolan. He has now entered the post of President of the Aus~ tralian Council of Trade Unions. He is by any standards one of the most important people in this country. He will be involved continuously in negotiations, not only with this Government but also with some of the larger employers throughout the country on behalf of organised labour in Australia. I have always found him, as have other people who know him, to be one of the more decent Australians. People should not, because it is fashionable and because we find ourselves in the heat of an industrial dispute, say that everything about Cliff Dolan is bad. He is a very decent, genuine Australian who holds very strong views on behalf of the people he'has been elected to represent. He should be seen as such.
Of course the Government is in a muddle about what it will. do about wages. I am critical of Sir John Moore's decision to suspend the indexation hearings. It seems to me that he was affected by the result of the election. I am sure that he would not have suspended indexation hearings if the Labor Party had been elected to government. Indexation is the fairest system for all members of the wor~ force, irrespective of whether they are organised into unions. Indexation, as the basis of wage fixing, is the fair system for all the people who go to work. We must abide by some central wage fixing system if we are to look after all members of the work force. The Labor Government introduced indexation. There is no shadow

Governor-General's Speech

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 379

of doubt that without indexation, without a central wage fixing system,"many people who go to work every day would never have kept as close as they have to the increases in the cost of living which have taken place over the past six years. It is to be hoped that the inquiry now being con-
ducted by the ConciHation and Arbitration Commission will come down on the side of maintaining a central wage fixing system for the work force.

It must be accepted, not only in the field of in-

dustrial relations but also in the field of political

realism, that it is about time that everybody in this

country who does not have superannuation said:

'We are doing as well for this country as other

people who have it. We are as good as the people

who work in insurance companies, the Public Ser-

vice, banks or universities'. The 36 per cent or 40

per cent of people who do not have superannu-

ation ought to be covered by a national superan-

nuation scheme. We should not cast people off

when they retire on pensions which are totally

unrelated to their wages. We should not leave

them to do the work in the workshops. They are

usually the blue collar workers who have been

forgotten. We have to establish, as a matter of

principle, that every person is entitled, to be

covered liament

mbyovseudpetoraensntaubaltiisohna. Intatisioanbaolustchtiemmee.PWare-

have to do a lot of thinking about how that can be

done. The Government prides itself on giving

public servants the opportunity of retiring at 55

years of age. The Parliament should consider giv-

ing the same opportunity to many other people

who may like to retire at 55 years of age. Perhaps,

as some people believe, it would ease the burden

of unemployment if those people who want to re-

tire early were given that opportunity. This pro-

posal is closely linked with the establishment of a

national superannuation scheme.

I think it is imporJant for the Parliament to discuss-it has not done so during the period in which I have been a member-what it believes to be the future projection of population in this
country. Australia has had major immigration policies, especially since the War. All Australians can be very proud of the job we have done. If there are any Enoch Powells in this Parliament at least they have had the decency to keep quiet. By
and large, Australia has done a magnificent job under a variety of governments in settling people from overseas. We have all gained from the fact that we have brought so many people with so many cultures into the country. But we should have some idea of what lies ahead. We will have another two billion people in the world in 20 or 25 years. Australians ought to be discussing this matter seriously. At the pinnacle of that discussion

should be our projected population in the years ahead. That should be one of the prime objectives of parliamentary discussion in the future. It does not seem to me that the views of the political parties are very wide apart on the question of immigration. There may be a great deal-of argument about post-settlement services and what ought to be done. The Galbally inquiry was more an indictment of our inadequacies in what we have done for migrants rather than a sign of what we might do in the future.
These are important matters of which all parliamentarians should take cognisance. They ought to be discussed in the Parliament. There seems to be a reluctance, especially on the pari of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) to involve the Parliament. I thought he would have a stroke when I asked him to set up a committee to look at the resources boom. He does not want the House of Representatives involved. He seems to have a phobia about the role of the House of Representatives. He does not mind the Senate being involved. He encouraged it to take great powers upon its shoulders in 1975. Members of the House of Representatives are treated like high school children. We are not to set up committees to inquire into, investigate and question some of the major developments which will take place in Australia in future.
I wish to deal briefly with the matter of foreign affairs. Foreign affairs in Australia always seem to be tied up with what the United States of America plans to do. I was pleased to hear the comments of my Deputy Leader, the honourable member for Kingsford-Smith (Mr Lionel Bowen), in relation to some of these matters. We have to be extremely careful about who is the President of the United States and where that country is going to take us. It is important for the Australian people to understand that President Reagan, for instance, who is very conservative and described as an extreme right wing politician, was elected by only some 27 per cent of eligible voters. Only about 51 per cent of those who were entitled to vote botheredJo vote for either Reagan or Carter. Reagan won quite substantially but the difference between the votes for the two candidates shows that some 73 per cent of the people of America do not want him as President. I repeat that only 27 per cent of the American people actually voted for Reaga,n.
It cannot be assumed that because President Reagan is a conservative, we can just go along with any decision he makes. For 20 years presidents of the United States-Kennedy, Johnson or whoever was in office, and now it is to be Reagan-have had an absolute phobia about Cuba. If they thought that Cuba was involved in

380 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

anything; they felt that they had to oppose it or to oppose anything described as a liberation movement. During the last century it was easy because it was a case of whites against blacks.' It has become a bit more mixed up and difficult now but it would be stupid for Australia-indeed, for any government-to say that the United St~tes could have carte blanche from the Australian people to do whatever it thought it had to do.
I, for one, would not add my voice in support of the Reagan manoeuvres in EI Salvador. In that respect, he ought to take the advice of a lot of people who have been looking at the situation and keep the United States out of that country. If the United States wants to be seen as being decent and gain recognition for the role that it is playing in the world, it seems to me that the people of EI Salvador ought to be left to make their own decision about who they want to govern their country.
There is another matter that the United States ought to take on board. I offer this as a suggestion. For years now, upon a change of government in the United States-for example, from a Democratic administration to a Republican administration, ,and I predict that probably there will be a change every four years as the people become dissatisfied with regimes that make many promises and then cannot keep them-we have had political appointments of ambassadors to Australia. I am very much in favour of the political appointment of ambassadors. Two of the most outstanding of those appointed by the Labor Government were theJate John Armstrong and Dr FitzGerald, this country's first ambassador to China.
I do not believe that it does the United States much good when we read, for example, that we are to get as ambassador a rancher from Texas or, as is the case this time, a Cadillac car dealer. The United States ought to understand that the Australian people read these comments in the newspapers. Although the Cadillac car dealer might be a very astute politician, the way his appointment reads in the Press, it does not appear that the United States is taking Australia very seriously. I wish the gentleman well if he receives the posting, but the United States ought to think more about the people who are sent out here to deal with Australia, especially when so many questions about the role that we may have to play in this part of the world remain unanswered.
To conclude, I say in regard to the so-called resources boom that the Government has a very simple view of the economy. If there is an increased number of foreign takeovers of Australian companies, if there are super-profits and if

the Liberals are in power, we have a great economy. For the Government, they are the three indicators of whether the economy is going along all right. We have seen a great deal of foreign takeover and investment because many of these companies-with the assistance of the Liberal National Country Party Government-now see Australia as one of the great places to rake off super-profits, because there is no tax on wealth and there are no resources taxes. We are thus left with some of the social scars that are created by the so-called resources boom. This Parliament ought to be making inquiries into the ownership and deals involved.
Also, some infrastructure as between the Commonwealth and the States ought to be established to ensure that some of these companies which are coming in from overseas will not be able to split off one State from the rest with a view to buying cheap power and land. That kind of thing has not just started. It has been going on for years. I remember in 1960 at the Frome by-election in Peterborough, that Tom Playford forgot where he was and promised us a deep-sea port. State Premiers have been doing this sort of thing for a long time but we have reached the point at which the Commonwealth must invite the States to sit around the table and tell them: 'These are the charges that you are to impose on these companies. They may make up their minds as to which State they want to go into but we are not going to rip off the Australian people by letting the companies divide the States.'
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)- Order! The honourable member's, time has expired.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (9.45)-1 am glad to have the opportunity, first, to speak in the Address-in-Reply debate to the Governor General's Speech and, secondly, to follow the honourable member for Port Adelaide (Mr Young) in the debate, mainly because some aspects of his remarks are in need of immediate correction. I refer particularly to his comments on unemployment and youth employment. The Governor-General said:
My Government believes that the long-term solution to it-
The reference is to unemployment-
undoubtedly lies in the creation of new jobs by restoring healthy economic growth, and in this respect Australia is much better placed than many other industrial countries. Over the next few years, resources and manufacturing development projects will certainly create tens of thousands of new jobs.
I mention in passing that over the last couple of years such developments have already created

Governor-General's Speech

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 381

hundreds of thousands of new jobs. His Excellency went on:
During the last five years over half a million Australians have received specific help through my Government's manpower and training programs. Nearly another quarter million will receive assistance during this year.
I quote those comments to dramatise the fact that the question of unemployment is certainly being addressed and has been addressed by this Government. The Government's record on the question of unemployment and plans for doing something about it certainly compare more than favourably with that of the Labor Party, but in one particular it is dramatically different-that is, that it, has been effective in creating new jobs. The key word is 'effective'. The disagreement that we can perhaps all have with that policy and program concerns whether it has been sufficiently effective. Many people would take the view that more can and should be done. The risks in undertaking more job training schemes than have been undertaken in the past, or are currently envisaged, clearly rest in the extent to which the expenditure of public money raised by way of taxes operates as a disincentive to private enterprise to employ people.
We have to recognise that the future employment patterns of this nation, the future prospects for jobs in this country, depend on private enterprise being able to provide them. If the Government is the only provider of expanding job opportunities, we will have a situation in which the Government digs deeper and deeper into the hip pocket of the taxpayer. There is certainly a growing view that already the taxpayers are providing too much to the Government. Of course, that money is transferred to the people in different ways. We must recognise that every dollar raised from the public goes back to it in one way or another. It is a method of transferring assets and money from one section of the community to another, often through a very inefficient funnel, that of governmental services. That is why many take the view that social welfare, for example, which is not directed to the needy but which is widespread-middle class welfare, if you like-is in fact a waste of public money because it does not provide any beneficial transfer of resources from people who are well off to people who are in need.
One of the dramatic things that we saw during the Labor Government's term of office-it is still part. of Labor's general approach-was that it believes in middle class welfare-in other words, welfare payment to people who are not in need but whose votes Labor fondly believes it can buy. I commend the Australian people for rejecting the

proposition that their votes are buyable through

the granting of middle class welfare-particularly

as the Australian population has found out who

ultimately pays. Those who pay are the PAYE

taxpayers. That was demonstrated under not only

the present Government but also it was demon-

strated dramatically under the previous Labor

Government.

.

Let us examine now the question of unemployment, which was raised by the honourable member for Port Adelaide. He indicated clearly that in his view the Government ,bad' done nothing, and that it cared nothing about unemployment. Let me dramatise what has happened in the last five years in regard to employment. As' at August 1980,405,400 more Australians were at work than were at work in August 1975. They are strictly comparable figures. During that period the number of people unemployed has also increased-by 113,900. Let us recognise the reality of what has happened. Of course, the working population has increased, but the great bulk of them-405,400-have jobs. In other words, something like six and a quarter million people are now
at work in Australia.

Let us compare that with what happened in, say, Labor's last year in office. In regard to the impact of policies on employment, the policies this Government has followed have resulted in a substantial increase in the number of people at work, as I have just demonstrated. How did the policies of the Australian Labor Party affect the level of employment? Over the period from August 1973 to August 1975-two years of Labor government-in the 15 to 19-year-old age group, the group about which crocodile tears were shed from the honourable member for Port Adelaide, employment of young males dropped by 10,800 to a figure of 324,400. Between August 1974 and August 1975-Labor's last year in office-total male employment fell by 26,500, mainly in the manufacturing sector. There was a fall in the number of young males at work, as well as in the actual number of people at wprk. I go back five
years to dramatise these figures not because the only thing I can do is look back but to dramatise the difference between the Government's positive policies, which perhaps are capable of being criticised for not working fast enough or well enough but which at least are working and have brought about an extra 405,400 people at work, and to those of our predecessors in government, which brought about an actual reduction in the number of people at work.

Under the Labor Government unemployment soared, despite the fact that they were putting on thousands of people under government funded

382 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Gover,ilor-General's Speech

schemes. If one can illustrate the wrong way to go about things, .this is it. Despite putting on people in multi-million dollar taxpayer-funded schemes to hide the real increase in unemployment occurring at the time, there was still an increase in the number of people out of work because the private
enterprise sector could not afford to keep employing people. I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard

two tables outlining the numbers of unemployed persons by age in Australia since August 1971, and the number of people employed in Australia since that time.

Leave granted.

-L.!:

The tables read as follows~

UNEMPLOYED PERSONS BY AGE ('000)

15-19 years

20 years andover

Total

15-19 years as percentage of total

1971 August 1972 August 1973 August 1974 August 1975 August 1976 August
November 1977 February
May August November (a) 1978 February March April May June July August September October November December 1979 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1980 January February March April May June July August September October November December
1971 August 1972 August 1973 August

Males

10.6

33.2

43.8

24.2

18.6

56.1

74.7

24.9

16.2

35.1

51.3

31.6

17.2

50.6

67.9

25.3

39.5

99.3

138.8

285

47.5

109.1

156.6

30.3

46.9

\08.3

155.2

30.2

67.5

118.7

186.1

36.3

62.6

122.1

184.7

33.9

62.3

127.8

190.1

32.8

58.3

124.8

183.1

31.8

86.5

168.5

254.9

33.9

63.4

154.1

217.6

29.1

58.9

151.9

210.9

27.9

59.8

149.4

209.1

28.6

59.6

157.1

216.7

27.5

58.2

152.9

211.1

27.6

65.5

155.9

221.5

29.6

60.1

158.0

218.1

27.6

58.6

149.3

207.9

28.2

56.4

149.9

206.4

27.3

87.1

154.4

241.6

36.1

91.1

158.9

250.0

36.4

76.8

165.0

241.8

31.8

65.9

157.2

223.1

29.5

65.6

151.6

217.2

30.2

59.6

151.0

210.6

28.3

57.0

149.0

206.0

27.7

57.3

144.3

201.6

28.4

59.2

136.9

196.1

30.2

62.3

139.3

201.6

30.9

61.6

134.4

195.9

31.4

56.4

127.4

183.8

30.7

84.5

139.7

224.2

37.7

82.3

160.0

242.3

34.0

72.9

157.5

23Q.4

31.6

58.2

153.2

211.5

27.5

56.4

150.5

206.9

27.3

62.5

157.4

219.9

28.4

59.8

149.1

208.9

28.6

57.8

147.5

205.3

28.2

60.7

148.4

209.1

29.0

66.0

145.2

211.1

31.3

61.3

133.5

194.8

31.5

56.8

126.0

182.8

31.1

Females

13.1

35.7

48.9

26.8

18.8

50.5

69.3

27.1

15.4

39.0

54.5

28.3

Governor-General's Speech
1974 August 1975 August 1976 August
November 1977 February
May August November(a) 1978 February March April May June July August September October November December 1979 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1980 January February March April May June July August September October November December
1971 August 1972 August 1973 August 1974 August 1975 August 1976 August
November 1977 February
May August November(a) 1978 February March April May June July August September October November

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 383

15-19 years
21.6 51.7 52.9 50.9 75.8 69.7 73.1 63.6 89.0 75.6 . 68.0 65.1 60.2 59.6 62.1 60.1 59.7 61.4 99.6 89.1 81.7 79.2 75.6 72.9 73.3 67.7 70.6 74.1 72;1 63.8 91.9 90.1 81.5 73.4 70.9 76.0 71.7 65.0 70.0 70.4 65.3 61.7

20 years and over
51.4 88.0 83.2 75.4 110.4 99.4 96.1 100.1 133.1 127.1 122.2 121.1 115.4 107.3 112.2 106.3 99.9 102.0 100.0 107.1 13D.4 122.6 124.0 113.0 110.0 113.3 107.1 120.8 119.8 113.0 110.8 105.4 132.5 127.5 126.6 117.7 125.4 115.0 113.2 124.0 115.6 112.4

Persons 23.7 37.4 31.6 38.9 91.1 1OD.4 97.9 143.2 132.3 135.3 121.9 175.4 139.0 127.0 124.9 119.8 117.8 127.6 120.1 118.3 117.8

69.0 106.6 74.2 IQ2.1 187.3 192.3 183.7 229.1 221.5 224.0 224.9 301.6 281.2 274.1 270.4 272.5 260.2 268.1 264.4 249.2 251.9

Total 73.1 139.7 136.1 126.3 186.2 169.1 169.2 163.7
222.1 202.7 190.3 186.2 175.6 166.9 174.2 166.4 159.6 163.3 199.7 196.1 212.1 201.8 199.5 186.0 183.3 181.0 177.7 194.9 191.8 176.8 202.7 195.5 214.1 200.9 197.5 193.7 197.1 180.0 183.2 194.4 '180.9 174.1

15-19 years as' percentage of total
29.5 37.0 38.9 40.3 40.7 41.2 43.2 38.9 40.1 37.3 35.7 35.0 34.3 35.7 35.6 36.1 37.4 37.6 49.9 45.4 38.5 39.2 37.9 39.2 40.0 37.4 39.7 38.0 37.6 36.1 45.3 46.1 38.1 36.5 35.9 39.2 36.4 36.1 38.2 36.2 36.1 35.4

92.7

25.6

144.0

26;0

105.8

29.9

140.9

27.6

278.4

32.7

292.7

34.3

281.5

34.8

372.3

38.5

353.8

37.4

359.3

37.7

346.8

35.1

477.0

36.8

420.2

33.1

401.1

31.7

395.3

31.6

392.3

30.5

378.0

31.2

395.7

32.2

384.5

31.2

367.5

32.2

369.7

31.9

384 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

15-19 . years

20 years andover

Total

15-19 years as percentage of total

December 1979 January
Febr\lary March April May June July August September October November December 1980 January February March April May June July August September October November December

186.7

254.5

441.2

42.3

180.2

266.0

446.2

40.4

158.5

295.4

453.9

34.9

145.2

279.8

425.0

34.2

141.2

275.6

416.8

33.9

132.5

264.0

396.6

33.4

130.0

259.0

389.3

33.5

125.0

257.6

382.5

32.7

129.7

244.0

373.8 .

34.7

136.4

260.1

396.5

34.4

133.6

254.2

387.8

34.5

120.2

240.4

360.6

33.3

176.4

250.5

426.9

41.3

172.4

265.4

" 437.8

39.4

154.4

290.1

444.5

34.7

131.7

280.7

412.4

31.9

127.3

277.2

404.5

31.5

138.5

275.1

413.6

33.5

131.5

274.6

406.0

32.4

122.8

262.5

385.4

31.9

130.7

261.6

392.3

33.3

136.4

269.1

405.5

33.6

126.6

249.1

375.7

33.3

118.5

238.5

357.0

33.2

(a) Estimates for earlier quarters revised to take account of new sample and new questionnaire introduced in November 1977. revised population benchmarks.
Compiled at request by the Statistics Group of the Legislative Research Service from information supplied by the Australian Bureau of Statistics.
EMPLOYED PERSONS BY AGE ('000)

15-19 years

Total

15-19 years as percentage oftotal

1971 August 1972 August 1973 AugUst 1974 August 1975 August 1976 August
November 1977 February
May August November (a) 1978 February March April May June July August September October November December 1979 January February

Males

322.3

3712.7

8.7

312J

3757.7

8.3

335.2

3839.6

8.7

326.3

3847.1

8.5

324.4

3820.6

8.5

326.1

3836.3

8.5

326.8

3866.0

8.5

345.6

3890.2

8.9

350.2

3891.5

9.0

332.1

3866.8

8.6

.323.5

3867.3

8.4

348.8

3857.4

9.0

348.3

3870.1

9.0

342.7

3867.7

8.9

345.7

3863.5

8.9

341.1,

3860.0

8.8

333.1

3848.2

8.7

332.9

3832.3

8.7

334.2

3840.9

8.7

338.6

3854.7

8.8

330.3

3846.1

8.6

368.8

3923.7

9.4

356.4

3869.2

9.2

355.3

3893.6

9.1

Governor-General's Speech,
--~I
March April May June July August September October November" December 1980 January February March April May June July August September October November December
1971 August 1972 August 1973 August 1974 August 1975 August 1976 August
November 1977 February
May August November (a) 1978 February March April May June July August September October November December 1979 January February March April May June July August September October N01(ember December 1980 January February March' April May June July August

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 385

15-19 years 361.0 360.5 356.9 347.3 342.7 342.8 347.2 338.9 343.7 380.1 368.6 368.2 367.1 359.9 370.3 '359.8 359.5 350.1 355.8 345.2 349.3
Females 293.8 301.0 301.8 299.6 291.2 ' 280.9 283.6 292.2 295.9, 286.4 297.3 304.6 301.5 308.4 308.1 305.7 305.5 297.9 290.7 287.9 287.3 303.6 303.6 298.4 296.5 295.2 291.0 284.6 285.7 274.9 286.5 281.1 296.5 313.0 310.7 306.1 310.8 309.1 305.9 307.4 310.6 300.9

Total 3904.2 3907.4 3908.3 3909.6 3910.8 3904.5 3939.3 3930.9 3931.2 3992.3 3937.6 3960.1 3971.1 3949.6 3981.2 3970.3 3984.2 3970.9 4010.0 4000.8 4006.7

15-19 years as percentage or total
9.2 9.2 9.1 8.9 8.8 8.8 8.8 8.6 8.7 9.5 9.4 9.3 9.2 9.1 9.3 9.1 9.0 8.8 8.9 8.6 8.7

1803.0 1852.1 1943.3 2008.1 2020.7 . 2061.5 2089.0 2095.1 2132.7 2128.6 2128.2 2074.8 2117.8 2136.1 2135.3 2131.9 2149.8 2137.2 2144.1 2151.9 2151.2 2173.8 2070.7 2125.4 2157.4 2149.0 2135.0 2148.0 2156.8 2136.9 2178.8 2194.4 2219.4 2227.7 2141.5 2213.9 2272.1 2242.4 2256.6 2262.4 2295.8 2275.8

16.3 16.3 15.5 14.9 14.4 13.6 13.6 13.9 13.9 13.5 14.0 14.7 14.2 14.4 14.4 14.3 14.2 13.9 13.6 13.4 13.4 14.0 14.7 14.0 13.7 13.7 13.6 13.2 13.2 12.9 13.1 12.8 13.4 14.1 14.5 13.8 13.7 13.8 13.6 13.6 13.5 13.2

386 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

15-19 years

Total

15-19 years as percentage oftotai

September October November December 1971 August 1972 August 1973 August 1974 August 1975 August 1976 August November 1977 February May August November (a) 1978 February March April May June July August September October November December 1979 January February March April May June July August September October November December 1980 January February March April May June July August September October November December

317.6

2315.3

13.7

310.8

2285.2

13.6

313.4

2301.8

13.6

Persons

616.2

5515.7

11.2

613.1

5609.9

10.9

637.0

5783.0

11.0

625.8

5855.2

10.7

615.7

5841.3

10.5

607.1

5897.8

10.3

61004

5955.0

10.3

637.8

5985.2

10.7

646.1

6024.2

10.7

618.5

5995.4

10.3

620.8

599504

lOA

65304

5932.3

11.0

649.8

5987.9

10.9

651.1

6003.8

10.8

653.8

5998.7

10.9

646.7

5991.9

10.8

638.6

5998.1

10.6

630.8

5969.6

10.6

624.9

5985.1

lOA

626.5

6006.6

lOA

617.7

5997.3

10.3

67204

6097.5

11.0

660.0

5939.9

11.1

653.7

6018.9

10.9

657.5

6061.6

10.8

655.6

605604

10.8

647.9

6043.3

10.7

631.9

6057.6

lOA

628.3

6067.6

lOA

617.7

6041.5

10.2

633.7

6118.1

lOA

620.0

6125.2

10.1

640.1

6150.6

lOA

693.1

6219.9

11.1

679.3

6079.1

11.2

674.2

6174.1

10.9

677.9

6243.2

10.9

669.0

6192.1

10.8

676.2

6237.8

10.8

667.2

6232.7

10.7

670.1

6280.0

10.7

650.9

6246.7

lOA

673.4

6325.3

10.6

656.0

6286.0

lOA

662.7

6308.5

10.5

(a) Estimates for earlier quarters revised to take account of new sample and new question. naire introduced in November 1977. revised population benchmarks.
Compiled at request by the Statistics Group of the Legislative Research Service from information supplied by the Australian Bureau of Statistics.

Mr BAUME-I thank the House. It is certainly worth pointing out that during this period, contrary to what has been alleged by honourable members opposite, there has been no dramatic increase under this Government, compared with the situation under the previous government, in

the proportion of the unemployed made up of young people. Certainly under Labor there was a dramatic increase in the proportion of young people who were unemployed. For example, in August 1972 only 26 per cent of the unemployed were between the ages of 15 and 19 years. Under

Governor-General's Speech

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 387

Labor the figure went up to around 33 per cent. undertaken by our predecessors. That interest on

Roughly a third of the total number of people unthe public debt has increased by $496m, which is

employed were in that 15 to 19 years bracket, and that percentage is about the same now. If there was any dramatic increase in the assault 011 youth, the incapacity of youth to get jobs, I suggest that

roughly half the total rise in real government expenditure over the last five years, including the present Budget. About half of it goes in paying interest on the borrowings that were forced on the

that took place in those days. Many of us regret Australian people because of the reckless policy

that we have not been able to get back to the of spending far more than was raised in revenue.

much better level that existed under the One of the reasons the Australian people have

McMahon Government in 1972, but we hope had such an excessive tax burden in the last five that, with the continuation of these positive poliyears has been the effort to make up that gap be-

cies that create rather than destroy jobs, particutween the huge spending and the much slower rise

larly in the manufacturing industry, we will get in government revenue.

back to those levels.

What are the other things that make up this

There has been quite an amount of comment about whether or not the Government can achieve reductions in taxation as a result of substantial cuts in government expenditure. Many of us take the very strong view that it is absolutely vital to reverse the trend that took place during the period from1973 to 1975, when there was a massive increase in the total levels of government spending. In real terms, during that time there was a 33.5 per cent increase in government spending,
after taking account of inflation. Many of us take the view that that not only has to be halted but actually reversed. I know that members of the Opposition regard this as an obnoxious and evil prop.: osition. They regard big public sector speriding as the only way in which social justice can be achieved, and that has been stated on the record. I do not want to go once again into the statements of all the Opposition spokesmen on economic policy who have called for bigger government and bigger taxes, because it is part of their concept of social justice.

modest increase of 5.8 per cent in government spending? We find that payments to the States make up the rest. The $548m increase in real terms, after accounting for inflation, in payments to the States over that time represents a significant increase in what the States have been getting. In fact, it represents a 14.3 per cent rise between 1975-76 and 1980-81. The States have received 14.3 per cent more money, but they keep whingeing continually about what is happening to them, whereas the Federal Government has had an increase in total of 5.8 per cent and half of that rise went in payments to the States. So there is thl< extraordinary situation in which one sees restraint, on behalf of taxpayers, being shown clearly by the Federal Government but a reckless indifference by the States to the economic requirements of this country. I believe that is something which should be drawn very much to the attention of the voters, particularly of the State of New South Wales, who will have the opportunity to make a judgment in the near future.

Many of us on this side of the House take the view that taxes are far too high. This Government has achieved something by at least slowing down the rate of growth of taxes. Instead of that 33.5 per cent real growth in total government outlays, or government spending, that took place during the period of the Labor Government, in the five years since then these outlays have gone up by only about 5.8 per cent. Some orus say that that is, too high, but it is interesting to examine where,

It is interesting too to see that the Federal Government has been obliged, quite properly, to increase its welfare payments in real terms over the period it has been in government by something like 26.2 per cent. That is a big increase in welfare, particularly for the aged and the infirm. I am very glad indeed to see this recognition by the Federal Government of need despite the requirements of a tight budgetary situation and of trying to hold down the level of taxes.

those increases have taken place and whether As a result there have been many offsetting re-

there is anything we can do to diminish those calls ductions of real Federal Government spending.

on the public purse. It is regrettable that one of However, I regret that a reduction to my satisfac-

the major increases-almost $500m in real terms tion has not taken place in one area. I hope that

over that period-has been in paying interest on the group loosely called the 'razor gang' will be

the public debt. When a government sets out as a able to look into this aspect. I refer to the 7.8'per

policy to have deficits-in other words, to spend a lot more than iUs prepared to raise-someone has to pay for it. The Australian people are still paying, and will continue to pay for quite some time, for the deliberate policy of deficit financing

cent increase in real terms in the general' expenditure on the Public Service. Many people take the view that there has been an unnecessary expansion in some segments of the Public Service-and, I underline the words 'some segments'-because it

388 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

seems to me that there is a continuing and massive need to increase the quality and quantity of some services from the Public Service to those who are in need. All I am seeking is a reduction in these services to people who are not in need. I hope that the current inquiry will establish some areas in which this can take place. Over the last five years there has been an increase of about $78m in real terms in general Public Service expenditure. This is only about half the rise that took place in the three years under our predecessors, but it still can be argued that it is perhaps too much.
I now mention very quickly another area where I believe the taxpayer, particularly the pay-asyou-earn taxpayer, can and should be relieved from the immense burden he is suffering. I accept and support many of the points that the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) has made in the past about the unfair burden that many PAVE taxpayers have, in fa:ct, suffered overrecent years. This includes the period during which the Australian Labor Party was in government. There is no doubt that PAYE tax in real terms has gone up by 48 per cent since 1973 while, at the same time, other income tax on individuals-that is, income tax not paid for by PAYE-has risen by only 18 per cent in real terms. This has occurred despite a significant trend towards selfemployment and appears to indicate a big increase in the use of proper and improper methods of tax avoidance by people in this category. It seems to me that the pressure to correct the unfair incidence of tax relates far more to PAYE taxpayers-that is the ordinary worker, including all of us here too-than to the self-employed, higher income tax earners who are most vocal on the subject. It seems to me that the PAYE taxpayer is the person who has to be considered utmost, along with the low income earner, when we are talking in future about reduced taxes. It does not seem to me that thll other group, the non PAYE taxpayers, has been carrying any,thing like the increased burden that the PAYE taxpayer has had to carry.
How do we bring about these reduced taxes which so many of us on this side of the House in particular genuinely want in comparison with those on the Australian Labor Party side, who see in high taxes a method of achieving their social justice ends? It is a high tax party and its policies remain so. I suggest that one of the ways we could not only generate tax revenue but also bring about significant benefits to our nation is by imposing an export tax on raw materials. In my electorate such a tax is already paid and has been ever since the Labor Party introduced it unfairly, I believe, under the policy of the late R. F. X. Connor: I

refer to the coal export levy. It is a discriminatory tax which applies in the underground mining area in New South Wales, massively to its disadvantage under the Labor Party, as against the competitive open cut mines in Queensland.
At least this Government removed that discrimination by charging the open cut mines a discriminatory rate of tax. The Queensland open cuts, existing now because they have a much lower cost level, pay a higher rate of tax. I suggest that this raw materials export tax be applied to all raw material mineral exports, but that this tax be withdrawn when those raw materials are upgraded. This would mean that those industries that upgraded their product for the benefit of employment in Australia and for the benefit of our balance of payments would have that tax wiped out. So instead of exporting iron ore fines they would export pellets; so the pellet plants in Western Australia would be reactivated. Instead of exporting bauxite, alumina would be exported and there would be a hix benefit involved in upgra~ing the ra:w material export. If it is good enough to apply that policy to the coal industry in my electorate, it is good enough to apply it to every other mineral export from Australia. I believe that the social benefits and the economic benefits involved are massive. I hope that we would raise very little from that tax because I hope that it would encourage every exporter to upgrade his products.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr LES McMAHON (Sydney) (10.5)-Both the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume) and I entered this Parliament in 1975 but he still sounds like an economist.
Mr Barry Jones-Like a failed one.
Mr LES McMAHON-That is right, like a failed one. I have no idea how he will continue as a member of this Parliament if he speaks like that and does not worry about the people he represents. With those few words I finish my remarks on the issues that he has raised in the past 20 minutes. I thank the electors of Sydney for the confidence that they have shown in electing me to represent them for the third time as a member of the Australian Labor Party in this Parliament.
Mr Barry Jones-It did not even go to preferences.
Mr LES McMAHON-No,it did not even go to preferences. I am pleased to say that it was a great win of 64 per cent of the primary vote and 74 per cent of the vote preferences. The members of the Labor Party worked hard for me during the

Governor-General's Speech

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 389

last election campaign, as they did for the previous two occasions. I extend to them my sincere gratitude for their untiring efforts. I also thank my wife and family for all the assistance they have given me. I support the amendment moved by the honourable member for Hotham (Mr Kent). Honourable members on both sides of this House must support his remarks on unemployment, family life and the care of the underprivileged. I wish to congratulate the newly elected members of the Australian Labor Party on their maiden speeches. I refer to the honourable member for Ballarat (Mr Mildren), the honourable member for Hindmarsh (Mr Scott), the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly), the honourable memb~r for La Trobe (Mr Milton), the honourable member for Macquarie (Mr Free) the honourable member for Burke (Dr Theophanous), the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke), the honourable member for Hotham (Mr Kent), the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley), the honourable member for Hunter (Mr Robert BrQwn), the honourable member for Holt (Mr Duffy), the honourable member for Isaacs (Mr Charles), the honourable member for Banks (Mr Mountford) and the great speech today from the honourable member for Lilley (Mrs Darling). I mention aJso the speech of the honourable member for St George (Mr Morrison), who is a former member. We have to remember that after the next election a swing of 3 per cent or 4 per cent will put us on the other side of the House in government.
Mr Baume-You have to get preselection first, Les.
Mr LES McMAHON-There is no worry about that. Everything is fairly right at this stage. I turn now to the Governor-General's Speech. I view with some scepticism the sentiments behind the Governor-General's statements in regard to the Government's alleged care for the people of Australia. The first matter the Governor-General spoke on, as honourable members will recall, was that of youth unemployment. He said that this was placed first because of the great importance his Government attaches to it. The Governor General also said:
In recent years, and for a number of reasons, the question of jobs for young people has emerged as a crucial one, not only in Australia but in virtually all Western countries.
This is such a crucial question to honourable members that this Government sought to cure the problem of the youth unemployed by cutting off unemployment benefits to the i6-year olds and 17-year olds. This action would have forced many young people to stay on at school, placing further

pressure on the already overburdened school systems or to continue seeking work in the job market with no means of financial support. The result of this plan would have been to reduce the number of young people shown in the unemployment statistics, which I imagine was one of the Government's priorities, and to subject 16-year olds and 17-year olds to further hardship.
May I remind honourable members of the Governor-General's comments in regard to this Government's deep concern for the Australians quality of life? He said:
My Government sets it out to establish that it cares deeply about the quality of life lived in Australia and that it is deterniined to give practical expression to that care.
He also added:
. . . to provide-the means whereby people can become more independent and freer to choose the lives they want to live.
The attempt by this Government to cut offunemployment benefits to 16-year-olds and 17-yearolds is typical of that so-called care of which the Governor-General spoke. It is also typical of the alleged wish that people become more independent and freer to choose the lives they want to live. After the Governor-General expressed the Government's deep concern about unemployment, it seemed strange to hear him follow on by reporting how the Government has successfully done away with 10,000 jobs in the Public Service, thus adding a further 10,000 to the ranks of the unemployed. Yet again this Government which cares so deeply for Australians displayed its true feelings in the manner in which it treated Betty Cuthbert. The Betty Cuthbert case was appalling in itself but it became even more appalling when one realises that it was only the. tip of the proverbial iceberg. In my electorate of Sydney I continually see cases similar to that of Betty Cuthbert but they do not receive the same publicity.
The maximum pension payable to a single pensioner is a mere $64.10 a week. An invalid pensioner is able to earn up to $20 a week, before tax, before his or her pension is reduced. Thereafter, pension payments are reduced by $2.50 for every additional $5 of other income earned to a maximum of $148.20 when pension entitlements are cut off. The maximum pension of $64.10 a week represents an income of $1.20 below the poverty line for a single unemployed person. Invalid pensioners also receive a pensioner health benefits card and other fringe benefits. These benefits are withdrawn once the pensioner's other income reaches $40 a week before tax. As invalid pensioners, in most cases, would require almost continual medical attention, the constant threat of

390 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

the loss of health benefit concessions must be dev-

astating to them and must cause them consider-

able mental anguish, resulting in their living lives

of fear. The treatment of Australians on invalid

pensions and other social benefits by this Govern-

ment which claims to care so much is. immoral,

unjust and inhumane.

.

Another problem which is of prime importance to my electorate of Sydney is housing or, more to the point, the lack of housing. As honourable members may be aware, my electorate covers the inner suburbs of Sydney-Balmain, Rozelle, Lily field, Leichhardt, Petersham, Dulwich Hill, Lewisham, Marrickville, Stanmore, .Enmore, Newtown, Darlington, Camperdown, Redfern, Glebe, Pyrmont, Ultimo, Chippendale, Millers Point, Annandale, Woolloomooloo, Forest
Lodge, The Rocks, and the great city -of Sydney itself. My electorate also covers all harbour islands and Lord Howe Island. Honourable members will notice that the areas I represent are Australia's oldest suburbs, Australia's most popular suburbs and one of Australia's most expensive areas.

Mr Young-And the best electorate, next to Port Adelaide.

Mr LES McMAHON-That is correct. Sydney is Australia's largest city, both in population and geographical area. Sydney with its beautiful harbour is by far Australia's most beautiful city. It is also Australia's oldest settlement. It was the site of the first white settlement in the colony in 1788. Therefore, I find it inconceivable that previous Liberal governments, both . State and Federal, have not had the foresight to plan for the housing needs of Sydney. Fortunately, the New South Wales Labor Government and, recently, the Labor Sydney City Council have attempted to remedy this lack of Liberal
foresight by launching housing projects in and around Sydney. One great example of the New South Wales Government's attempt to right the wrong of the previous Government is the Sirius project. It is a New South Wales Housing Commission project at the Rocks area Sydney. The Sirius project, which is named after the supply ship of the First Fleet, comprises 79 units ranging from one-bedroom to four-bedroom dwellings. The 79 units are split up as follows: 17 onebedroom units which are on level one and are de, signed for the aged; 11 one-bedroom units which are split-level; 38 two-bedroom units deigned for single-parent families; 8 three-bedroom units; and 5 four-bedroom units. The complex also includes two community ro6ms, one of which is designed specifically for the aged. Of the units 70 per cent have balconies, courtyards or roof terraces. This

project is a fine example of the New South Wales Labor Government!scare for people, a care which this Federal Liberal-National Party Government lacks. ",'
The Whitlam Goyernment displayed its care for the Australian people by launching the Glebe estate housing proje~t:yl1974. When the Whitlam Government purchased the Glebe estate some 600 of the 700 dwe11iQgs were in need of major rehabilitation. Approxim.ately only 400 of these 600 dWellings have been r6paired to date, mainly due to this Government!!! slashing of funds. This Government virtUally. has brought the project to a stanqstill since coming to powoer in 1975. This action is in line with the Government's approach to any of the reforms. made by the Ll,ibor Government between 1972'and 1975. This Government tightens funds in such a way that a project becomes unviable or it destroys it gradually, as was the case with Medibank. In fact, Medibank in its original form has been completely destroyed by this Government, even though the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) said in his policy speech of 1975 that Medibankwould not be dismantled. Housing is a major problem in my electorate. With the high rise in Teal estate prices in the inner suburbs of Sydney and the high interest rate on housing loans brought about by the policy of this Government which purports to care so much for the people of Australia, families and pensioners are being forced out of the inner city area. These people have lived in the inner area for generations and are in urgent heed of low cost housing.
This Government has the resources to help to launch low cost housing projects in the inner suburbs of Sydney but it refuses to offer any assistance. I am referring to parcels of unused Commonwealth land iIi the inner city~ In particular, there is land at Pyrmont, Anmindale, Glebe, Woolloomooloo and Balmain which could be used for low-cost housing projects and as part of the Sydney Harbour national park. In Woolloomooloo, the New South Wales Housing Commission currently is involved in a restoration of the area providing low-cost housing by restoring existing housing and building new dwellings. One problem that the Housing Commission is facing in Woolloomooloo is that to continue the project an. area of Commonwealth land must be handed over to the State Government by the Federal Government. As yet the Federal Government has not handed over the land in question,
The Australian National Line terminal at Mort Bay, Balmain, is yet another area the Government will not hand over to the State. The area which ANL vacated in late 1979 has been the centre of much debate over the last 2 years. Local residehts,

Governor-General's Speech

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 391

the Leichhardt Municipal Council and the State Govcirnment are all in favour of this land being utilised for low-cost housing and as open space. The Federal Government has been engaged in bureaucratic delaying tactics in regard to this site. The Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) announced last year that the site may be. used as an Army installation, a proposal which was received with great alarm by local residents. I call on the Federal Government as a matter of urgency to hand over these sites to the New South Wales Government for use in low-cost housing projects.
I draw the attention of honourable members to
my the problems of Sydnei (Kingsford-Smith) Air-
port.The airport is not in electorate; it is in the electorate of the Deputy Leader of the Opposition (Mr Lionel Bowen). However, the airport does cause considerable problems in my electorate due to the fact that Jhe flight path of the north-south runway, the airport's busiest runway, passes over the suburbs of Leichhardt, Annandale, Petersham, Stanmore and Marrickville. In 19~9 the arrivals on the north-south runway totalled 39,780, which represented 46 per cent of the total arrivals for that year; In 1980 those figures increased to 42,414 arrivals, which represented 46.5 per cent of the total arrivals. As honourable members may be aware, the noise of a jet airliner as it engages full thrust 3 to 5 miles before touchdown is devastating. The result is that school classes must stop, children playing in the streets cover their ears, conversations cease and television pictures are distorted. These are only a few of the effects of living under the flight path. I have even received reports from constituents living in Marrickville, which is approximately 3 miles from the airport, that they have been awakened during the night by the sound of jet engines being tested at the airport. Therefore, I am opposed to any proposal to extend the Sydney airport. My opposition is shared by many other Federal and State parliamentary members whose electorates are affected by such proposals.
Mr Les .Johnson-You can count me in on that.
Mr LES McMAHON-Yes. There are many of us here who have made that decision. The councils which are against the airport's extension are not all Labor councils. They an, Ashfield, Botany, Canterbury, Drummoyne, Leichhardt, Marrickville, South Sydney, Sutherland, Waverley, Randwick and Rockdale councils. When a decision is made the Government will have some trouble on itshands. At this stage the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) might agree to extending the Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport. Gwydir is a blue-ribbon National Country Party seat where

the air is fresh and the only noise to be heard is made by the birds singing in the trees, so why should the Minister for Transport worry about the noise at Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport?
Mr Les Johnson-How does the honourable member for Barton stand on that?
Mr LES McMAHON-I agree that the honourable member for Barton (Mr Bradfield) must be very worried because he has to make a d.ecision on this matter. Another point I would like to make concerns the Government's immigration policy. My electorate is ranked at No. 6 in Australia in relation to the proportion of nonEnglish speaking people in it. It is worthwhile noting that the first nine electorates are all held by the Australian Labor Party. In my electorate 25.6 per cent of the total electorate are non-English speaking people. The electorate is made up of many suburbs which, over the years, have become areas of transition. Migrants arrive in Australia and settle in the suburbs of my electorate. They establish themselves there, become naturalised and then move to other areas.
My electorate is a multicultural electorate and comprises many different ethnic communities. These communities are made up of Italians, Greeks, South Americans, Yugoslavs, Turks, Macedonians, Lebanese, Arabs, Portuguese, Cypriots and various South East Asians. My migrant constituents face numerous problems in sponsoring the near family, spouses and fiancees from overseas. Let us look at the case of one of my constituents, a widow with two children. This lady sponsored her fiance last May. She has had his baby which is now seven months old. The fiance is an unmarried man who is due to undertake military training in his country in the near future. To date, despite my representations, we have not been able to obtain a visa for entry to Australia. If this matter is not resolved in time this man will be unable to join his fiancee and son for another two years. There is some doubt whether he will ever come here at all. How do we tell these people not to worry? How do we say to them: ~We have it under control. The bureaucrats, the Government, will give the answer one day'.? .,
Students who come to Australia to study are not entitled to resident status under the Regularisation of Status Program unless they were former students who were here illegally and had broken the conditions of their student entry. I am dealing with a typical case which involves the plight of a student from Hong Kong who was refused resident status under ROSP because he had a current student visa. This young man came to Australia in

392 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Governor-General's Speech

1972 to study and to join his parents, his two sisters and two brothers, all of whom have resident status. He has only one relative outside Australia, his sister, who is married and living in Hong Kong. This man, who has been in Australia for 10 years, has been an honest respectable resident. However, he now faces the heartbreak of being separated from his family because he has a student visa.
Another contentious matter within the community involves the attempt by the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner), the Government and employers to bring skilled workers from overseas while young people in Australia cannot enter trades. This Government is attempting to import skilled ~orkers on the cheap. The Government is neglecting its responsibility to provide funds for the training of apprentices. While we have so many young people unemployed and so many wanting to take on trades it is irresponsible of this Government and employers even to think about such proposals. I am pleased to say that parents, the Australian Council of Trade Unions and the labor councils of all States and many employers are against the Government's proposal.
Many members of the Labor Party have discussed the important issue of socialism. The important issue of democratic socialism in the Australian Labor Party reminds me of my background in the Catholic religion. I think the greatest thing about democratic socialism is its Christian attitude. I must give praise to Pope John Paul II who, in his white robes, has travelled all over the world to try to convert people with peace. He has not used a gun or nuclear weapons. He has not tried to push his fist down anyone's throat or to give people money in an attempt to influence the way they vote. The greatest thing I have ever seen took place in St Peter's Square when I was with my wife. I was in Rome attending the Inter-parliamentary Union conference. The Pope captivated an audience of 100,000 people, not all of whom were believers, with his eight languages. He took a little child in his arms as a peaceful gesture and this act almost brought tears to the eyes of many people. Many Government supporters and many members of the Opposition have discussed the need for peace when speaking during the Address-in-Reply debate. If both sides of the Parliament do not act in a spirit of peace and do not put a bit oflife and'meaning into what they say, no one will believe that politicians are doing their jobs. We have one chance to secure peace for our future, for our children's future and for our grandchildren's future. Mr Deputy

Speaker, I again congratulate you on your electipn to your present position. I know that yqu have been fair. You did not interfere with anything I said and therefore I must have been on the right track.
Mr Armitage-When he gives the right decision.
Mr LES McMAHON-He is always fair. I will finish on that note.
Debate (on motion by Mr MacKenzie) adjourned.
ADJOURNMENT Women's Refuges in Victoria-The Antarctic: Mawson's Hut-EI Salvador-Support for the
Blind-Holcroft Inquiry-The Parliament-Service Pensions-Australian
Labor Party Policies Motion (by Mr Viner) proposed:
That the House do now adjourn.
Mr MILTON (La Trobe) (10.26)-1 would like to draw attention tonight to a problem which has arisen with regard to the confidentiality of women's refuges in Victoria. The Victorian Women's Refuge Group is an innovative program offering refuge to women and children in a noninstitutionalised setting. The accommodation provided offers security and confidentiality for women and children whose mental and physical well-being is under threat. No one refuge has the residential address of any other refuge because confidentiality is of the highest importance. Why is this confidentiality and security so important? It is important because the break up of the family has arisen as a result of the violence of men who inflict grievous bodily harm on their wives and children. I do not have sufficient time to talk about the pressures of our society which causes these men to behave in such an inhumane manner. They need medical and psychological treatment but government is as uncaring and as unfeeling about them as it is about the victims of their violent assaults. It is vital that these men should not be in a position to seek out the addresses of the refuges offering shelter to the family who have fled from their violent physical assaults.
There are now 16 refuges in Victoria providing a unique system of support for women and children who have been forced to leave an intolerable domestic situation. Each year hundreds of homeless women and children are housed by the refuges which also provide them with the resources necessary to begin independent lives. Local police officers will bear witness to the serious physical threat which these people suffer. In many cases

Adjournment

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 393

the lives and property of members of the groups overshadowed by the race to the South Pole. It is a

who run the refuges are frequently threatened.

remarkable story of human endeavour and per-

In Victoria these dangers have been reduced
together with the consequent necessity for police intervention by a strict policy of secrecy for telephone numbers and residential addresses of the refuges. To assist this level of secrecy the Vic-

sonal discipline on Mawsons's part. Furthermore, Mawson was responsible for Australia's original interest in the Antarctic. Australia's claim to territory in that continent is largely attributable to his contributions.

torian Government has funded a central agency, For that reason and the fact that next year 1982

the Women's Refuge Referral Service, to provide will be the centenary of Mawson's birth, I believe

adequate public access to refuges. Mr Jona, the some restoration work should be undertaken on

Victorian State Minister responsible for refuges, his hut at Commonwealth Bay so that it can be

has made an agreement with the refuges which preserved in the Antarctic Territory and portions

provides the necessary accountability to the State of it returned to Australia as a national monu-

Government and which retains the secrecy of the ment to enable many people to see the conditions

refuge addresses. My concern, and the concern of under which Mawson and his companions lived. It

all people connected with the refuges in Victoria, is impossible for people to do that while it remains

is a present request from the Minister for Health in Australian Antarctic Territory. The only

(Mr MacKellar) that the refuges supply him with option available would be to leave the hut as it is.

their addresses. The reason given for this request Unfortunately, this would not be a practical sol-

by the Minister is to enable officers from his de- . ution because in that extreme environment, Cape

partment to inspect the refuges so that accountDenison being the windiest place in the world

ability for the use of public money is provided to where winds of up to 200 knots have been experi-

the Commonwealth Parliament.

enced, if the hut is breached it will virtually blow

I submit that the administration of the refuge program has been effectively transferred to the Victorian Community Welfare Services Depart-
ment and it is totally unnecessary for the Minister .for Health to demand further information. This information can readily be obtainable from officers of the State Community Welfare Services. No matter how strenuously a government keeps confidential the addresses of refuges, this infor-

away. At the moment it is completely drifted up with hard ice. It would have to be excavated but, most importantly, it would have to be sealed against drift. It is virtually impossible to do so. If it were to be preserved in situ, effectively, a new building would have to be erected over the existing hut which would be prohibitive in terms of
cost and also would completely remove the visual impact of Mawson's original hut in its setting.

mation leaks out. Any increase in the number of An attempt could be made to seal the existing

people who have knowledge of the addresses framework against drift. From our inspections, it

poses further danger for the women and children would seem that the deterioration of the pine

whose physical and mental well-being is already cladding has gone so far that the snowblast has

at grave risk. I take this opportunity tonight to actuallv holed inch-thick boards. Most of the

make an earnest request to the Minister to reconboards' are less than half their original thickness

sider his stated view that it is necessary for officers and sealing would not be possible. There is no

of his department to visit women's refuges when point in attempting to preserve the hut unless it

all the information he needs can be obtained from can be sealed from snow drift to prevent ice from

the Victorian Government.

again building up inside it. I suggest that a' party

Mr MacKENZIE (Calare) (10.29)-Tonight I would like to make some mention of a site of very significant historic import to Australia. I refer to Mawson's hut at Cape Denison in the Commonwealth Bay area of the eastern sector of

be sent down to Commonwealth Bay to remove the existing pine cladding from the building. This should be done in such a way that it can be transported to Australia and used to clad a replica to coincide with the Mawson centenary next year.

Australia's Antarctic Territory. In January I was Some of the new cladding could be sealed in

fortunate to visit Mawsons's hut at Cape Denison. such a way that the remainder of the hut could be

I was the first member of Parliament to do so. It is kept in the eastern sector of Australia's Antarctic

indeed a monument of national historic interest Territory. The resources of the Antarctic division

and significance. Mawson with his companions, are such that this could not be done at present. An

Mutz and Ninnis, undertook one of the most aradditional allocation of funds would have to be

duous and strenuous journeys in Antarctic explomade for a project officer, necessary manpower,

ration history, perhaps even more so than the additional ship charter, materials, a summer

journey undertaken by Scott. At that time, program to undertake the restoration and the re-

Mawson's journey was, to a large extent, moval of the original cladding over perhaps two

394 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Adjournment

or three summers. The net result would be to preserve and to maintain a national monument in the eastern sector of the Australian Territory where there is no other sign of activity or presence and at the same time to commemorate the amazing contribution that Mawson-as an Australian-made to the Antarctic. It would provide also a replica in the very real form of the external cladding, the artifacts and items of equipment that could be stored in that replica to give all Australians some idea of Mawson's achievements in the Antarctic.
Mr HOWE (Batman) (l0.34)-On an occasion when the Australian Minister for Foreign Affairs (Mr Street) is in Washington engaged in talks with the American Secretary of State, Iwant to underline my opposition, and I
would hope the opposition of very many honour-
able members of Parliament, to the directions of American foreign policy, particularly in regard to EISalvador. Anyone who has followed that situation and has recognised that more than 14,000 people have been killed already in what is a tragic civil war in that country will see that the .decision of the United States Government to increase the number of military advisers and to provide an extra $25m in terms of support for the existing junta in El Salvador can only exacerbate a worsening situation which could well lead to the outbreak of a major war within the central American region.
It is extraordinary that honourable members on the other side of this chamber who were so pious about the intervention of the Soviet Union in Afghanistan-which was condemned by both sides of this House-should remain so silent on this question. I .remind the House that the American Government is in the process of seeking support around the world. Emissaries have been sent to Western Europe and to Latin America to try to get support for the American position as it is developing in relation to El Salvador. There has been considerable resistance from a number of governments in those countries to the course taken. People recognise that an escalation of the civil war in this country can result only in much greater suffering for the people, many more deaths resulting from the fighting, a polarisation of views and perhaps a spreading of the conflict to other countries within that region.
I believe El Salvador could become another Vietnam. I believe the United States Government ought to have learnt the lessons of Vietnam which resulted in so much tragedy and which ended in a very great defeat for the American people. The cause of the liberation front in El Salvador is a just one. No matter how long it takes, that front finally will achieve a victory because it is based on

a broad alliance of all forces except those most

closely associated with .the military backed junta.

The United States Government has pursued a

course in relation to El Salvador which has sought
mediation between ,the various groups. It is a

course which is no lqnger being pursued by the

present United States Government which is mov-

ing to a situation which I suggest will result in con-

frontation on a massive scale and will inevitably

result in a great tragedy for that country. Propa-

ganda being put oilt by the United States Govern-

ment which suggests that somehow this situation

is the product of a wider conflict, part of a global

conflict between the United States and the Soviet

Union is a very misleading analysis. It is the kind

of simplistic analysis which will lead to tragedy if

it is applied in situations where special factors

clearly are involved. I simply hope that before

long this Parliament will put on record its very

strong opposition to American policy relating to

El Salvador. I hope that our Foreign Minister will

say to the United States Government that it does

not have the support of the Australian people, the

Australian Parliament or the Australian

Government.

.

Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (l0.38)-Before I move on to the subject. I intend to cover I state that I hope the honourable member for Batman (Mr Howe) has the same feelings about the promotion of conflict in El Salvador by countries such as Cuba, Iraq and the Soviet Union. One of the facts of life in international affairs, and one of the tragedies of the twentieth century, is that the great powers seem to derive much joy from backing skirmishes which cause unrest on the doorsteps of the major powers. That is one of the ways and means to maintain a situation of unease in this world. The honourable member's lack of reference to the activities of other countries makes me feel that perhaps he is a little one-eyed.

I wish to make reference to the passing last week of Marie Cuvet, a blind Brisbane woman who was resident in my former electorate of Griffith. Marie Cuvet was blind, I think,- for almost all her life. She played a very active role in the community. Indeed, I observed that the funeral notice was supported by invitations for. the members of the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association of Queensland to be present. She was cited as a director of the One People of Australia League-OPAL-and she was also a member of the Buranda branch of the Australian Labor Party. At one stage I think she was also a member of my own party organisation. 1 suppose that every organisation to which she belonged would have regarded her at times as a very independent

Adjournment

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 395

minded lady. Knowing that she was blind, I used to feel somewhat uncomfortable when she talked to me about what she was reading today or last week or yesterday. She used to have people read to her, and she made a point of keeping up with exactly what was going on iii this world.
I have risen to speak this evening because in late January or early February Marie Cuvet rang me and made a plea for an extra form of support for blind people, and it has'heen my intention to speak in this House at some stage about her suggestion. Her husband died some time ago, and she has left a son who is an invalid. She pointed out that all she was entitled to was the invalid pension. On that invalid pension she had also to support her guide dog, which cost some $6 or $7 a week at most to feed. I notice the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner) is at the table listening. It is good to have a Minister from the Cabinet in the House so that this suggestion, which has much merit, can be conveyed back to that august body. Marie Cuvet pointed out quite sensibly that when a single person with a guide dog has to distribute her income on normal living costs and also use some of it for the upkeep of the dog-they are large dogs, as members of this House would realise~such a person is disadvantaged by a few dollars a week.
Whilst I do not advocate to this house the wholesale handing out of moneys from the public purse, I believe that if an examination were made to ascertain how many people live alone on a single pension we would probably find 30 or 40 blind persons in Australia in this situation. In memory of Marie Cuvet, I would like to leave the last suggestion she ever made to me with the Minister and with this Parliament. Perhaps it would not be too costly to make a contribution to the upkeep of the only companion that some of these people have. Whilst it may not be another human being, to such people the dog represents eyes, a means of transport, of getting from one place or another, and I think it is worthy of consideration.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (10.44)-1 want to raise I in this Parliament a matter which the Independent Public Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares, chaired by Mr Holcroft, was compelled to set aside because of its curtailed activities. This concerns the cross-subsidisation of F27 routes by jet routes and Western Australia is in a relatively disadvantaged position in this regard. With the current air fare structure, Western Australians are had both ways. We subsidise eastern States jet

routes and we subsidise eastern States F27 routes. On our own regional routes, however, we pay at full service cost rates. This is in marked contrast to Queelislanders, who have managed to browbeat Trans-Australia Airlines, into running their internal services at a loss. Responsibility for this situation rests squarely with the Western Australian Government.
In our wrath at the evidence of Federal Government maltreatment of the Holcroft inquiry and Federal Government acquiescence in the exploitation of Western Australian travellers, I would hate this Parliament to miss an opportunity to examine a couple of sleights of hand in the Western Australian Government's submission to the inquiry. After pages and pages of a fully justifiable attack on the cost structure of Western Australian travellers air fares and calls for reductions in them, there appears on pages 74 and 75 of the submission, or pages 286 and 287 of Volume 3 of the report, what amounts to a justification of its defence of a monopoly situation in Western Australia. In rather enigmatic terms, the Western Australian Government describes a quarrel between itself and the Federal Government over who has responsibility for determining air fares and licensing in Western Australia. It mentions a conflict between the Federal Government and the Western Australian Government over whether Trans-Australia Airlines should run a DC9 route from Darwin to Port Hedland to Perth. What it does not mention in the submission is that the Western Australian Liberal Government took up negotiations started by the Tonkin Labor Government and mounted a ferocious attack on TAA's capacity to serve that route. The attack was aimed at denying Western Australians a 20 per cent reduction in fares. It was probably successful in the end in denying them a further 15 per cent cut. As it happens, they did get a 20 per cent cut. A pathetic little coda to this section of the Western Australian Government's submission reads:
It is possible that the Government may wish to see a: MMA
which is more responsive to competitive pressures.' Serious consideration was given to a recent Trans West Airlines application to operate on the Perth-Kalgoorlie route, and even more serious consideration will be given to a Trans West application to operate between Karratha and Port Hedland.
Honourable members ought not hold their breaths to see those desirable eventualities come about. The Western Australian Government in its submission expresses delight in its belief that the Federal Government over the last year or two has determined that the Western Australian Government will have unfettered control over the intraState airline. If that really is the case, if the Government is really expressing what is a Federal

396 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Adjournment

Government position, then those of us, who are seeking cheaper air fares in Western Australia will be given considerable pause for thought.
At the moment Western Australia is holding its own internal air fares inquiry, or what passes for one. The public is invited to make submissions but these submissions are not publicly heard. The inquiry is presided over by local civil servants and can hardly be described as independent. We probably need not fear that this inquiry will suffer the same maltreatment as the Holcroft Inquiry, but I would not bet on it producing for the Western Australian people as valuable a result. I hope that if we get an opportunity to debate the Holcroft report over the next couple of days this aspect of the report will not be set aside. It is a serious matter, I believe, that the Holcroft Inquiry was not given the opportunity that its terms of reference permitted to make a serious inquiry into air fares in Western Australia. That is a serious omission in the Committee's report, albeit an omission imposed upon it by the Government's early closure of its efforts. However, as I said at the outset, I do not want the Western Australian Government to be let off its very considerable responsibility in this area. It has been responsible for resistance to price cuts in air fares in Western Australia and it must be held to account for that.
Mr BURR (Wilmot) (10.48)-1 was delighted to read in the Melbourne Age of Friday, 27 February, that the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) is now supporting the concept of a fouryear Parliament.
Mr Good luck-He supports you.
Mr BURR-Thank you. As my honourable colleague from Franklin says, I have supported the concept of four-year Parliaments for some considerable time. In fact, in December 1977 I wrote to the Prime Minister suggesting that we should introduce into this Parliament the legislation necessary to enable us to have a referendum on that matter. I am delighted to read now that the Prime Minister has accepted that proposition. According to a television interview he did recently, he is now supporting the concept. Of course, the fact that the Prime Minister supports the concept of a four-year Parliament does not necessarily mean that we will proceed to the stage of having a referendum to find out whether that is the consensus of the Australian people. It has to be supported by people other than just the Prime Minister or members of the Government.
The advantages of a four-year Parliament seems to me to be fairly obvious. Under our present system of three-year Parliaments, the first

year of an incoming government is devoted to decisions made by the previous government, either in its Budget or in the time before the incoming government comes to office. So one year effectively is lost. The second year is given over to effective management of government affairs, while the third year is devoted to building up to the election campaign that is to follow. We have one year in three for the effective management of public affairs whilst the other two years are devoted to either the aftermath of or the building up to election campaigns. I believe that the public is heartily sick of the process of government being dominated by what can only be considered to be an ongoing election campaign. That is not what government is all about. That is not what the public expects of government. If we extend the term of parliament to four years at least we will be able to expect that two out of four years will be devoted to the responsible, effective management of public affairs. That has been my contention for some considerable time.
I am delighted to see that that proposition has now been taken up by the Prime Minister. I hope that he will be successful in convincing his Government colleagues that the Federal Government should support the concept of four-year parliaments. But, as the Prime Minister pointed out, if we are to gain a broad consensus that there should be four-year parliaments, certainly before we put that proposition to the electorate at large by way of referendum there needs to be a consensus of all the political parties represented in this Federal Parliament. I put it to my parliamentary colleagues on the other side of the House that they should support the concept of a four-year parliament when that concept comes before this House for consideration. If we are to have that concept accepted in a referendum that referendum should not be fought on the basis of partisan politics but rather on the basis of what will produce sound and responsible public management.
I am delighted to see that Mr Wran in the New South Wales Government is to put that proposition to the people of New South Wales by way of referendum later this year in conjunction with the State general election. I note also that Mr Hamer. in the Victorian Government is now attracted to the concept of a four-year parliament. That is a good start, but it does not go all the way towards gaining a total consensus of either all the political parties or all the governments, State and Federal, throughout the country, which is what we need before we put the proposition to the people by way of referendum. I strongly urge my friends on the other side of the House to give this matter serious consideration. I

Adjournment

3 March. 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 397

strongly urge the State governments which do not already have four-year parliaments to give their' support to the concept. I believe that, if it is accepted, it will lead to much better management of public affairs. It will give governments a much better opportunity to implement their policies. It will be widely supported by the public at large if it is supported by all political parties.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (10.52)- Tonight I raise a matter relating to a returned serviceman who served in the Navy during the last war, Mr Hawksworth, who resides in Bass in southern Victoria. He is a man who, in his very young days, served this country. He discovered in 1954 that he had tuberculosis. In a letter to me dated 15 November 1980, he states:
This was accepted with little fuss as due to War service, with the evidence of X-rays, on my discharge from the Navy. After surgery, and other treatment, I was declared fit in 1956, to return to work. But with a letter from the then Repatriation Department, stating that I would never be reduced below the rate of 100% accepted disability, and would receive medical treatment at departmental expense.
Mr Hawksworth states that he was happy to be covered for the future as he would not be able to obtain life insurance and, having worked for the Government, he would get only limited superannuation cover. In 1978 this Government repealed the legislation whereby tuberculosis pensioners were automatically granted 100 per cent general rate of pension. We should bear in mind that this man had geared his life to the fact that that pension was available to him and he had this in writing from the government.
The situation today is that his pension was frozen in 1978, when the review which was carried out declared that he should receive a 40 per cent rate of pension. This means that his pension must now stay frozen at $74.40 until what he is receiving represents 40 per cent of the full rate of pension. His pension today, with consumer price index increases; should be $92.60. In those two years he has lost $18.20 of his expected income. I do not know how any government can expect a person to manage in this situation when he has geared his whole life to a certain economic situation in which he could not take out life insurance and his superannuation entitlements are very poor. He has served his country. All that he says is really. seriously wrong with him now are his knees, as a result of his crawling along the beaches to defend this country. This Government has repealed legislation which has affected his pension. He now has to sit and watch his income erode as inflation eats into it.
The letter he received dated 5 April 1955 states:
You are informed that pension will continue subject to further review, but will not under any circumstances be

reduced 'below the ordinary total rate prescribed by the Repatriation Act . , .
How can we expect people to respect the Government when men who have gone away and fought for their country and have received such a document which sets out the situation in black and white find when they get old that they are expected to stay put while inflation eats away their pensions? I urge the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr Viner), who is at the table, to receive this letter and show it to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). I ask him to urge the Cabinet to honour the commitments given by previous governments to those people who fought for this land to make it safe for the people who are here now.
Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (10.57)-The Australian Labor Party in both the State and Federal Houses long have denied that the nationalisation of private property is a policy which it embraces. But in the last few years in New South Wales we have seen the expropriation of dairy quotas, the quotas which dairy farmers supplying the Sydney whole milk market had and which many of them bought but which in fact were taken away without any recompense whatsoever by the State Labor Government. 'Expropriation' is a pleasant word meaning theft. Those quotas were--
Mr Leo McLeay-On a point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker, I want to explain to him why the State Government was willing to do that.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- There is no point of order. The honourable member will resume his seat.
Mr BAUME-I recognise that the honourable member for Grayndler is not a member with great experience in the House, but I am sorry to see him adopting deliberately the tactics used by so many of his peers in the House; namely, that of deliberately interrupting with specious points of order.
Mr Leo McLeay-1 raise a further point of order, Mr Deputy Speaker.
Mr BAUME-I now raise the matter of local rights.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Grayndler has a point of order.
Mr Leo McLeay-My point of order is that I consider that a gross reflection upon me--
Mr BAUME-You are right; it was.
Mr Leo McLeay-The honourable member has condemned himself from his own mouth. All I was drawing to the attention of the House was a relevant point of order, and the honourable

398 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Adjournment

member attacked me for doing that. I ask him for a withdrawal.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There appears to be some accord between the honourable members on the point in dispute. I suggest that we leave it at that.
Mr BAUME-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. I refer now to the rights of private property owners who have coal below the surface of their properties. In many cases properties were purchased recognising especially that there was a right. The New South Wales Government, following its nationalisation lead with dairy farmers, now plans to expropriate those rights. It plans to pinch them, to thieve them; without making any

recompense whatsoever. I simply draw to the attention of the House that the Labor Party is embracing a policy which in the past it has denied exists.
Mr Leo McLeay-1 don't think--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Grayndler will resume his seat. He is not entitled to take a point of order simply to obstruct another honourable member. His two previous points of order have not been of substance. It being 11 p.m., the debate is interrupted. The House stands adjourned until 2.15 p.m. tomorrow.
House adjourned at 11 p.m.

Answers to Questions

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 399

ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS i,

The following answers to questions were circalated:

Palmdale Group ofInsurance Companies (Question 1'10. 62)

Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:

(1) Has his attention been drawn to the hardship and confusion caused by the recent collapse of the Palmdale Group of
insurance companies; if so, is he also aware that the greatest hardship and confusion has been caused to employers and
workers in the context of workmen's compensation insurance.

(2) Is he further aware that much of the confusion arises from different approaches being taken to a variety of matters, including policy holders' protection, in the States and Federal Territories.

(3) Is it desirable to have uniformity on these matters, particularly in the light of the increasing mobility of workers.

(4) Will he convene a meeting of relevant Ministers to discuss the possibility of adopting a single approach to the pro-
tection of employers and workers in the event of an insurance collapse affecting workmen's compensation policy.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) I am aware of the hardship and other problems occasioned by the collapse of insurance companies within the Palmdale Group including the problems experienced by employees and workers in the context of workers' compensation insurance taken out with these companies.

(2) While the Commonwealth has the primary responsi-

bility for the supervision of the insurance industry, the States

and Territories have traditionally held certain responsibilities

in the insurance field, including aspects of workers' compensa-

tion insurance. 'I am aware that some concerns have been ex-

pressed concerning different approaches by States and Terri-

tories with regard to workers' compensation and policy holder

protection.

.

(3) In considering the general question of uniformity in ap-
proach, regard has to be paid to the traditional responsibilities of the States, the kind of uniform approach that is being considered and the differing circumstances and objectives that
can be involved.

(4) While I do not feel that there is a need, in present circumstances, for a meeting of the particular kind proposed, the general question of co-ordination between the States and the Commonwealth on insurance matters could be an appropriate subject for discussion at some future meeting.

Electricity Pricing
(Question No. 65)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Is it a fact that the recent OECD economic survey on Australia states that the pricing of some other energy forms, particularly electricity, may not in some areas be. ideal for proper resource allocation and would appear to involve undue subsidies; if so, does the Government concur in this assessment.
(2) Does this statement refer to cheap electricity supplied or proposed to be supplied to the aluminium cartel by some State governments; if so, is this an undue subsidy being given

to these companies and what action will the Government take to reduce this.

Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) The most recent OECD Survey of the Australian economy, which was released in June 1980, canvassed a number of issues related to the pricing of energy resources and concluded
with the statement indicated in the question.

The Government believes that resource allocation issues

should be properly taken into account in energy pricing, as is

evidenced by its policy of import parity pricing of indigenous

crude oil.

.

(2) The statement reflects the OECD's concern that the pricing of energy resources in general, including electricity, should be such as to ensure efficiency in the allocation of those resources.

The determination of the terms and conditions under which
electricity is made available to particular consumers by State electricity authorities is the responsibility of the State govern-
ments concerned. The limited information available to the Commonwealth about the detailed charges for electricity negotiated with aluminium companies has been provided on a
confidential basis.

Consumer Product Safety
(Question No. 76)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 28 November 1980:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the statement made by Mr A. McCann, Executive Director of the Australian Federation of Consumers' Organisation that consumer product safety was being hampered by poor co-ordination between the Commonwealth and the States, as reported in the Canberra Timesof20 May 1980, page 3.
(2) Has his attention also been drawn to the statement by Mr McCann that the Commonwealth-State Consumer Product Advisory Committee, which was established in 1977 to identify hazardous products, was inadequate.
(3) Is there any substance to the statements made by Mr McCann.
(4) Did the Australian Federation of Consumers' Organisations put forward a proposal which called upon the Federal Government to set up an independent Consumer Products Safety Commission with Commonwealth powers and technical expertise; if so, what action does he propose to take.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) No. Effective co-operation exists between the Commonwealth, States and Territories which has resulted in the achievement of mandatory safety standards for a wide range of products including such items as the flammability requirements for children's nightwear, motor cyclists' helmets and child restraints in motor vehicles. Much has also been achieved in co-operation with suppliers and retailers but on those occasions on which it has been found necessary to ban unsafe goods, effective powers exist and have been exercised.

400 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Answers to Questions

(4) Yes. I do not propose to take any action to establish a Commonwealth Consumer Products Safety Commission as I am not convinced that another Commonwealth Government regulatory body is the answer to consumer product safety.
North West Cape Communications Station
(Question No. 128)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(1) Further to his answer to question No. 1494 (Hansard, 22 August 1978, page 602) that detailed discussions were being held with the United States of America in an attempt to reach agreement on improved procedureS to meet the Australian Government's needs in respect of the North West Cape, WA. will he now inform the House (a) of the uutcome of such discussions and (b) what new procedures have been adopted to ensure that the Australian .Government will be fully informed and consulted in respect of the North West Cape.
(2) Was there a failure to consult in May 1978 in respect of the AN/MSC 61 terminal; if so, what steps are being taken to ensure that there is no repetition of this.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) The discussions between the respective Departments of Defence led to agreement between them on procedures for consultation on those matters where liaison was then considered to need improvement.
(b) Under this procedure US plans and proposals relating to specific joint defence facilities are communicated to the Australian Government through agreed designated points in the respective Defence Departments-these being the Office of International Security Affairs in the US Department of Defense and the First Assistant Secretary for Strategic and International Policy in the Australian Department of Defence.
(2) See my statement in Hansard of21 March 1979 (page 954). I am satisfied that the agreed procedure now applying will avoid recurrence of ti'.: ::>rt of problem to which the honourable member refers. That is its purpose.
Taxation
(Question No. 136)
Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
Is he' presently examining a proposal to alter the Government's revenue raising capacities by strongly increasing indirect taxation while compelling State Governments to introduce a form of income tax.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Consideration has been given to proposals for broadening the indirect tax base in the context of changes in the overall tax mix but, as I announced on 23 February, the Government has decided not to proceed with these proposals. The Commonwealth has no power to compel State Governments to introduce any form of taxation.
Business Bankruptcies
(Question No. 156)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:

(1) Has his attention been drawn to the statement by His Excellency the Governor-General, Sir Zelman Cowen, at the opening of the 7th International Symposium of Small Business on 17 November 1980, that failure or rnediocre performance by small businesses could be attributed not infrequently to management problems.
(2) Have busines bankruptcies increased in the last 5 years; if so, are management problems the reason for the increase.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourahle member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Business bankruptcies have increased in the last 5 years but not in the same proportion as the increase in the total number of bankruptcies. Whilst they are considered to be a major factor in business bankruptcies 'managclcnt problems' are not indentified as being the sole cause for the increase in business bankruptcies.
Kampuchea
(Question No, 239)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, up'on notice, on 3 December 1980:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the article 'America's second war in Indochina . . . Only the allies are new', by John Pilger in the New Statesman of I August 1980, pages 10-15.
(2) Has he taken any steps to investigate allegations in the article that (a) Thai troops are assisting Khmer Rouge guerilla forces inside Kampuchea, (b) a journalist has been imprisoned and his film destroyed, following his discovery of Camp 42, a Khmer base run entirely by Thais, (c) a UNICEF official was recalled to New York and threatened with dismissal if he continued to speak publicly about (i) manipulation of Western aid to Kampuchea and (ii) Vietnam's humanitarian assistance to Kampuchea, (d) the Sa Kaeo refugee camp in Thailand, nominally controlled by the United Nations High Commission for Refugees, is controlled by the Khmer Rouge, (e) the Khmer Serei are not right-wing guerillas but bandits with no popular following, (f) 84% of rice sent as aid across the Thailand-Kampuchea border is sold, according to an internal UNICEF estimate, (g) the World Food Program has dumped low grade seed, often consisting of empty husks and with a germination rate of less than 40%, in Kampuchea, (h) events in Indochina have been deliberately distorted in Western countries, especially following the publication of an allegedly fabricated CIA report in late 1979, U) Britain's policy of derecognition of the Pol Pot regime has been designed to quieten international opposition to backdoor support for the Khmer Rouge and (k) the British Foreign Office instructed Sir Henry Yellowless, the British delegate to the World Health Assembly, to vote in favour of the credentials of the Pol Pot regimldn May 1980; if so, which of the allegations can be specificall)' confirmed or denied and what is the evidence in each case.
(3) What Australian (a) Government and (b) nongovernment organisation aid programs to Kampuchea have operated in (i) Thailand and (ii) Phnom Penh within the last 18 months.
(4) What type of Australian aid has been given in each case and what was the cost of each program in Australian dollars from the date of its inception to 30 June 1980.
(5) Have any Australian diplomatic personnel visited Kampuchea since 1975; if so, what was (a) the officer's name and his or her substantive grading at the time (b) the (i) purpose, (ii) date and (iii) duration of each visit and (c) the substance of any recommendations made to the Australian Government following the visit.

Answers to Questions

3 March 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 401

Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) Yes.
(2)(a) The Thai Government has consistently denied that it is giving assistance to the Khmer Rouge. Vietnamese allegations that Thai forces have deployed artillery in support of Democratic Kampuchea on the Kampuchean side of the Thai-Kampuchean border have not been corroborated.
(b) Camp 42 (or NW9) is not 'a Khmer base run entirely by Thais' but shelters Vietnamese refugees who have made their way overland via Kampuchea. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) is in charge of delivering and distribution of food to the camp residents. I have no information about any journalist having been imprisoned and his film destroyed, following his 'discovery' of Camp 42. The camp's existence is public knowledge.
(c) I am not able to confirm or deny this allegation. Such matters would normally be considered the internal business of the agency concerned.
(d) There have been two holding centres at Sa Kaeo, both controlled by the Thai Supreme Command in co-operation with the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Movement of refugees from Sa Kaeo I, to the new camp at Sa Kaeo II (also known as Ban Kaeng) and other holding centres was completed in August 1980. Sa Kaeo I was believed to contain Khmer Rouge elements and sympathisers but was not run by the Khmer Rouge.
(e) A number of small groups of armed anti-communist Khmer elements known generally as the Khmer Serei operate in the Thai-Kampuchean border area. There have been frequent reports of armed clashes and black-marketeering involving relief supplies in the border region.
(f) The Australian Government receives detailed reports of the distribution of our contributions and those of other donors to the international relief program in Kampuchea. The supplies allocated to the Thai-Kampuchean border region between 1 October 1979 and 31 December 1980 consisted of 155,000 tonnes of rice pledged through the World Food Program and 20,000 tonnes of other commodities. This food was distributed on a day to day basis to the 250,000 refugees settled along the Thai side of the border. Since the beginning of this year there has been a substantial drop in the number of displaced Khmers in the border region. On 23 January 1981 the land-bridge operation which distributed relief to Khmers who had come from within Kampuchea was suspended.
(g) The international donor community has provided about 55,000 metric tonnes of rice seed and about 2,000 tonnes of other seeds to Kampuchea since late 1979. The FAO mission which made a thorough investigation of the food and agriculture situation in Kampuchea during October and November 1980 commented favourably on these inputs, and predicted as a consequence a substantial increase in rice production in 1980-8\. Australia has not provided rice seed for use in Kampuchea.
(h) Numerous reports on internal conditions in Kampuchea, originating principally from the personnel of international and private relief agencies and from the journalists who have visited Kampuchea, are available in Western countries. These reports have a high degree of consistency, and there is no reason to believe that they are not substantially accurate.
U) The reasons behind the British Government's decision to d-recognise the Government of Democratic Kampuchea (the Pol Pot regime) were set out by the British Lord Privy Seal, Sir Ian Gilmour, in the House of Commons on 6 December 1979.

(k) Britain voted in favour of Democratic Kampuchea's credentials at the World Health Assembly of WHO, held in May 1980.
(3) (a) The Australian Government does not have a current aid program to Kampuchea. However, Australia was one of the first countries to respond to an international appeal for humanitarian assistance for the people of Kampuchea. The Australian Government has contributed over $14 million to the relief operation. The Government's contributions have been mainly channelled through the United Nations International Children's Emergency Fund, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the International Committee of the Red Cross, the Food and Agricultural Organisation and the World Food l'rogram, with a view to alleviating the suffering of people within Kart)puchea as well as those in refugee border camps in Thailand and along the ThaiKampuchean border. Assistance has also been given through the Government of Thailand for displaced Thai people affected by the influx of refugees.
The Government has given increasing recognition to Australian Non-Government Organisations (NDOs) providing relief to Kampucheans and has recently provided an additional $1.2 million for humanitarian assistance programs conducted by NGOs in Kampuchea and Thailand.
Contributions from the Australian public in 1979-80 to the International Disaster Emergencies Committee's Kampuchean Relief Appeal were tax deductible and the Government made a direct grant of $200,000 to that appeal.
(b) The Government does not have complete statistics on the total involvement of Non-Government Organisations. However, it is known that the following Australian organisations have operated or contributed to programs of assistance to Kampucheans.
AUSTCARE (Thailand) Australian Council of Churches (Thailand and
Kampuchea) Australian Catholic Relief (Thailand and Kampuchea) Australian Red Cross Society (Kampuchea and
Thailand) Australian Freedom from Hunger Campaign (Kam-
puchea and Thailand) UNICEF Committee of Australia (Kampuchea and
Thailand) World Vision of Australia (Thailand and Kampuchea) Community Aid Abroad (Kampuchea) Australian Council Save the Children Fund (Kam-
puchea and Thailand) Lutheran World Federation (Kampuchea) Australian Baptist World Aid and Relief Committee
(Thailand) Society ofSt Vincent de Paul (Thailand) Overseas Service Bureau (Thailand) YMCA (Thailand) YWCA (Thailand) For Those Who Have Less (Kampuchea) Seventh Day Adventist World Service (Kampuchea and
Thailand) Australian Jaycees (Kampuchea)
These NGOs have contributed more than $12 million (of which the Government provided over $2 million).
Programs supported have ranged from emergency food, medical aid and volunteers to longer term projects such as the rehabilitation of hospitals, schools, transportation, food production, irrigation and agricultural facilities and the provision of livestock.
4. Australian Government contributions to the Kampuchean Humanitarian Relief Operation during the period to 30 June 1980 were as follows:

402 REPRESENTATIVES 3 March 1981

Answers to Questions

Nature of assistance
Airlifts of emergency supplies in response to initial appeal for immediate assistance
4,000 tonnes of rice 460 tonnes of sugar Cash grant Cash contribution Nutritional foodstuffs Cash grant Cash grant (part earmarked for workshop rehabilitation)
Medical teams for relief work in Kampuchea Cash grant RAAF Hercules aircraft and crew for relief
flights Cash grant (earmarked for use on agricultural rehabili-
tation program) Cash grant (to support relief programs for Khmers in
camps in Thailand) Cash grant (earmarked for operational costs of the UN
relief co-ordinator's office) Milk powder Cash grant

Amount
($A) 0.329
2.541
0.200 0.250 1.700 1.497
0.600 0.500 1.330 0.500
0.250
0.100
0.200 0.100

Recipient organisations
UNICEFIICRC
World Food Program IDEC Appeal organised by voluntary organisations Aust. Freedom from Hunder Campaign United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees United Nations International Children's Emergency
Fund Australian Red Cross International Committee of the Red Cross Food and Agricultural Organisation Government of Thailand United Nations Headquarters World Vision of Australia (raw materials required for
rehabilitated milk processing plant in Kampuchea)

(5) There have been three visits to Kampuchea by Australian diplomatic personnel since 1975 as follows:
(i) (a) R. S. Merrillees, Acting Assistant Secretary, South Asia Branch, Department of Foreign Affairs R. C. G. Martin, Executive Officer, South East Asia Programs Branch, Australian Development Assistance Bureau
(b) (i) to accompany a Government-sponsored flight carrying emergency humanitarian supplies, hand over the supplies to ICRCI UNICEF personnel and obtain direct information on the progress of the relief operation being undertaken by the international agencies and others.
(ii) 24 October 197,9 (iii) approximately seven hours
(c) It would not be appropriate to reveal the detailed confidential recommenllations made by the officer Concerned.
(ii) (a) I. Mezes, First Secretary and Consul, Australian Embassy, Bangkok

R. M. Scobie, Third SeCretary, Australian Embassy Bangkok
(b) (i) to obtain official proof of identity of Australian citizens David Lloyd Scott and Ronald Keith Dean ,who were reported to have been arrested and later, executed in Kampuchea.
(ii) 21-23 August 1980. (iii) Two days.
(c) Not applicable. The visit was for consular purposes only.
(iii) (a) J. G. Dunn, Second Secretary (Consular and Administrative), Australian Embassy, Hanoi
(b) (i) to obtain the release of Australian citizen Margaret Anne Mcl\wraith who had entered Kampuchea illegally and been detained by the Peoples Republic of Kampuchea authorities.
(ii) 19-24 January 1981. (iii) Five days.
(c) Not applicable. The visit was for consular purposes only.


