House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 121, 1981 Wednesday, 1 April 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--SECOND PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-SECOND PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House - Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health and Minister for Home Affairs and
Environment Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar
The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh

--Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government) (From 19 March 1981)

- Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Industrial Relations -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General -Minister for Social Security
Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources
Minister for Home Affairs and Environment -Minister in the Cabinet

The Right Honourable-John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Andrew Sharp Peacock The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter. Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable John Colin ton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (NCP) (LP) (LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCPNational Country Party of Australia.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

(From 16 Aprill981)

-Prime Minister -Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources -Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House -Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate -Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry -Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance

-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting

the Prime Minister

- Attorney-General

-Minister for Social Security

.

-Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime

Minister in Federal Affairs

Minister for Transport

Minister for Health

Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Minister for Science and Technology

Minister for Administrative Services and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Defence

Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs

Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting

the Minister for Industry and Commerce

Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the

Treasurer

Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting

the Minister for National Development and Energy

Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister

Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources

Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Jan McCahan Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robertlan Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, QC. Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dun net Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, QC. The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senator the Honourable Anthony John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Jan Bonython Cameron Wilson

-Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)-
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia.

Members of the House of Representatives
Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, KCMG., QC. Chairman of Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deputy Chairmen of Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Donald Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles, Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader of the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader of the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Opposition and Manager"ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS
Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C. H. Deputy Leader of the Liberal Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG.
Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony Deputy Leader of the National Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor Party-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan
Anthony, RL Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume, Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John
Blewell, Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen, Han. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, QC. Brown, Robert James
Bungey, Melville Harold Burr, Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme
Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Han. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest Child, Joan Cohen, Barry --coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas
Cunningham, Ba:rry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney
Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Hon. Douglas Nixon Falconer, Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, C.H. Free, Ross Vincent
Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey O'Halloran
Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John -Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.C. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allan Clyde
Howard, Hon. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie
Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunne! Hurford, Christopher J.ohn Hyde, John Martin Innes, Urquhart Edward

Division
Fisher,Qld Richmond, N.S.W. Chi Hey, N.S.W.
Macarthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. BonyLhon, S.A. Bendigo, Vic.
Kingsford-Smith, N.S.W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qid Parramaua, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic. Hunter, N.S.W. Canning, WA.
Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden,Qid Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
HenLy, Vic. Robertson, N.S.W. Wentworth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne, N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld
McMillan, Vic. Lilley,Qid Fremantle, WA. Herbert,Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. Holt, Vic.
Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Farrer, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S. W. Fraser, A.C.T.
Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas.
Braddon, Tas. Boothby, S.A. Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qid Riverina, N.S.W. Petrie,Qid Denison, Tas.
Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Grillith,Qid Gwydir, N.S.W. Adelaide, S.A. Moore,WA. Mel~urne, Vic.

Party
NCP
NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP
LP LP LP LP LP NCP ALP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP
LP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP
ALP LP LP LP ALP LP ALP
LP LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP LP
LP ALP ALP NCP LP LP ALP
LP ALP
ALP NCP ALP
LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Raiph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Han. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin
Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles
Killen, Han. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, RL Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
KCMG. MacKellar, Hon. Michaellohn Randal
MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., C.H. McVeigh, Han. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm
Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence
Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Hon. William Lawrence Mountford, John Graham Newman, Hon. Kevin Eugene
Nixon, Hon. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Hon. Andrew Sharp Porter, James Robert Robinson, Hon. Jan Louis -Rocher, Allan Charles
Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scou, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon. Ian McCahan Snedden, RL Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., QC.
Spender, John Michael, QC. Street, Hon. Anthony A-ustin Tambling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.C. Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Hon. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George
West, Stewart John -while, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.C. Willis, Ralph Wilson, Hon. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker, S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcaslle, N.S.W. Bowman,Qid Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S.W. Canberra, A.C.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Warringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S.W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S.W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld LaTrobe, Vic. Ryan,Qid Shortland, N.S.W. SLGeorge,N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. ,Reid, N.S.W. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S.W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. SLurt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

-Elected at by-election 21 February 1981. --Elected at by-election II April I981.
PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP~Australian Labor Pa[-.ty; LP-Liberal Party or Australia;.NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Jan Robinson, Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSER VATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXI'ENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HOUSE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY-Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous.
PRIVILEGES-Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes (from 5 March).
PUBLICATIONS-:-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr Howe.
ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman (from 9 April), Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Morris, Mr Shack (to 9 April) and Mr Tuckey.
STANDING 0RDERS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), Chairman of Committees, Leader of the House, Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senators Hamer and Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
Puouc ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), the Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senators Georges, Lajovic and Watson, and Mr Beazley (to 4 June), Mr Bradfield, MrCadman (to 26 March), Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly (from4June), MrShack (from 26 March), MrTamblingand Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKS-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senators Kilgariff, Melzer and Young, and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (from 7 May) (Chairman), Senators Georges, Knight (to 4 March), Neal and Robertson (from 5 March), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Dean, Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senators Elstob, Kilgariff, Mcintosh, Martin, Sibraa, Sim and Young, and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, M-r Kalter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HousE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Minister for the Capital Territory, Senators Evans, Maunsell, Melzer, Missen, O'Byrne and Young, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. 0. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (Table)-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (Procedural)-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk-Assistant-A. R. Browning C/erk-Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-!. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-!. C. Cochran Procedure Office-1. K. Porter
Table Office (Programming)-J. W. Pender (Acting) Table Office (Bills and Papers)-B. C. Wright (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-]. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporler-J. M. Campbell
LeaderofSta.ff(House ofRepresentativesJ-R. T. Martin
Leader ofSta.ff(Senate)-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. G. Weir
JOINT HOUSE
Secretary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Advisory Council for Inter-government Relations Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.7 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Advisory Councilfor Inter-government Relations Act1976.
Airlines Agreement Act 1981 (Act No. 75 of 1981 )An Act to approve the execution of an agreement relating to air transport, and for purposes connected therewith.
Airlines Equipment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 77 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Airlines Equipment Act 1958.
Airlines Equipment (Loan Guarantee) Act 1981 (Act No. 38 of 1981). An Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Act 1981 (Act -No. 30 of 1981 ) An Act relating to the conservation of marine living resources of the Antarctic and its surrounding seas.
Apple and Pear Export Underwriting Act 1981 (Act No. 14of 1981 )An Act relating to the underwriting of returns from the export from Australia of apples and pears.
Apple and Pear Stabilization Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 15 of 1981)An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Stabilization Act 1971, to repeal certain related Acts, and for other purposes.
Appropriation Act (No.3) 1980-81 (Act No. 55 of 1981 )An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No. I) 1980-81, for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1981.
Appropriation Act (No.4) 1980-81 (Act No. 56 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund, additional to the sum appropriated by the Appropriation Act (No.2) 1980-81 ,for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1961.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Gaming and Liquor Authority Act 1981 (Act No. 116of 1981)An Act to establish a Gaming and Liquor Authority for the Australian Capital Territory and for related purposes.
Australian Federal Police Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 22 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Federal Police Act1979.
Australian National Airlines Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 78 of 1981)An Act to repeal the Australian National Airlines Actl945 and for related purposes.
Australian National University Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 106 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian National University Act 1946.
Australian Tourist Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 27 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Australian Tourist Commission Act 1967.
Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 49 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Beef Industry (Incentive Payments) Act 1977.
Bounty (Non-adjustable Wrenches) Act 1981 (Act No. 18 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain wrenches.
Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 17 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Bounty (Polyester-Cotton Yarn) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Bounty (Printed Fabrics) Act 1981 (Act No. 102of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain printed fabrics.
Bounty (Textile Yarns) Act 1981 (Act No. 103 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of bounty on the production of certain textile yarns.
Broadcasting and Television Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 113 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting and Television Act 1942, and for related purposes.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Act 198) (Act No. 114 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964 to extend it to certain licences.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 48 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905.
Christmas Island Agreement Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 107 of 1981)- An Act relating to the Christmas Island Agreement.
Coal Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 19 of 1981)An Act to amend the Coal Excise Act 1949, and for other purposes.
Commonwealth Banks Act 1981 (Act No. 29of 1981).An Act to amend the Commonwealth Banks Act 1959, and for related purposes.
Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 26 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Act 1979.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued

Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981 (Act No. 74 ofl981 ) An Act to implement certain changes in Commonwealth functions.

Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 62 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Legal Aid Commission Act1977.

Commonwealth Teaching Service Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.5 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commonwealth Teaching Service Act 1972, and for purposes connected therewith.

Companies Act 1981 (Act No. 89 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the government of the Australian Capital Territory in relation to the formation of companies, the regulation of companies formed in that Territory, the registration in that Territory of certain other bodies and certain other matters.
Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.2 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 94 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares) Act 1980.

Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 95 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Companies (Acquisition of Shares-Fees) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 4 of 1981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies and Securities (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Amendment Act (No. 2) of 1981 (Act No. 98ofl981)An Act to amend the Companies and Securit-ies (Interpretation and Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1980.

Companies (Fees) Actl981 (Act No. 90of 1981 ) An Act relating to fees payable for the purposes of the Companies Actl98l.

Companies (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 92 of 1981 ) -

.

An Act to make certain amendments consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981 and for other

purposes.

Companies (Transitional Provisions) Act 1981 (Act No. 91 of 1981 )An Act to enact transitional provisions consequent upon the enactment of the Companies Act 1981.

Complaints (Australian Federal Police) Act 1981 (Act No. 21 of 1981)An Act relating to complaints made in respect of members of the Australian Federal Police, and for related purposes.

Conciliation and Arbitration Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 71 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.

Crown Debts (Priority) Act 1981 (Act No. 93 of 1981)- An Act relating to the priority of Crown debts.

Currency Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. II of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Currency Act 1965.

Customs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 64of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.

Customs Amendment (Securities) Act 1981 (Act No. 67 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Actl901 in relation to securities.

Customs Amendment (Tenders) Act 1981 (Act No. 45 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901 to provide for tenders for rights to import goods at concessional rates of duly, and for related purposes.

Customs Securities (Penalties) Act 1981 (A.:t No. 46 of 1981 )An Act to provide for penalties for refusal or failure to give certain securities with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Customs Tariff Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 68 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Customs Tariff Act1966.

Customs Tariff (Anti-Dumping) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 66of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Customs Tari.ff(Anti-Dumping) Act 1975.

Customs TarilfValidation Act 1981 (Act No. 87 of 1981 ) An Act to provide for the validation of certain collections of duty of Customs.

Customs Undertakings (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 47 of 1981)An Act to provide for penalties for breaches of undertakings with respect to the importation into Australia of dutiable goods.

Dairying Research Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Dairying Research Act 1972, and for related purposes.

Designs Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 42 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Designs Act 1906, and for related purposes.

Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Act 1981 (Act No. 59 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the export of dried fruit.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Dried Fruit (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Actl981 (Act No. 60 of 1981 ) An Act to make provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Dried Fruit (Export Inspec.tion Charge) Act 1981.
Dried Vine Fruits Stabilization Legislation Repeal Act 1981 (Act No. 13 of 1981)An Act to repeal certain legislation relating to dried vine fruits and for related purposes.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981 (Act No. 101 of 1981)An Act providing for the protection of the environment by regulating the dumping into the sea, and the incineration at sea, of wastes and other matter and the dumping into the sea of certain other objects, and for related purposes.
Excise Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 65 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Excise Act 1901.
Excise Tariff Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 50 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Excise Tariff Act 1921.
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981 (Act No. 23 of 1981 ) An Act relating to costs in federal courts and courts of certain Territories.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Act1981 (Act No. 57 of 1981 ) - An Act to impose a charge upon the inspection of fish for export.
Fish (Export Inspection Charge) Collection Act 1981 (Act No. 58 of 1981)An Act to niake provision for the collection of the charge imposed by the Fish (Export Inspection Charge} Act 1981.
Flags Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.9 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Flags Act 1953.
Health Acts Amendment Billl98l (Act No. 118 of 1981 ) An Act relating to sickness and hospital benefits, and for other purposes.
Housing Assistance Act 1981 (Act No. 70of 1981 ) An Act relating to financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory for the purpose of housing.
Human Rights Commission Act 1981 (Act No. 24of 1981 )- An Act relating to human rights.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. Ill of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Assessment and Rates) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 109 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Diverted Income) Act 1981 (Act No. 112 of 1981)An Act to impose tax on certain income derived under tax avoidance schemes.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 28 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (International Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 108 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. llOof 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Independent Air Fares Committee Act 1981 (Act No. 76 of 1981)An Act to establish a Committee to review the basis on which certain domestic passenger air fares are determined and to determine those domestic passenger air fares.
Industrial Research and Development Incentives Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 44 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Industrial Research and Development Incentives Act 1976 and to repeal certain related Acts.
Koongarra Project Area Act 1981 (Act No. 104 of 1981 )An Act to vary the boundary of the Kakadu National Park for the purposes of the Koongarra Project.
Lands Acquisition (Northern Territory Pastoral Leases) Act 1981 (Act No. 105 of 1981 )An Act relating to the acquisition by the Commonwealth of certain land in the Northern Territory.
Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 100of 1981)An Act to amend the Local Government (Persona/Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976 in consequence of the States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981.
Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.6 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Long Service Leave (Commonwealth Employees) Act 1976.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 (Act No. 81 of 1981)An Act relating to the recovery of minerals, other than petroleum, from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Exploration Permit Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 83 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of permits under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to explore for minerals in submerged lands.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Production Licence Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 84 of 1981 )An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of licences under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981 to recover minerals from submerged lands.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 86of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of the registration of certain instruments under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act1981.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Royalty) Act 1981 (Act No. 82 of 1981)An Act to impose a royalty upon minerals other than petroleum recovered from the continental shelf of Australia and of certain Territories of the Commonwealth.
Minerals (Submerged Lands) (Works Authority Fees) Act 1981 (Act No. 85 of 1981)An Act to provide for the payment of fees in respect of works authorities under the Minerals (Submerged Lands) Act 1981.
National Companies and Securities Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. I of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Companies and Securities Commission Act 1979.
National Health (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 40 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits.
Navigation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 10 of 1981)An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Navigation (Protection of the Sea) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 36 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Navigation Act 1912, and for related purposes.
Overseas Telcommunications Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 115 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Overseas Telecommunications Act1946.
Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 37 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Parliamentary Contributory Superannuation Act1948.
Parliamentary Joint Sittings Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 39 of 1981)- An Act relating to joint sittings of the Parliament.
Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 69 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Pay-roll Tax (Territories) Assessment Act1971.
Petroleum Products Pricing Act 1981 (Act No. 117 of 1981 )An Act to make provision for the holding of inquiries into prices charged or proposed to be charged for the supply of petroleum products or services related to the production or supply of petroleum products in Australia.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands-Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 79 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act1967, the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Amendment Act1980and the Coral Sea Islands Act1969.
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 80 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) (Registration Fees) Amendment Act1980.
Pig Slaughter Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 51 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Pig Slaughter Levy Act1971.
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Act 1981 (Act No. 31 of 1981 )- An Act relating to civil liability for pollution damage.
Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Act 1981 (Act No. 32 of 1981 )An Act relating to the protection of the sea from pollution by oil discharged from ships.
Protection of the Sea (Powers of Intervention) Act 1981 (Act No. 33 of 1981 )An Act authorizing the Commonwealth to take measures for the purpose of protecting the sea from pollution by oil and other noxious substances discharged from ships, and for related purposes.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy) Act 1981 (Act No. 34of 1981)An Act to impose a levy in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Act 1981 (Act No. 35 of 1981)An Act relating to the levy imposed in respect of certain ships in Australian ports with oil on board.
Public Works Committee Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 20of 1981)- An Act to amend the Public Works Committee Act1981.
Quarantine Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 54 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Quarantine Act 1980.
Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 25 of 1981 ) An Act to amend the Racial Discrimination Amendment Act 1980 by substituting references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1981 for references to the Human Rights Commission Act 1980.
Repatriation (Pharmaceutical Benefits) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 41 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Repatriation Act 1920 in relation to pharmaceutical benefits, and for other purposes.
Roads Grants Act 1981 (Act No. 88 of 1981 ) An Act to grant financial assistance to the States and to the Northern Territory in relation to roads.
Securities Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No.3 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION-continued
Securities Industry Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 96 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry Act 1980.
Securities Industry (Fees) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 97 of 1981 )- An Act to amend the Securities Industry (Fees) Act 1980.
Shipping Registration Act 1981 (Act No.8 of 1981 )An Act providing for the registration of ships in Australia, and for related matters.
States (Tax Sharing and Health Grants) Act 1981 (Act No. 99of 1981 ) An Act to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory from the tax collections of the Commonwealth and to provide for grants to the States and the Northern Territory for health purposes.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 52 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1979 and the States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1980, and for related purposes.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 53 of 1981 )An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1978, and for related purposes.
Statute Law Revision Act 1981 (Act No. 61 of 1981 )An Act for the purposes of statute law revision, and for other purposes.
Supply Act (No. I) 1981-82 (Act No. 72 of 1981 )An Act" to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Supply Act( No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 73 of 1981 )An Act to make interim provision for the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year ending on 30 June 1982
Trade Marks Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 43 of 1981 )An Act to amend the Trade Marks Act 1955.
Wool Industry Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 63 of 1981 ) - An Act to amend the Woo/Industry Act 1972.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: SECOND PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill1981lnitiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.

Death ofHon. Sir Alexander Downer, K.B.E.

I April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 59

Wednesday, 1 April 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 2. 1 5 p.m., and read prayers.
DEATH OF HON. SIR ALEXANDER DOWNER, K.B.E.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon- -Prime Minister) -I move:
. That this House expresses its deep regret at the death on 30 March 1981 of the Hon. Sir Alexander Russell Downer, Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire, a member of this House for the Division of Angas from 1 949 to 1964, a Minister of the Crown from 1958 to 1 963, and Australian High Commissioner in London from 1964 to !')72; and that this House places on record its appreciation of his long and meritorious public service, and tenders its profound sym pathy to his widow and family in their bereavement.
Alexander Russell Downer was born in 1 9 10, 1 0 years after the birth of the Commonwealth of Australia. His father, Sir John Downer, was one of the founders of this Commonwealth as well as being a Premier of South Australia. Alexander Downer followed with conviction and total dedi cation the tradition of political life and service to the Australian community. I am sure that a number of honourable members will be interested to know that I visited Alec Downer only a very few weeks ago and, whilst obviously very ill, he maintained a lively interest in the members of this place and in the affairs of the nation. He wanted to know how people were doing and his mind was as sharp and active as always.
He was educated both in Australia and in England. He took the degrees of Master of Arts and Diploma of Economics and Political Science at Oxford University. He was called to the Bar at the Inner Temple in London in 1 934 and was admitted to the South Australian Bar in 1 935. [n 1 940 he enlisted as a gunner in the Australian Im perial Force. He went to Singapore in 1941 on active service and was reported missing. He spent some three and a half years as a prisoner of war at the Changi camp until the recapture of Singapore in 1 945. It is greatly to the credit of Alexander Downer and a tribute to his character that a major effect of his experience in those years was a strengthened belief in the value of closer international co-operation. He entered this House as member for the division of Angas in 1 949 and was returned successively in the next five elections. He represented the electorate of Angas well and faithfully through all that time. I am sure that his whole electorate remembers him with great affection.

He served with distinction on a considerable number of parliamentary committees-the Li brary Committee, the Select Committee set up to inquire into and report upon the Hansard of the House of Representatives, the Privileges Committee, and the Joint Committee on Consti tutional Review, in which he had a particular interest. He was a well known, widely respected and greatly liked member of this House. Alec Downer had friends on both sides of the Parliament. I know that in his old home in South Australia and in his new home he was visited by members of the Opposition as well as by members of the Government parties. He had close friends on both sides of the House and there was wide spread appreciation of his work both on the back bench and as a Minister. In 1958 he became Min ister for Immigration and he served in that port folio until 1 963. He worked devotedly and effec tively as Minister for Immigration, travelling to the United Kingdom, Europe and the United States of America to discuss various issues concerning migration. It will doubtless be regarded as a particular tribute to his work in that portfolio that the late Mr Arthur Calwell, perhaps the founder of Australia's modern immigration program, took the opportunity to say how pleased he was both with Alec Downer's appointment to that post and with the way in which he handled it. Alec Downer resigned from this House on 23 April 1 964 in order to take up the position of Australia's High Commissioner in London. On the occasion of his resignation Sir Robert Menzies said of him:
He is an extraordinarily popular member of this House and he will take to London with him a great background of tradition. He is a man of high education, of wide information, of great courtesy and with an uncommon capacity for getting on with people and presenting his views strongly without forfeit ing friendship.
I think that paragraph very accurately describes much of the Alec Downer we remember. I echo those judgments, as I am sure other members will. Sir Robert went on to say how ideal were the qualifications and attributes of Alec Downer for the post he was shortly to take up in London. So they proved to be in the event. He was made a Knight Commander of the British Empire in 1 965. His term of office in London was extended three times and he insisted that the third renewal should be the last.
Alec Downer was a great believer in the link between Australia and Great Britain. His period in office in London was a period in which consider able adjustments were made to some aspects of that link as the United Kingdom moved into the European Economic Community. Alec Downer had his own views on that move, which would be

1 1 60 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 198 1

Death ofHon. Sir Alexander Downer, K.B.E.

well known to honourable members, and on its implications for his country. Throughout that whole period he was a great ambassador for Australia and for all Australian interests. During his entire period of office in the United Kingdom he used his position and also his private resources to further as much as he could the interests of Australia. Of course, he was a great lover of England but, as one would expect, it was in Australia that he chose to live at the end of his period of office in London. Alec Downer had a fine career. Much was promised and much was given. We are grateful for his life and for his nota ble service to this country.
This is a time of particular sadness for his fam ily. A thought which must pass through the minds of all of us on these occasions is that, whatever we say of the history and the record of a man, we can not say much to ease the hurt of the immediate family in these circumstances. I think we are con scious of that. But to Alec's wife, Mary, who gave him immense support and dedication, and to his children-Stella, Angela, Alexander and Una-we extend our deepest sympathy at this time. I add that Alec Downer was a very great personal friend of many people in this House, including me. He was a person who showed great fortitude in recent years as he fought off an insidi ous and inevitable illness. He was an admirable example to many of us in many ways. He was much loved and much admired.
Mr HAYDEN ( O xley-Leader of the Opposition) -On behalf of the Opposition I support the expressions of condolence by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) in relation to the passing of Sir Alec Downer and I extend the deepest sympathies of the Opposition to the members of his family. Personally, I was struck with a deep sense of grief, which I still experience, at the news of Sir Alec's death. Parliament is a curious institution in many respects and probably is somewhat unfathomable for people outside the Parliament who watch the daily conflict in this sparring pit called the parliamentary chamber. For all that, in my view it is of great cathartic benefit to the community that tense views are ex pressed and passions are released here which otherwise, pent up, might present problems in the wider community.
However, that is not the matter I want to de velop. I merely note in passing that the impression we probably often leave with the public is one of unremitting conflict. That is not true. There are many matters, indeed most, that go through the Parliament uncontested, with only mild reservations being expressed. The impression of conflict and perhaps unbridgable distance is very

much a product of the more heated debates on the great issues of the moment.
It is proper that there should be genuine, strong feeling on those great issues. There is, however, a bridge that transcends these conflicts. It is a sturdy structure built on mutual respect and often affection between two people who may be opponents in this chamber. I mention this fact because for me there was such a sturdy bridge built with the late Sir Alec Downer. He was an extra ordinarily decent man. He was, in his manner, a gentleman-always considerate and, it seemed to me, preferring always to see the better side of those with whom he dealt, including his political opponents. He had a great sense of belonging to South Australia, where his family had been since 1 868. His family had been in politics for almost 1 20 years when he completed an eight-year term as Australia's High Commissioner to London. Whilst he came from an establishment back ground, he did not see arrogance or indifference to the common good as the hallmark of success in our society. Rather, he saw his background as giving him the opportunity to take a less ruthless approach to politics and to pursue public life with an eye to the common good. He had a great sense of serving the community, of striving for harmony rather than seeking discord.
Despite his background, his down to earth toughness is shown by his endurance, along with others in this chamber, of three and a half years in Changi prison during World War II. It was one of the great joys of the late Sir Alec Downer that the late Eddie Ward, the former firebrand of East Sydney, had stayed with him at his countrY-I<?si dence outside Adelaide on several occasionS. This association showed the breadth of his friendships. He was a man of good humour always, restrained and dignified in the presentation of his views in a period when excesses and indignities in politics wcre the common weapon of too many.
I suppose in a nutshell what I am saying is simply this: One of the great lessons for mest of us in the Parliament who come in fiercely committed to our party, staunch protaganists of our party's views, is the discovery that not all wisdom resides on one side of the Parliament, that no single party or person has a monopoly on all of the virtue in the political arena. That was one of the great lessons that I learned from the late Sir Alec Downer. He was, I repeat, unfailingly courteous and helpful, whether in London where I met him as a distinguished High Commissioner for this country, after having been associated with him in this Parliament when he was a Minister, or sub sequently when, as a Minister myself in the last Labor Government, I had occasion to greet him

Death ofHan. Sir Alexander Downer, K.B.E.

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 6 1

on several instances and in Opposition, of course, as Opposition Leader. His courtesy, his humour, his generosity and his patriotism leave us with many good memories of him. We are saddened by his death.
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)-It is with a great deal of sadness that I join the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) in the condolence motion which has been moved in respect of Sir Alexander Downer. I served with him in this Parliament for a number of years and also saw him regularly after he retired. Sir Alec was a real gentleman-a man with great dignity and a man who had no preju dices or hatreds. One could not help liking and admiring the man. The House pays tribute today to a great Australian-a man held in deep respect and admiration in all sections of the Australian community and a man whom I and many other members will be proud to be able to claim as a friend.
Sir Alec Downer was a great South Australian. He had Ii great affection for the State in which he grew up and in which his family home has been since the first half of the nineteenth century. At the end of his public career, he returned to South Australia and lived at Williamstown with his wife, Lady Mary, until his death. Sir Alec was the son of one of the founders of the Australian Consti tution, Sir John Downer. Educated in Australia and England, he went to the Bar in South Australia before World War II. After the war broke out, he enlisted in the Australian Imperial Force and was amongst many of the Australians who were captured by the Japanese forces at the fall of Singapore. He spent the remainder of the war period in a prisoner of war camp at Changi gaol.
Sir Alec Downer married in 1 947. In 1 949 he entered the Federal Parliament as member for Angas-the seat he held until 1 964. He served on the Joint Parliamentary Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Joint Committee on Consti tutional Review. In 1958 he became Minister for Immigration. He served in this demanding and often controversial portfolio with distinction. In 1 964, following his retirement from Federal poli tics, he was appointed High Commissioner to the United Kingdom. On a number of occasions I had the pleasure of visiting him and was able to see the excellent job he did there. Sir Alec Downer's international outlook, his wide-ranging interests, his experience in government and the personal charm of both him and Lady Downer were outstanding qualifications for this position. These qualities and his own warm feeling towards Britain and his love

for Australia combined to make him one of Australia's most successful ambassadors to Britain.
As 1 have already noted, Sir Alec made: Ihany lasting friendships during this time in public life. Those friendships went across all political lines. I was very interested to hear the remarks of the Leader of the Opposition when he claimed that even Eddie Ward had gone to visit Sir Alec in South Australia. I knew Sir Alec and Lady Downer well. J valued their friendship. I had respect for both of them for the contribution they made to Australia, particularly to Soth Australia. Today I offer my sympathy and that of my party to Lady Downer and to all the members of Sir Alec's family.
Mr UREN (Reid)-I join the ' three party leaders in paying tribute to Alec Downer. As the House will know, Alec Downer was a prisoner of war of the Japanese during the last war. He was one of five members on the Liberal-Country Party side of politics in the House of Representatives, who were prisoners of war, the others being Charlie Anderson, Billy Kent Hughes, Reg Swartz and Winton Turnbull. Of course, the only ones now alive are Charlie Anderson and Reg Swartz. Alec Downer was a very special person. Whether one knew him in the army, in prison camp, as a back bencher, as a Minister or even as a high commissioner, he was always the same type of person; he was never different. He was a very human person. He was a gentlemen of the old school and a very gentle person.
The only difference of opinion 1 had with Alec was when he was Minister for Immigration. If one went to him to try to get naturalised somebody who was a bit to the left in politics, he would really shy away. I certainly had a blue or two with him on that issue, as 1 have had with other Minis ters. I will never forget what happened when I went to London on one occasion and he heard that I was there. Some time before he left his pos tion as a Minister he thought he had offended me in some way. So, when we met, he embraced me and I embraced him because there was a very deep affection between the two of us.
The other point I want to make about Alec Downer's contribution to public affairs concerns the period when he was a member of the Joint Committee on Constitutional Review. I commend the report of the Committee to all members of the House. Persons ' of goodwill from both sides of politics sat down together on that Committee between 1956 and 1 959 and most of their recommendations were unanimous. The characters of the members of that Committee were d{verse.

1 1 62 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Death ofHon. Sir AlexanderDowner, K.B.E.

Its members were Pat Kennelly, Reg Wright, Alec Downer, Len Hamilton, Reg Pollard, Eddie Ward, Nick McKenna, Arthur Calwell, Dave Drummond, Percy Joske, Gough Whitlam and Neil O'Sullivan. As the Leader of the Opposition, Bill Hayden, said, affection grew between Alec Downer and Eddie Ward. I believe that Reg Pol lard, who was one of the members of that Committee, was probably one of the greatest parlia mentarians ever to come into this place. Honourable members should have heard the real affection with which Reg Ppllard would talk about Alec Downer, because of the warmth of his regard for him and his real understanding of Alec Downer's position in politics. When one thinks of what we are trying to seek in life, it seems that Alec Downer really represented the best of the conservative forces on the other side of the chamber. r pay tribute to him and send my very deep sympathy to his wife and family.
J wish to mention only one other matter. It has been referred to in part. Alec Downer's home was in a part of Australia which I believe is now a part of the National Estate. I refer to the house in which he lived in the Adelaide Hills. There was a time when it was doomed to destruction-not by a Labor Government in South Australia but by the Playford Government-just in order to build a freeway. Eventually it survived and it remains now as a part of the public sector, a part of the N ational Estate. It certainly embodies the tradition of the Downer family. I am pleased to join my colleagues in paying a tribute to the late Alec Downer.
1\1r GILES (Wakefield) -I wish to join in the motion moved by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and supported by honourable members on both sides of the House. As the Prime Minister has stated, Alec Downer joined the 2 / 1 4 Field Regiment in 1 940, as soon as h e could after the outbreak of war. He was captured in late 1 94 1 and incarcerated in the prisoner of war camp at Changi. He remained there until 1 945 with such people as Senator John Carrick, and until a little while ago I thought perhaps the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) as well. The honour able member for Reid mentioned the sensitivity of Alec Downer and I guess that it would not be wrong of me to say that the honourable member might have got through that period of being a pris oner of war more easily than a person of Alec Downer's make up; but be that as it may. Although his experience in Changi could not have enhanced his love for his captors, it is worth noting that the stature of the man was such that his attitude in trade agreements and other actions taken by the Australian Government shortly after

that period were in marked contradiction to any acknowledgment of the fact that he had been a prisoner of war. His attitude in all such matters was that of a big man and his vision on major oiscshueiasliosmf tohrisbynhatisurpeerwsoansanl efeveelrinagfsf.ected. by par-
I believe that, apart from his appointment as High Commissioner to the United Kingdom and his advent to the Ministry and ultimately to the Cabinet, his appointment as a member of the Joint Committee on Constitutional Review in 1 956 gave him lasting satisfaction. I was very glad to hear the honourable member for Reid mention that fact. Alec Downer brought to bear his great intellect on a subject dear to his heart, and fre quently mentioned to his friends the importance to his mind of that Committee. He was a forty niner, and I think it is true to say that of the forty niners only Sir William McMahon remains in this House.
The late Alec Downer was elected on 1 0 December 1 949 and was re-elected at seven elec tions. On one of those occasions he was unop posed. As has been mentioned, he resigned in 1 964 and shortly afterwards I won a by-election for the Federal seat of Angas and re-established my friendship cif previous years with both Alec and Mary Downer. I remember clearly those early days as a Federal member, as I struggled to con solidate in that seat, because I was made well aware of the tremendous admiration in which he was held in his electorate. His greatest quality as a member of parliament was his sincerity, which is universally acknowledged. As a back bench member, I am told, he was ambitious but he was never short of courage in attacking his own Government's policies when necessary. His powers of oratory were great and his sense of his tory immense.
As a highly principled man he found the un principled hunt for funds by State governments grotesque. His own individual makeup did not allow for the tactics of personal abuse, blackmail, the improper use of statistics and, in fact, sheer bloody-minded parochialism as the main arguments to be used at Premiers Conferences and afterwards around the countryside. I believe a majority of members of parliament here today would think likewise in the absence of a more rational method of distributing funds.
Although he was a great South Australian, as the Prime Minister has already stated, I believe he saw himself fundamentally as an Australian at a time in our history when that attribute was not always acceptable to State colleagues, particularly he was always prepared to stand up for his

Death ofHon. Sir A lexander Downer, K.B.E.

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 63

viewpoint. Nevertheless, I believe he was a very honoured member of this House, with friends on both sides, principally due to his admiration for all people who he felt were true to their principles. [ am sure he would not mind my mentioning both Eddie Ward, who was mentioned earlier, and Clyde Cameron, who were invited to stay with him on more than one occasion. I believe that only last year Clyde Cameron moved a congratulatory motion to him at a large party to celebrate his sev entieth birthday. Not many of us will leave Parliament-indeed, this earth-with the degree of goodwill and respect that he engendered.
Much of his success must also be attributed to his remarkable wife, always refreshing and with a mind of her own. In many ways she was not only complementary to Sir Alexander Downer's intel lectual accomplishments but also an accomplished and charming hostess possessed of great character in her own right. I believe the two of them, together, raised the stature of Australians abroad in a unique fashion when Sir A lec was High Commissioner to the United Kingdom. I remember many years ago dining at the table of the New Zealand High Commissioner in Canberra. Somebody there criticised Sir Alec Downer because he was not available when this person arrived in London. [ clearly remember Sir John McEwen turning to me and asking whether I took his seat of Angas, to which I replied 'Yes'. He said: 'I want you, of all people, to know that, of all the high commissioners representing Australia, Alec Downer would certainly rank highest amongst the best in my memory for 'his ability to attract influential and important people to me when I visited London'.
Sir A lexander Downer served Australia well in so many fields during an extraordinarily active life that I believe it is proper that this House, which he loved so well, pay proper triQute to this great Australian. I support the motion and add my personal sympathy to his wife, Mary, and her children-Stella, Angela, Alexander and Una.
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide)-I join in these tributes to the late Sir Alec Downer and extend my sympathy to his family, not only as a South Australian but also as a friend. He had already left this House by the time. I was elected to this place, but his great gifts were well known to me through my parents and through Clyde Cameron, the former member for Hindmarsh who, as has already been mentioned, was a close friend. I first met Alec when I was a member of a parliamen tary delegation which visited London in 1 970, and that was the first of a number of meetings. The warmth of his hospitality, not only when High Commissioner but also in later years, and his keen

interest in Australian public affairs were very evi dent to those of us who knew him. What impres sed me even more was his relative lack of preju dice which contributed so much to his close friendships across this chamber. He wanted to re tain those friendships after he left this place and I was delighted to benefit from that wish of his, because I enjoyed his company so much.
I know that Clyde Cameron will not mind my telling a story which Clyde told me. I was not present on the occasion, but Sir Alec told me the same story at another time. After Clyde had proposed the toast mentioned by the honourable member for Wakefield (Mr Giles) to that large gathering of Downer friends and family in Sir Alec's home on that very special seventieth birth day occasion about a year ago, Clyde turned to Alec and said: 'Alec, would there be any socialists other than my wife and me in this company today?' Alec replied: 'My dear Clyde, I think the only person who would come remotely close to that description is me'. In spite of his conservative appearance, he did indeed have a number of reforming characteristics and a delightful sense of humour, as denoted in that story.
He had notable achievements in public life which have already been mentioned. He was a compassionate Minister for Immigration and administered his Department in such a way that he won bipartisan support for most of what happened during those years. He was a successful rep resentative of our country in London. [ also understand-this has not been mentioned today-that he beat the candidate who was strongly backed by his party's establishment, which included Sir Thomas Playford, when he first won Liberal pre-selection for Angas and came into this House. I mention this story only because it shows the capacity he had of impressing all who met him personally. Also I pay tribute to his work on the committee which made recom mendations on constitutional reform, which has been mentioned by the honourable member for Reid (Mr Uren) and which, of course, reported to this Parliament as long ago as 1 959. I merely say that it would be a further mark of respect to him if in a bipartisan way we accepted and put into effect some more of the recommendations of that all-party committee than have been acted on to date, in particular of course those recommendations in relation to deadlocks between the Houses of this Parliament which he mentioned to me again on the last occasion on which 1 saw him.
Finally, I, too, take this opportunity of paying respect to Lady Downer. She is a very special per son who has been a tower of strength to him. From my family-an elderly father, who is still

1 1 64 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 198 1

Death ofHon. Sir Alexander Downer, K.B.E.

alive, and my wife-and myself and the many of with other members, mourn his death. To his

my Adelaide constituents who knew and admired widow, Lady Downer, and to his children

him, I send warm messages of sympathy to Mary, especially his daughter Una, who until this year

hy! daughters and son on this very sad occasion. was a member of my staff-I offer my sympathy

Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-I rise to support the motion of condolence moved by the Prime Minis

and that of my family. Question resolved in the affirmative, honour
able members standing in their places.

ter (Mr Malcolm Fraser). It was with great personal sorrow that I learned of the death of Sir Alexander Downer. Not only was Sir Alec a great

PRINCE OF WALES: MARRIAGE Ministerial Statement

Australian and South Australian whom I held in Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime

very great regard but also he was a close friend of Minister) -by leave-This statement concerns

my family. He and my father were elected to this the forthcoming marriage of His Royal Highness

House on the same day in the same year.

the Prince of Wales. I have received a letter from

Sir Alec Downer had a long and distinguished career in public life in the service of this country. He entered Parliament in 1949 and was the member for Angas from 1 949 to 1 964. During that time he served as Minister for Immigration from 1 958 until 1 963. As Minister responsible at an important time for the post-war immigration program, Sir Alec Downer had a very great and

the Governor-General conveying a message from  Her Majesty the Queen. I think it appropriate
that I formally advise the House that on Friday, 27 March 1981 , in accordance with the provisions of the Royal Marriage Act 1 772, the Queen declared in Council her formal consent to the marriage of His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales to Lady Diana Spencer.

lasting influence on the shape and direction of Australia's history. It was when he was Minister for Immigration that he gave me personal encour agement as I began my political career. I shall always remember with esteem and gratitude the generous support and wise advice that he afforded

PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Funding of Children's Services

me in what were for me the very early days.

To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of

From 1 964 to 1 972, Sir Alec Downer was High

Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. Th"e petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:

Commissioner to the United Kingdom, a country That funding in the area of children's services, which has and a nation which he had always held very dear. been reduced by almost 40 per cent in real terms over the last

In his public life, Sir Alec was guided by several abiding principles in all that he did. For example, he was a staunch supporter of the concept of con stitutional monarchy and the democratic tra

five years, should be restored forthwith to at least the real value of funding allocated in the 1975-76 Budget. And further, that annual budget allocations in the area of children's services should be spent in full for the purposes designated.

ditions inherent in the Westminister system of And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

government. For him, that tradition, with, for example, the notion that Ministers should come from within the Parliament, was far more accept

by Mr Free and Mr Leo McLeay. Petitions received.

able than other systems such as the presidential system.

Unemployment Benefit
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of

Sir Alec also had a firm and compassionate con viction that the family unit is the essential basis for a strong and vital society. He believed in the family and the need to help it in fulfilling its role. He also believed that we have a strong obligation

Representatives of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia, respectfully calls for:
The immediate and unconditional withdrawal of any proposals to deny Unemployment Benefits to unemployed people under 18 years old.

to protect and preserve our heritage and the natu

That the level of Benefits for all unemployed people, and

ral environment-a belief that bore witness to an including people receiving sickness benefits and pensions, be

inate love of beauty and a sensitive appreciation raised to at least 1 20 per cent of the poverty line.

of the world around him. Much has been said and That futureemploymentpolicies be devoted to job creation

will be said about Sir Alex Downer, the public man. But it is as the private man, a family friend both to my father and me and my whole family, a man of wisdom and integrity, great learning and sensitivity, that I shall most remember him and,

and the restoration of full employment rather than the evasion of this responsibility by hiding the unemployed in short term training and education schemes.
Public acknowledgement of the fact that unemployment is the result of insufficient jobs and not the fault of any minority group, the education system or the unemployed themselves.

Petitions

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 65

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Carlton.
Petition received.
Drug Problems in Australia
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the unqersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
More than ten thousand deaths each year in Australia are caused by tobacco usage,
The costs of tobacco-related diseases from hospital and medical expenses from health insurance costs, and from pro ductivity loss from disease and premature death exceed revenue gains to the Government from the tobacco industry.
The tobacco industry is responsible for the tobacco-related disease and death in as much as it actively promotes the con sumption of tobacco related products directly via advertising and indirectly via sponsorship of sporting and cultural activities.
Non-smokers represent 64% of the adult population, and of those who do smoke 50% wish to give up smoking.
Your petitioners call on the Australian Government to implement the recommendations of the report of the Senate Standing Committee on Social Welfare "Drug Problems in Australia-An intoxicated Society?" which are within the Australian Government's power to legislate for, namely, recommendations 39-44, 46-52, 54 and 55.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will everpray.
by Mr Carlton.
Petition received.
Family Allowance
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled, the petition of certain citizens respectfully showeth:
Tbat parents with dependent children bear a disproportion ate share of the tax burden;
That the recent substantial increase in the dependent spouse rebate does not go to all parents;
That family allowances do benefit all parents with dependent children.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That family allowances be increased immediately, and
That familyallowances be indexed but not taxed.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will every pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Pornographic Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That we the undersigned, having great concern at the way in which children are now being used in the production ofpor nography, call upon the Government to introduce immediate legislation:
1 . To prevent the sexual exploitation of children by way of photography for commercial purposes;

2. To penalise parents/guardians who knowingly allow their children to be used in the production of such por nographic or obscene material depicting children;
3. To make specifically illegal the importation, publi cation, distribution and sale of such pornographic child abuse material in any form whatsoever such as maga zines, novels, papers or films;
4. To take immediate police action to con fiscate and de stroy all child pornography in Australia and urgent ap propriatelegal action against all those involved or profi tingfrom this sordid exploitation ofchildren.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honour able House will protect all children and immediately prohibit pornographic child-abuse materials, publications or films.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fife.
Petition received.
Royal Commission on Human Relationships
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That because the Report of the Royal Commission on Human Relationships and especially its Recommendations-
(a) Have been widely condemned for its support of un Australian, anti-family, anti-child behaviour and mor als such as incest, promiscuity, abortion, pornography, homosexuality, prostitution and brothels, etc.
(b) Have been strongly criticised by the medical pro fession for the absence of any medical practitioner on the Commission or on its staff of 3 1 persons, and for the Commissioners action in rejecting or ignoring relevant medical evidence.
(c) Have been discredited as irresponsible in adopting a new definition of the family, i.e., "a varying range of people living together in relationships of commit ment", which has effectively confused the real mean ing and intentions of the Report where it refers to the 'family'''.
Therefore the Parliament has a responsibility to the families of Australia not to adopt this controversial Report and its Recommendations.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Australian Parliament will:
(a) Simply receive the Report and not adopt its Recommendations,
(b) Set up a Select Parliamentary Committee along the lines of the New Zealand Select Committee to conduct a public inquiry into the ways and means of supporting and strengthening family life and providing adequate protection for children from physical and sexual abuse before as well as after birth in accordance with the UN.O. Declaration of the Rights of the Child as part of Australia's supportfor the Year of the Child.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that your honour able House will take no measures concerning the Royal Commission on Human Relationships Report that will further undermine and weaken marriage, child-care or the family which is the basic unit of our socity.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fife.
Petition received.

1 1 66 REPRESENTATIVES I April 1981

Petitions

Labelling o fCosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits coveringmineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic prod ucts, and the inhumane use ofanimals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of Cosmetic Companies which produce cos metics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were subjected to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:
Legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:

by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Norwood North Post Office
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That hardship and inconvenience would be caused to the community by the proposed closure on 3 1 st March 1981 of the Norwood North post office (non-official) 1 42 Magill Road, Norwood, S.A.

( 1 ) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.
(2) whether the research and development of that prod uct or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Minister of Communications will intercede on behalf of Norwood and Stepney residents and have abandoned the proposal to'close the Norwood North post office.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys. Petition received.
Service Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
( 1 ) That merchant seamen have in the past served in theatres of war; they have been decorated fOf valor fOllowing waf action; they have been prisoners of war and should there fore be entitled to similar pension rights and medical benefits as regular servicemen.
(2) That by being denied the entitlements, such as pension and medical benefits, which other war veterans receive, they are thereby being discriminated against.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government amend the Repatriation Act ( 1 920) Section 100 (d) (iv) to take account of war-related service by merchant seamen during World War 2.
And your petitioners as in dutyboundwill ever pray.

by Mr Hurford. Petition received.
Importation of Canned Ham
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the imports of canned ham should be stopped or at least restricted to the 1 980 level in order to prevent serious dislo cation to the Australian pig industry.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that steps be taken to prevent the importation of canned ham into Australia or that any importation be restricted to 1980 levels.
And your petitioners as in duty bound wili ever pray.
by Mr Lloyd.
Petition received.
Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

by Mr Humphreys. Petition received.

1 . We call upon the Commonwealth and State Governments to select a site for Sydney's second airport now and to protect it by immediate development.

Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the interim list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heri tage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the pro tection of the island.
3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed a further mining lease against the advice of conservationists.

2. We do not agree to the expansion of the Sydney (Kingsford-Smith) Airport.
3. We support the MarrickviJIe Municipal Council's oppo sition to the airport extension proposals.
4. We do not agree that nuisances from aircraft noises are reducing.
5. We oppose any shorter evening 'curfew' hours. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that there be no extension of Kingsford-Smith Airport, Sydney. And your petitioners as in duty bound \vill ever pray.
by Mr Leo McLeay. Petition received.

Petitions

1 April 1 98 ] REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 67

Trans-Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective ofselling Trans Australia Airlines within 5 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in: (i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline
services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans Australia Airlines.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.
Plant Breeders' Rights
To the Honourable tbe Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth that your pet itioners are gravely concerned at the prospect of any legislation regarding plant variety rights.
The reasons are as follows:
1. We believe it would transfer control, the key aspect of agriculture in this country, to overseas interests not re sponsible to the Australian Government.
2. We believe it would restrict the growing and trading of many seeds.
3. We believe it would cause a decline in the genetic diver sity of crops making them more subject to destruction by pests and diseases.
4. We believe thorough investigation of the effect of simi lar legislation overseas and a full public debate is required before any decision is made.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that Parliament re frains from enacting any legislation on Plant Variety Rights.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Porter.
Petition received.
Trade Unions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of certain citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that we are gravely disturbed by the actions of militant unions and the ACTU, the failure of the President of the ACTU to assist positively in settling the dispute which has caused massive losses to Qantas our National Airline, and we applaud the action of the Government in using RAAF planes to rescue Australians stranded abroad.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Parliament and The Government should be of firm resolve not to permit such unions to hold the country to ransom and continue to take a forccful and resolute stand against such union militancy.
by Mr Ruddock.
Petition received.

Metric System
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfUlly showeth;
That the plan to obliterate the traditional weights and measures of this country does not have the support of the people;
That the change is causing and will continue to cause, wide spread, serious and costly problems;
That the compulsory tactics being used to force the change are a violation ofall democratic principles.
Your petitioners terefore pray:
That the Metric Conversion Act be repealed to ensure that the people are free to utilize whichever system they prefer and so enable the return to imperial weights and measures wherever the people so desire;
That weather reporting be as it was prior to the passing of the Metric Conversion Act;
That the Australian Government take urgent steps to cause the traditional mile units to be restored to our highways;
That the Australian Government request the State Governments to procure that the imperial and metric sys tems be taught together in schools.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will evcr pray.
by Mr White.
Petition received.
Airline Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament Assembled: The humble petition of certain c.itizens of Western Australia respectfully showeth:
That we protest most strongly against the present two airline domestic policy of the Commonwealth Government.
That this policy has resulted in expensive airfares and poor services and discourages tourists from the Eastern States visiting WA and vice versa.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will look favourably On our petition and formulate an Airline Policy providing for greater competition so that prices and service are determined by free market forces.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr McLean and Mr Shack. Petitions received.
Telephone Services
To the Honourable the Speaker of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Macquarie respect fully showeth:
That we consider the lack of service provided by Telecom Australia in Sydney's 047 telephone zone is not only inconvenient but is affecting families, business concerns and em ploymentin the area.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government direct Telecom Australia to provide an adequate service to subscribers and users in the 047 telephone zone.
And yourpetitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free.
Petition received.

1 J 68 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

Australian Capital Territory: Parklands
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament Assembled: The humble Petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Canberra respectfully showeth:
That Block 23, Section 3, in the land division of Chapman, A.C.T. has been maintained as open space parkland by the Department of the Capital Territory for several years and has been enjoyed as a reacreational and sporting area by the elec tors and children of the community during that time.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that plans by the Department of Capital Territory to sub-divide and lease Block 23, Section 3 for residential purposes be withdrawn and the block retained and gazetted as parkland.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Kelly. Petition received.
35-HOUR WEEK
Notice of Motion
Mr PORTER (Barker)-I give notice that on the next day of sitting I shall move:
That this House-
( 1 ) Views with concern the failure of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission to address themselves in their Statement in the Altona 35-hour week case to the wider public interest and the flow-on effect.
(2) Request the Government to intervene in all Conciliation and Arbitration hearings relating to an extension of the 35-hour week, to present a detailed case outlin ing the effects such moves will have on the economy, employment, investment and on our international competitiveness.
(3) Further requests the Government in such submissions to remind the Commission that under Section 39 (2) of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act it is bound to consider the likely effects of its decision on the economy with special reference to the likely effects on the level ofemployment and inflation.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE

company some 24 hours after the Minister made that statement of policy.
Mr PEACOCK-I reiterate what I ' said last week. If unions believe that they have a justifiable case so far as the 35-hour week is concerned, then let them go to arbitration and argue it out. That would be contrary, of course, to what they did in the metal trades industry matter that is before the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission at the present moment when, after seek ing an adjournment, which was not granted, they walked out. The Government condemns them for it. If there is a belief that it can be accommodated without cost, let them argue that before the Commission.
The Leader of the Opposition then goes on to talk about a complaint made by the Chairman of TCI Australia Limited. As I understand it, the Chairman of IC] issued a statement today concerning this matter, and I have to say that the Government, through a statement issued by the Minister for Industry and Commerce, has wel comed the statement that the Chairman has issued refuting Press reports that the company had reached agreement on a shorter working week or indeed was willing to do so. I understand that at the end of his statement the following appears:
. . . that he regretted the misunderstanding of the Government's position and that following clarification of points of concern to both the Company and the Government, IC] will now continue with its plans for major capital extension . . .
There is the answer from ICI . The answer from me, so far as arbitration is concerned, is: Let the unions take the matter to arbitration and test it. Why will they not do so?

INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
Mr HAYDEN-I refer the Minister for Indus trial Relations to page 963 of the Hansard of last Thursday, in which he said:
If unions believe that they have justifiable claims let them come forward to have them tested by arbitration--
He added-
let them come forward to allow both sides of the argument to be put and let the result rest on merit but not on industrial might.
He will recall saying at a later stage:
Pressure will not be exerted on firms in this situation.
I ask the Minister to advise the House how he jus tifies his policy statements of only six days ago in the light of the complaint by the Chairman of ICI Australia Limited yesterday that the Government had threatened punitive measures against his

EARTHQUAKES IN GREECE Mr DOBIE-I ask the Minister for Foreign Affairs whether his attention has been drawn to the hardship and damage caused by the recent serious earthquakes in Greece? Bearing in mind the Government's history of providing disaster re lief to other countries which have suffered such natural catastrophes, I ask the Minister whether he and his Government will give urgent consideration to providing such disaster relief assistance through the Greek Government to the badly affeCted Greek people. Mr STREET-The Government is concerned about and is conscious of the serious difficulties and suffering that have been caused by the recent series of earthquakes in Greece. Although the Greek Government has not made an appeal for international assistance, it has made known to us

Questions Without Notice

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 69

that its particular requirement is for tents to provide emergency housing and that anything we could do in that regard would be greatly appreci ated. As a measure of our concern, I am happy to be able to inform the House that the Government has decided to make available immediately $ 1 00,000 for the purchase and transportation of tents to Greece.
35-HOUR WORKING WEEK Mr HAWKE-Has the Prime Minister been critical of some - trade unions, particularly the Builders Labourers Federation, for resorting to what he has described as the tactic of threats and blackmail outside the arbitration system? I ask the Prime Minister whether he is aware that in a telex to the Premier of New South Wales yester day ICI Australia Ltd said:
As you may know the Federal Government is threatening as a punitive measure an immediate lAC reference on the chemical industry.
I regret that while this serious threat exists we have no
option but to suspend new investment projects at Botany. The future of our operations in New South Wales must now be in doubt.
In the circumstances of this double standard, does the Prime Minister regard as accurate the view ex pressed in the Sydney Morning Herald of 28 March 1981 by Mr C. P. Mills, reader in commercial and industrial law at the University of Sydney, in which he described the Government's approach in this matter as 'A compound of bribery and corruption' and asserted that 'the real threat to the freedom to Australia lies not in the unions but in a government--
Honourable members interjecting Mr HAWKE-Of course honourable members opposite do not like it. Mr Mills asserted: 'The real threat to the freedom of Australians lies not in the unions but in a government that tries to get its way by threats and bribery'. Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Builders Labourers Federation has a long record of intimidation. The Government's position in relation to the Builders Labourers Federation is very well known. Indeed, many people in labour circles do not want any association with that union. The Government is determined to protcct the public interest in relation to activities of unions of that kind. It is quite clear, from that part of the statement which my colleague read to the House, that there had been a misunderstanding of the Government's position by the Chairman of ICI Australia Limited. The statement, which I would commend to all honourable gentlemen, makes it perfectly plain that the company opposes the 35-hour

working week very strongly and intends to continue so doing. The company has very much re gretted the misunderstanding of the Government's position on these matter. One of the great differences between ourselves and the Australian Labor Party on these issues is that at all times we will protect the public interest. The public interest--
Honourable members inteljectingMr MALCOLM FRASER-We know quite well what the Opposition thinks of the public interest because it tramples on it as it did when it was in government and as do the policies of the Australian Council of Trade Unions in so many circumstances. If there is a general move to a 35-hour week, as has been proposed by many people, tens of thousands of Australians will not gain employment, as a result of increased costs to Australian industry. If honourable gentlemen opposite want to be completely honest in their advo cacy in these matters they will say that that is what they are prepared to accept as a result of ac ceding to the claims and to the pressures of Australia's militant trade union movement.
35-HOUR WORKING WEEK Mr BUNGEYI direct a question to the Min ister for Business and Consumer Affairs. What effect would a 35-hour working week have on the current protection levels for Australian industry? Would the introduction of a 35-hc>ur working week make Australian industry less competitive on the world market? Could we expect also greater demand for protection from Australian industries? Mr MOORE-I think it is fairly obvious to any person that if the level of wages is increased or the number of hours worked is reduced-that amounts to the same thing-the cost of pro duction will increase. Mr Innes-That is rubbish. Mr MOORE-If the price of goods IS increasedMr Innes-Why don't you tell the truth? Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Melbourne will withdraw. Mr Innes-J withdraw. Mr SPEAKER-I ask honourable members on my left not to interject continually while an answer is being given. Mr MOORE-It is obvious that an increase in wages will increase the cost of production. This will affect the profitability of any company or cor poration. Quite clearly, if that company is operat ing under a high level of protection its ability to

1 1 70 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

make a profit will be affected. The company will Opposition did not know much about foreign

then have to approach the Government in some affairs, yet he used to question me at length. I

instances to offered to it

see are

whether the appropriate

levels for its

of protection continuance .

.

suggest that he knows even less about a company in his own electorate than does the Chairman of

The Government's policy is to refer such matters ICI, who has put forward the dangers of a shorter

to the Industries Assistance Commission. The working week.

lAC judges the efficiency of the company. The re sponse is judged by the Government on the basis of the company's need and whether it is per forming in the best interests of Australia. The ap propriate levels of assistance are determined. No government will stand back and see the taxpayers of Australia pay higher bounties to a company

.

We have been warning about the 35-hour week for very obvious reasons. We have talked about its effect. Inflation would rise and profits would be reduced considerably. Investment capacity and confidence would decline and output and employ ment expansion would be curtailed.

which is not playing the game in respect of stan dards of wages and hours worked. No government

Mr Lionel Bowen-Rubbish.

will stand back and allow higher levels of tariff for Mr PEACOCK-The Deputy Leader of the

exactly the same reason.

Opposition does not want to know about that. So

ICI AUSTRALIA LTD

far as his support for the trade union movement is concerned, I presume he agrees with its represen

Mr LIONEL BOWEN-My question is tatives walking out of the Australian Concilation

- directed to the Minister for Industrial Relations. and Arbitration Commission hearing yesterday.

ICI Australia Ltd is in my electorate. Is it a fact Why did they not go ahead and argue the case? I

that in 1 975 the profit of ICI was $28m and in have stressed on a number of occasions that

1980 it was $ 1 1 7m? During that five-year period claims for reduced working hours should be

the productivity per non-staff employee rose by processed through arbitration and without re

40 per cent and overall employment dropped. As course to industrial action. Members of the Oppo

it is obvious that there is plenty of room for pro sition, by their owr1 words, are backing industrial

ductivity bargaining to introduce a shorter work action and industrial blackmail and not the arbi

ing week in ICI and create extra jobs, why is the tration system:

Government penalising ICI for attempting to

share the benefits with its employees?

MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY

Mr PEACOCKI am very interested in the figures that the Deputy Leader of the Opposition put forward. I look forward to examining them in greater detail. I welcomed the opportunity that the Prime Minister, the Minister for I ndustry and Commerce and I had to have discussions this morning with the Chairman of ICI who, I suggest, knows a little more about his company than does the Deputy Leader of the Opposition. The Chair man of ICI indicated publicly today, as he did in his address to shareholders in February this year--
Mr Barry Jones-With his arm up the middle of his back.
Mr PEACOCK-I do not know who had his arm behind his back. The honourable member might be the ventriloquist's doll, for all I know. He might be an expert in such matters. In an ad dress to shareholders in February, the Chairman ofICI sounded a warning. He said:
. . . Australian manufacturers would be seriously damaged ifAustralia were to move to a shorter working week ahead of overseas competitors. The increase in wage costs would be very large in relation to current operating margins.
I learned during the period I spent as Foreign Minister that my friend the Deputy Leader of the

Mr HODGES-Is the Minister for Industry and Commerce able to say how well Australian companies are performing in export markets? Is the secondary development of Australian resources related to a stable economy? How dependent upon realistic wages and economic manage ment is the extension of the Australian work base, investment and expertise?
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH-It is a very significant reflection of the strengthening capacity of manufacturing industry that manufacturing exports at present are performing very well in export markets despite the sluggishness which exists in world trade. For example, the value of manufactured exports increased by some 6+ per cent in the 7 months to January 1981 , compared with the corresonding period in the previous year. That followed an increase of some 1 9 per cent in 1 979-80. This is an obvious reflection of the over all success of the Government's economic and industry policies which have created competitive conditions for manufacturing industry and a cli mate in which Australian industry can show an improvement in investment patterns and, at the same time, in the provision of job opportunities. What has been laid down is the underpinning of a

Questions Without Notice

I April 1 981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 7 1

base for the coming boost and surge in investment Mr Malcolm Fraser-Mr Speaker, could I

projects around Australia.

help --

The House is very much aware of the sig Mr SPEAKER-No. I call the honourable

nificant employment impact which the surge in member for Melbourne.

manufacturing and mining investment will create and not just in mining areas-because of its overall impact on the Australian community. If economic management is one criterion, as members of the Government have made clear today, economic management must be matched by restraint in terms of hours worked and, of . course, in terms of wages paid. Unrestrained union demands by some sections of the militant

Mr Innes -The Prime Minister is straining at the leash to answer the question. I would like him to answer it. With due respect to you, Mr Speaker, I would like you to point out to me where the question is out of order.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Melbourne must learn that I am here to judge, not to explain.

trade union movement which seek higher wages Mr Holding-I raise a point of order. Sir,

and reduced hours will have the obvious impact would it not assist the deliberations of the House,

which my colleague, the Minister for Business and having regard to the continuous inconsistencies of

Consumer Affairs, alluded to earlier. I think both your rulings, if you were to assist all honourable

Government and Opposition members are very members by giving the reasons for the decision

much aware of the wage push which is taking that you just made in respect of the question of

place. The question of the movement towards a the honourable member for Melbourne?

55-hour working week has been very much a talk ing point in earlier questions. So far as the

Mr SPEAKER-There is no point of order.

Government is concerned, any move towards

AUSTRALIAN FEDERAL POLICE

reduced working hours or a 3 5-hour working week would have a very significant and devastat ing impact upon Australian industry and that means upon Australian production, exports and jobs.

Mr BRAITHWAITE-The Minister for Ad ministrative Services would be aware that Commonwealth crime is not restricted to capital cities and that over 1 ,300 kilometres off the Queensland coast from Brisbane to Townsville does not have

DISALLOWED QUESTION
Mr Innes proceeding to address a question to the Prime Minister-

the direct protection of the Australian Federal Police. Will the Minister heed the real need to position Australian Federal Police officers in major provincial districts, such as at Mackay and

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable Rockhampton, in order to provide these districts

gentleman's question is out of order.

and cities with greater protection and quicker re

Mr Malcolm FraserIs it out of order?

sponse against crimes of a Federal nature, par ticularly drugs and foreign incursions into the

Mr SPEAKER-The question is out of order. Great Barrier Reef?

Mr Innes-I raise a point of order. My point of order goes to the matter of how you ruled the question out of order. I asked for justification by the Prime Minister of his actions in blackmailing a company.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat.
Mr Innes-I believe that that is completely relevant to all the gobbledegook that has gone on today.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat and remain silent. The question is out of order.
Mr Holding-Why? Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Melbourne Ports may consult the Standing Orders and inform himself. Mr Innes-I raise a point of order.

Mr NEWMAN-Australian Federal Police officers are posted at stations on the Gold Coast and in Brisbane, Cairns and Townsville. The officers are deployed from those stations when required for suspected offences against Commonwealth law. I should add, of couse, that we get the ready co-operation of the Queensland Police, whose members have the power to enforce Commonwealth laws when Commonwealth officers are not readily available or are not stationed at a particular spot. In talking about the deployment of the Australian Federal Police or its broad objectives I would like to make two points. First of all, the Australian Federal Police works under the normal staffing restraints which the Government imposes on all departments, all statutory authorities and so on. It therefore has to operate efficiently under those restraints. Last December I effected the redeployment of 750 members from the Protective Element of the old Commonwealth

1 1 72 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

Police Force to general duties. This will enable

DISALLOWED QUESTION

the Australian Federal Police to deploy its members more efficiently in the future.
The second and probably most important point is that Australia faces a very grave position with regard to increased violent crime. Therefore, the

Mr Tambling having addressed a question to the Minister for Administrative Services-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's question is out of order.

Commonwealth's objective with regard to the priorities of its police force is that they should

DISASTER RELIEF

centre on these areas:

Mrs DARLING-My question is directed to

Increased anti-narcotic operations; better anti terrorist capabilities, including the protection of VIPs; better crime intelligence, particularly against organised crime and drug trafficking; and co-operation with other police forces in our country to ensure that we have better unified police services, such as better forensic labora tories, better forensic ability, a better Australian police college, and perhaps better ways of researching crime activity in Australia-all those things to be done, of course, in co-operation with State police forces and other Commonwealth bodies, such as the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs and the Bureau of Customs.

the Prime Minister. Is it a fact that he will review the annual disaster assistance arrangements between his Government and the States at the next Premiers Conference? If so, will he undertake at that conference to promise to lower the prescribed base contributions by State governments to disaster relief, as referred to in Budget Paper No. 7? Does the prescribed base annual expenditure by a State government on disaster re lief, in the case of Queensland, accurately or fairly reflect the extremely high incidence of natural dis asters to which that State is susceptible? Will he ensure that Queensland is favourably considered in the review of disaster assistance arrangements? What guarantees can he give that expenditure by

VOTING RIGHTS OF AUSTRALIAN CITIZENS OVERSEAS
Mr FRY-Is the Minister for Administrative Services aware of complaints that several hundred

the Queensland Government will not unduly favour the victims of disaster in rural areas over the victims of disaster in urban areas-a practice which has been alleged in the past?

Australian citizens overseas were unable to vote Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The natural dis

in the last Federal election due to the restrictive aster arrangements will be discussed at the forth

requirements of the Commonwealth Electoral coming Premiers Conference. I have made sure

Act relating to the witnessing of signatures? Is he that the matter has been listed. Some aspects of

also aware that the requirements of section 39 of the working of those arrangements, especially in

the Electoral Act have made it impossible for relation to drought, have concerned the

many Australian citizens serving abroad, includ Commonwealth over the last 1 2 months or so.

ing some ambassadors; to register a vote during an There are two parts to the arrangements. We need

election because they do not have a permanent to keep them clearly separate. The first is that of

address in this country? Does the Minister intend getting relief to people who have been harmed,

taking action to end this situation, which has gone whether they are in an urban or a country area,

on for several years, and to ensure that people speedily and in a just and equitable manner. Sec

who give long and faithful service to their country ondly, there is the impact of the arrangements on

overseas are not denied the basic right to cast a State Budgets. That part which has an impact on

vote against an incompetent government which State Budgets is properly a matter for the Prem

does not appear to be capable of overcoming such iers Conference. If the honourable member would

simple problems?

like to check the kind of base that the States were

Mr NEWMAN-I will ignore the last part of the honourable member's question. It was not worth hearing, anyway. As to the two points he raises, he is correct. Unless a person can indicate, when going overseas, that he intends to come back to a permanent address in Australia that person may not vote. The honourable member raises important questions. I have them under consider

subject to in earlier years she would find that, relative to their then incomes, the base level that they had to meet was a larger part of the States' incomes than at present. That seems to indicate that the base level which the States need to meet before the Commonwealth subsidises all future payments, at the level of $3 for every $ 1 from the States, is not really an onerous one.

ation and any move in this direction will be incor It has been the practice in any natural disaster

porated in amendments to the Act that the for the Commonwealth and the States immedi

Government announces.

ately to apply crtain core measures which have

Questions Without Notice

I April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 73

been agreed to. The States can take the appli cation of those measures in granting relief to indi viduals as a matter of course. Over the last year, because of the severity of drought in a number of places, more than one State has made a special approach to the Commonwealth asking that the measures be extended in relation to some aspects of the disaster. In most circumstances that has been done.
Mrs Darling-It did not happen in Brighton, in my area.

with the States of Western Australia and Queensland? In view of the need for South Australia--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will ask his question.
Mr STEELE HALL-I ask the question: Will the Minister, in view of the need to build these roads to serve the oil fields and Roxby Downs, correct this imbalance in the new allocations he will announcc this year?

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-If there is a particular aspect of concern, I would be happy to dis cuss that in detail with the honourable member. We have been very concerned about N ew South Wales in particular because the carry-on and res tocking loans for many people in the rural com munities were very much lower than in other States, including Western Australia, Queensland, probably my own State-Victoria and Tas mania. It took a long time to get the money flowing in New South Wales and to get the New South Wales Government to agree to the level of restocking loans which was generally regarded and agreed to as being necessary in other parts of Australia. We prompted the State Government of New South Wales over a period of many months to extend its provisions and to match the pro visions supplied in other States.
Mrs Darling-In Queensland the Premier would not declare it a disaster area.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I f there are particular circumstances where the honourable member believes that the provisions have operated unjustly, I would be very happy to examine them. But we rely upon the States in the first instance to declare disasters. The States should undertake the declaration of drought areas because they ought to be closer to their own people than the Commonwealth is. The smooth and equitable working of the arrangements de pends very much on close co-operation between State and Commonwealth governments. If there has been any deficiency in relation to those ar rangements I would like to have it examined.
ROAD GRANT ALLOCATIONS Mr STEELE HALL-I ask the Minister for Transport whether he is aware that the road grant allocations to South Australia have fallen over the last decade to 8.5 per cent of the total allocations to all States. Is he aware that, on a per capita basis, a per vehicle basis, a self-help basis, a war ranted program basis and a percentage of allocation of fuel taxes collected basis, South Australia is severely disadvantaged in comparison

Mr HUNT-The honourable member for Boothby obviously has taken a considerable interest in the way in which funds have been dis tributed by the Commonwealth to the States. The Commonwealth will be guided by the most recent Bureau of Transport Economics report on roads and road funding. That report indicates that over the years some States have not had their needs addressed as well as other States have. It is quite appropriate, under the existing legislation, for State governments to submit developmental proj ects for consideration under the national roads program for the receipt of development grants where significant developmental projects are in operation or are planned. I would be very pleased to have discussions with the South Australian Minister for Roads on any such project that he may have in mind. It is true that the Government will be very shortly taking into account the needs of the States so that it can get on with the job of allocating the funds which will be spent by the Commonwealth Government or allocated to the States over the next four years.
MILITARY OPERATIONS: SOUTH AFRICA Mr HAYDEN-Has the Prime Minister noted
the published substantial eyewitness evidence -in one case a participant's evidence-that South African defence force troops regularly undertake military operations inside Angola and, more recently, invaded Mozambique, in which innocent civilians, including black women and children, have been brutally slaughtered, and in the course of which unspeakable atrocities have been committed? Has he publicly condemned unreservedly . and, if not, does he intend publicly to condemn unreservedly-those invasions and associated atrocities? If not, does he recognise the serious damage which will be done to the credi bility of his criticisms of South Africa's revolting apartheid policies and to his own constructive role in the settlement of Zimbabwe's independence, and perhaps even the threat the failure to con demn publicly will pose to the forthcoming Commonwealth Games in Brisbane?

1 1 74 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I have no confir mation that such raids have taken place. Let me say only that if they have taken place in the terms contained in the honourable gentleman's question they would certainly be roundly condemned by the Commonwealth Government.
HOME OWNERSHIP Mr IAN CAMERON-Has the attention of the Minister for Housing and Construction been drawn to the recent Australian Bureau of Stat istics figures concerning home ownership in Australia? D o these figures show that Australia is still one of the leading nations in the developed world for home ownership? Mr McVEIGH-Yes, I have seen the statistics to which the honourable member refers. The Government can be very proud of them indeed as they indicate that in Australia 3,341,000 people either own their own homes or are in the process of purchasing them. That is an increase of 1 06,000 since the last survey was conducted in 1 978. It is interesting to note that 79. 1 per cent of Australian households which have a married head are in the process of owning or purchasing their own homes; that is four out of every five. We find that 55 per cent of households with an unmarried head own their own home. Unfortunately, because of the greater distribution of these people in the population, the percentage on an Australia-wide basis has slipped from 73.4 per cent to 7 1 .9 per cent. But these statistics are very high by world stan dards and indicate that Australians are secure in their planning for home ownership due to the sound economic policies of the Government. The only thing that concerns me about the future is the enormous effect on the cost of housing which would be brought about by the implementation of a 35-hour working week. That would lead to an increase in the cost of housing of 21 per cent. I only hope that those who sit opposite will support the Government in its efforts to contain costs and ensure that Australian home owners can continue to plan for their future security.
RADIO AUSTRALIA Mr KENT-I ask the Minister for Foreign Affairs whether he has received a letter from the Minister for Communications, Mr Sinclair, suggesting that Radio Australia news broadcasts be censored by Government officials. Would the Minister assure the House that no censorship will be introduced to appease the military dictators in lndonesia-a regime which for obvious reasons does not like the truth reported and which has a record of silencing journalists by bullets or expulsion?

Mr STREET-There is certainly no question of Radio Australia news broadcasts being cen sored by officials. As far as I am aware, Radio Australia's broadcasts to Indonesia are treated and handled in the same way as those in any foreign language. Liaison arrangements have existed for many years between my Department and Radio Australia. They are designed to enable Radio Australia to be fully briefed on foreign relations developments. Of course, Radio Australia and the Australian Broadcasting Commission re tain editorial responsibility for deciding what material is broadcast and how it will be used. There has been correspondence between the Min ister for Communications and me about problems encountered recently by Radio Australia. I can say that no significant change is envisaged in the existing arrangements which I have just described. I believe that it would be desirable for the Government to have before it the recommendations of the Dix Committee of Review inquiring into the Australian Broadcasting Commission before any further developments occur. Should, as a result of that report, any further considerations be judged necessary, the Government would look at the arrangements under which Radio Australia is established and conducts its operations.
AUSTRALIA DAY COUNCIL LOGO Mr . GOODLUCK-Is the Prime Minister aware that Tasmania has been left off the Australia Day Council logo? In view of the fact that the Tasmanian members and senators have helped put Tasmania back on the mapwith the help of the Government, of course-will the Prime Minister intervene to rectify this obvious oversight ? Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I saw some public reports that Mr Lowe was going to do something about this matter, but I do not think that a communication has come from him yet. Since I saw those reports, I have had another look at the logo. I am certainly very happy to take the matter up with the Chairman of the Australian Bicentennial Authority. I can well understand the honourable gentleman's concern and I am quite certain that the Authority would want to respond to it.
ALUMINIUM PRICES Mr HOWE-I refer the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs to the fact that the Prices Justification Tribunal is considering whether to hold a public inquiry into prices charged for alu minium. In the event of the PJT recommending an inquiry, will the Minister give an assurance that he will approve the holding of a public in quiry into aluminium prices or will the current

Questions Without Notice

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 75

petroleum products inquiry be the last public in areas of Australia. I look forward to seeing what

quiry held by the Tribunal?

the committee has to say when it reports.

Mr MOORE-I can tell the honourable member that the State of play with the Prices Justification Tribunal is that the inquiry into aluminium pricing is a preliminary one to seek initial information to see whether a further full-scale inquiry is warranted. When that comes to hand, I will make a judgment.

ARMY APPRENTICES Dr JENKINS-My question is addressed to the Minister for Defence. Are provisional non commissioned ranks assigned to second-year apprentices of the Army apprentice school at Bal combe? Have complaints been made recently that such second-year apprentices are using the privi-

TAXATION ZONE ALLOWANCES

leges of rank in the process of bastardisation of

Mr KATTER-I direct my question to the Treasurer. I refer to the current inquiry into taxation zone allowances and the financial and physi-

first-year apprentices ? Have any parents requested the discharge of their sons on that account in recent weeks?

cal difficulties and disadvantages suffered by Mr KILLEN-Nothing has been placed before

people in rural and remote areas. Can he inform me relating to the matter which the honourable

the House as to what progress has been made in gentleman raised. If there is any information on

this matter and what hearings have been the matter I would be happy to receive it and to

organised throughout the areas involved?

,. act on it promptly.

Mr HOWARD-This inquiry was foreshadowed in last year's Budget. The com mittee was established shortly before Christmas and has already made extensive visits to a number of remote areas in Australia. There is a series of public hearings scheduled over the next two months. For example, there will be a hearing in Townsville on 6 April. I understand that the com mittee has already visited a number of areas in the honourable member's electorate of Kennedy. The Committee is asked to report to the Government in time for its investigations and views to be taken into account by the Government in putting together the Budget for 1981 -82. As, the honour able member knows, there have not been any adjustments to the basic zone allowance since, I think, the late 1950s, although there have been periodic adjustments to the incremental elements of the allowance whenever other rebates have been adjusted.
That is not an easy task for the committee because on many occasions views on the relative costs of living in different parts of Australia tend to be subjective rather than totally objective. Sometimes it is very difficult to separate facts from assertions. But the committee membership represents a broad number of interests, including people very familiar with rural areas of Australia, a very well respected member of the Australian trade union movement, a qualified and very dis tinguished chartered accountant from Sydney and a person who is very familiar with the develop ment area of the north-west of Western Australia. Membership of the committee is very broad ranging. I think the committee will bring to its findings an intelligent understanding of the various cost pressures, including, I am sure, the effect of any escalatio!1 in wages or other costs in remote

REQUESTS FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Parliamentary Departments Mr SPEAKER-I have received from the Clerk notice that six honourable members namely, the honourable members for Hawker, Bonython, Lalor, Werriwa, La Trobe and Corio have sought detailed information from me concerning parliamentary departments. I ask those honourable gentlemen to submit their requests in writing to the Clerk. If they are in order, the re quests will be printed in Hansard and, in due course, I will supply answers which also will be printed in Hansard.
OFFICIAL ESTABLISHMENTS TRUST Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister) ---On behalf of the Prime Minister and for the information of honourable members, I present the first annual report of the Official Establishments Trust for 1 979-80.
ABORIGINAL LAND COMMISSIONER Mr VINER (Stirling -Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs)-Pursuant to section 6 1 of the Aboriginal Land Rights (Northern Terri tory) Act 1976, I present the report of the Aboriginal Land Commissioner for the year ended 30 June 1 980.
TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE AUTHORITY Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business
and Consumer Affairs) -For the information of honourable members, J present the report of the Temporary Assistance Authority on certain works,trucks and stackers.

1 1 76 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Domestic Air Fares

BILLS RETURNED FROM THE SENATE The following Bills were returned from the
Senate without amendment or requests:
Protection of the Sea (Civil Liability) Bill 1981 . Protection of the Sea (Discharge of Oil from Ships) Bill 198 1 . Protection o fthe Sea (Powers ofIntervention) Bi1l 1981 . Protection o fthe Sea (Shipping Levy) Bill J 981 . Protection of the Sea (Shipping Levy Collection) Bill 198 1 . Navigation (Protection o fthe Sea) Amendment Bill 1981 . Commonwealth Employees (Redeployment and Retirement) Amendment Bi11 1981 .
DOMESTIC AIR FARES Ministerial Statement
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport) -by leave-I take this opportunity to advise honourable members of Government de cisions on a number of matters on domestic air transport, including the Government's initial re sponse to the Independent Public Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares. The Government com missioned this inquiry into domestic air fares in 1 980 and the inquiry reported on 1 6 February 1981 . The report was tabled in the Parliament shortly thereafter. The inquiry's report is an extensive one and contributes a great deal of valu able work towards expanding the knowledge of airline costs and revenues. However, the inquiry recognised a considerable amount of detailed work would still be necessary to derive and verify the most appropriate fare setting formula based on current costs. The report at page 277 states:
Verification . . . Various matters associated with determining an air fare pricing policy, derived by way of a for mula, will be an exacting task for the regulatory authority.
The Government will arrange immediately further substantial discussions with the airlines so this task can be completed by July 1981 . In under taking this task the Government will, as necess ary, draw upon independent advice. At this stage, the Government has accepted the following princples contained in the inquiry's recommendations: First, we will adopt a cost based, nationally consistent approach by use of an air fare formula comprising a flagfall and a distance rate for the national jet network. We endorse the inquiry's view on the approach to be taken to dis count fares. The Government supports as wide a range of discount fares as possible without increasing the burden on the full fare paying passenger. Discounts for the aged and provision of tour basing fares are to be considered further with the airlines. The Government is concerned that special innovative discounts which are negotiated by the airlines on the basis of their commercial vi ability must stand the test of public scrutiny. The

Government decided that an independent tribunal should be established with powers to hear and make decisions upon proposals for changes to air fares. The powers, structure and scope of the tribunal are under consideration.
As I stated earlier, the report is extensive and further investigation is necessary because, although the broad principles contained in the recommendations are acceptable to the Government, the cost allocation methodology requires detailed analysis. I am concerned also that further consideration must be given to the pricing of the F27 services of Ansett Airlines of Australia and Trans-Australia Airlines. In addition, the report's recommendations advocating the adoption of a profit target must be more fully examined. The Government has decided alSo in principle to establish TAA as a public company. The Government has under consideration the nature and structure of such a company. Such an arrangement should enable TAA to compete more effec tively in a more commercial environment.
In March, the Government deferred consideration of tariff increases sought by the airlines until it completed its initial review of the inquiry's recommendations. It has now been decided to ap prove increases in fares using a new formula which meets the thrust of the inquiry's recommendations. The Government was concerned that the delay in this tariff approval is costing the airlines about $ 1 .2m a week. To further delay approval of this increase in an attempt to achieve greater refinements is inappropriate as the lost revenue would ultimately lead to higher fares in order to recoup that revenue. Already the delay has meant that the level of justified increase is now at 8.9 per cent.
The level of the economy fare increase has been offset by variations in other fare types. Overall, an 8.9 per cent increase in revenue for the airlines was justified and this will be achieved by: First, an increase in the first class differential to 1 .45 times the economy fares. After allowing for some diver sion from first to economy class travel this adjust ment will achieve a reduction of 0.4 per cent in economy fares. Secondly, it will be achieved by a withdrawal of the 20 per cent advance purchase excursion fare, the first class night coach, first class tertiary discount fares and off-peak fares, and a reduction in the level of discounts for APEX fares from 40 per cent to 35 per cent and stand-by fares from 30 per cent to 25 per cent. The adjustments to discount fares will achieve a reduction of 1 . 1 per cent in economy fares.
I must emphasise that these variations in fares are entirely consistent with the Holcroft inquiry's

Domestic Air Fares

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 77

recommendations. They enable the level of increase in the economyjet fares to be kept to an average of 7.4 per cent. The new economy jet for mula is to be $40 fiagfall plus 6.848c per kilometre with a second distance rate-the long distance rate-of 5.82 1 c per kilometre for travel over 2,200 kilometres between Perth and Melbourne or Sydney and Darwin and Adelaide or Brisbane. Recognising the major increases in fares that this formula would bring on routes operated by Ansett and TAA between Melbourne and Tasmania and that alternative land-based modes are not available, the Government has set fares on these routes at 90 per cent of the formula and, in accordance with the approach recommended by the inquiry, the loss in revenue will be met by the Government. This subsidy is expected to cost $5m per annum at the new fare levels.
The following are a few examples of the impact the new fare formula will have:

Previous

New

Sydney-Canberra Sydney-Melbourne Melbourne-Brisbane Brisbane-Cairns Melbourne-Hobart DarwinBrisbane Melbourne-Perth Perth-Sydney

$ 40.50 77.70 1 30.30 1 3 1 .60 70.50 240.20 229.30 268 . 1 0

$ 56.20 88.40 1 34.20 1 35.30 74.00 229.60 220.20 253.70

Fares on F27 routes will rise by the average increase which is being achieved through an increase in the fiagfall component only. The fiagfall will be $30.30 with a distance rate of 9.86c per kilometre-the existing distance rate.
If the previous practice of relating F27 fares to the economy jet formula had been applied the F27 formula would have been $40 fiagfall plus 8.56c per kilometre.
I should emphasise that the inquiry's report was based on 1 979-80 costs. Taking January 1 980 as a convenient mid point of that period, the airline costs have risen by almost 30 per cent since that time. The.major factors in these increases are, of course, wage rises and higher fuel prices. When that level of cost increase is taken into account, the fact that we have been able to lower fares at all on long distance routes is a major achievement. However, as I have already indicated, further refinement of the formula will be undertaken as soon as possible. The decisions I have announced in respect of the inquiry's recommendations follow the Government's initial review of the

Holcroft report. Considerable further work is being pursued and I will advise Parliament further once that task is completed. I present the folfow ing paper:
Domestic air transport-Ministerial statement, I April 1981 .
Motion (by M r Sinclair) proposed:
That the House take note of the paper.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (3.54) -Firstly, want to register the very strong objection of the Opposition to the manner in which this statement has been prepared and placed before the Parliament. I received a copy of the statement at 2. 1 5 p.m. About seven minutes ago the Opposition was advised that a debate would take place this after noon with, I think, four speakers from each side of the House. That kind of arrangement shows the Government's absolute contempt of the Parliament. It indicates what little regard those who sit opposite have for the interests of air transport in this country, and particularly their contemptuous attitude towards people who use the airline services of this country. It may be all very well for the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) , with 1 1 ,000 officers at his disposal, to be able to pre pare some sort of ad hoc response to the report of the Holcroft Independent Public Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares, but the Parliament is entitled to a better arrangement and to better consideration from this Government than the embattled Minister is giving to it.
We are considering the latest piece of ad hockery from this embaitled Minister. Again, the Minister has produced a knee jerk response to a complex and difficult issue, rather than respon sibly, carefully and rationally providing for a system of safe and convenient air services at I'1ini mum cost to travellers. The changes to the air fares announced by the Minister are based on a continuation of the existing fare formula about which the Holcroft inquiry, in the report pre sented a few weeks ago, stated:
The specification of the formula used and of its variants is unsound, inadequately monitored and the cause of serious inequities including marked cross-subsidisation between pass engers on different routes.
That is the definition of the expert body set up by this Government, by this Minister, of the fare for mula on which the Minister has now based his latest changes.
I want to deal item by item with some of the statements made by the Minister in his report to the Parliament. The Minister stated that the Government will be arranging further substantial discussions with the airlines in relation to the fare formula. There is no indication of when that will be. A year has elapsed since the fares inquiry was

1 1 78 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Domestic Air Fares

established. Today a hotchpotch, paste-up kind of The Minister went on to say that the raising of

report has been placed before the Parliament, but the differential on first-class fares from 37.5 per

we have been given no indication of what will be cent to 45 per cent will mean in overall terms a re

the nature of the consultations, when they will be duction of 0.4 per cent in economy class fares.

conducted, who will be participating or what will Again this figure does not appear to take into

be the deadline for their presentation to this Par account the dilution of fare revenue that will fol 

liament so that they can be examined in proper Iow a movement of first-class passengers out of

detail.

that class of travel to economy class travel, with a

The Minister says that the Government will be drawing upon independent advice. Advice from whom, when, how and where? These questions need to be answered by the Minister. Again, we have had a repetition of the feeding out of a little bit in response to public reaction, trying to quieten the Government back benchers from Western Australia and at the same time not sitting down and working out a proper response to the problems which plague the airline system and which were brought about by the policies of this Government. The Opposition is in agreement with some aspects of the Minister's statement and I will note those as I go through what the Minister had to say. The adoption of a cost-based, nationally-consistent approach by the use of an air fare formula comprising a fiagfall and distance rate for the national network is something with which we agree. We agree also with the Government's endorsement of the inquiry's view on the approach to be taken to discount fares. In prin ciple, the Opposition supports the inquiry's recommendations on discount fares. However, we make this qualification: Commercial discounts must be seen to stand on their own in economic terms and not continue to be cross-subsidised by

consequential effect on overall airline revenue. The Minister referred to the withdrawal of the following discounts: The 20 per cent advance pur chase excursion fare, the first class night coach fare, the first class tertiary discount fare and off-peak fares, and to reductions in the level of discounts for APEX fares from 40 per cent to 35 per cent and stand-by fares from 30 per cent to 25 per cent. It is interesting to note that again- - I have to use the word 'again' over and over that move was requested by Ansett Transport Indus tries Ltd. No economic justification is provided and no mathematical calculation is given. Just a submission from Ansett Transport industries Ltd. We ought to recall that when those changes were brought in, it was claimed that they were inno vations. Now, a matter of months later, we find that they are being withdrawn at the behest of the organisation which sponsored their introduction. The Minister's statement on that section is in stark contrast to this statement:
The Government supports as wide a range of discount fares as possible without increasing the burden on the full fare paying passenger.
J ask the Parliament to contrast those two state ments made by the Minister. He states:

economy fare paying passengers, as is the case at present.

The Government is concerned that special innovative dis counts which are negotiated by the airlines on the basis of their commercial viability must stand the test of public

The Minister said that the delay in the approval scrutiny. of increased air fares has meant that the 'justified' We on this side of the chamber would have pre

increase has risen from 7.9 per cent to 8.9 per ferred to hear him say that the Government is

cent. I point out that 7.9 per cent was the figure adamant, rather than that the Government is con

released by the Department of Transport four cerned. It is a milky statement which leaves an op

weeks ago via its leaking system. We are told by portunity for the Minister to back out again from

the Minister that in four weeks the justified in any firm commitment to reform which is aimed at

crease has risen by another one per cent. I suggest improving the lot of air travellers in this country.

that the increase, if any, at most would be in the He does not tell us what the form of public scru range of 0.5 per cent. Again we are not told by tiny will be. He goes on to say:

what means that figure of 8.9 per cent was arrived The GOvernment decided that an independent tribunal be

at. The Minister referred to an increase in the first established with powers to hear andmake decisions . . .

class differential. Whilst the Opposition supports We would like to think that that independent tri

in principle that there should be proper equity be bunal would be in the nature of a prices justifica

tween the first class and the economy class fare tion tribunal where there would be public hear

levels, no evidence is advanced in the Parliament ings at which sworn evidence would be given and

in justification of a differential of 0.45 per cent. at which the airlines would be compelled to pro

No evidence whatsoever in economic terms has duce evidence. But the Minist has not made that

been given to the Parliament; there is no indi statement. If it is to be an independent tribunal

cation of how the Minister and his Department with the powers to which I referred a few mo

arrived at that figure.

ments ago, that is something which we on this side

Domestic Air Fares

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 79

of the chamber would commend and which we would regard as a victory after almost three and a half years of campaigning for a public justification process for fare increases by the airlines.
Again in the Minister's statement there is no reference to consumer representation on such a tribunal. We are adamant that there should be representation of those who use the services, not just those who profit from the use of the services or those in the bureaucracy who decide on the price, quality and range of services.
The Minister refers to the pricing of Ansett and TAA F27 services. That again leaves considerable room for doubt. No information is given as to the nature of an inquiry or where or how that will be established; there is no reference to the fact that in the recent Holcroft inquiry Ansett was able to escape providing information with respect to F27 services, and no assurance from the Minister that there will be a public examination of the provision of F27 services, particularly the regional airline services operated by the subsidiaries of Ansett. Almost tossed in there, tucked away in a couple of sentences, the Minister says:
The Government has also decided in principle to establish TAA as a public company.
Government members-Hear, hear! Mr MORRIS-Those who sit opposite and say 'Hear, hear' might consider their role as protec tors of the public purse and of the the public assets. That airline has been built out of the dedi cation of people who have served it and the support which it has been given by the Australian community, despite all the barriers and impedi ments placed in its way by conservative governments. Let me say this: Changing the form of own ership of TAA will do nothing to lessen air fares for Australian air travellers. It is an exercise in ac counting that might satisfy some of the free enterprise prophets on the opposite side, but we can achieve a better result by retaining full owner ship of TAA by the Australian community, by re taining the existing structure and by making minor amendments to existing legislaion. There is no need to dispose of TAA, and we on this side of the chamber will use every means at our disposal to oppose any dismemberment of TAA. It belongs to the Australian people; it has served the Australian people well. The fact that air fares are not at higher levels than they presently are is because TAA has been operating and providing airline services to the people in this country. Since the 1 940s, the only contribution to TAA has been

something like $ 1 5m. Let me say to those honour able members opposite who guffaw at such an important issue, who posture about the role of air lines in this country, but who vote in support of legislation to preserve the status quo-the test is how one votes, and they have always voted for the preservation of the status quo-that TAA in its operations has acted as a monitor and as a brake
on the level of air fares in this country. Change
can be brought about to reduce the level of air fares and this can be achieved by altering the existing legislation, not by the dismembering of the airline.
Let me move to that section of the Minister's statement where he referred to flagfalls. Here again we have an ad hoc, impromptu alteration to the flagfall charge. The fiagfall charge was not a figure established upon an analysis of cost. It was not a figure established upon a dissection of over head costs, of on-ground costs as compared with in-flight costs of airline operations. It was a figure plucked out of the air in 1 974 as a beginning, and since then adjusted in subsequent fare increases. Here we have the latest piece of ad hockery. The flagfall is now up to $40. We might also ask the same question in relation to the distance limit of 2,200 kilometres. Again those opposite who pos ture ought to bear this in mind. I have not heard one word from them about it. The limit of 2,200 kilometres for the rate per kilometre of the dis tance of travel, interestingly enough, is just in excess of the 2, 1 20 kilometres between Adelaide and Perth. They might direct their minds to the science involved in arriving at the figure of 2,200 kilometres. The point I make is that it is ad hockery. There is no analysis of the relationship of the 2,200 kilometres figure that has been set within the actual needs or costs incurred by the airlines.
Moving to the adjustment to fares between Tasmania and the mainland, this statement by the Minister has to be regarded as a complete embar rassment for him. I could not quickly find the rip roaring statement that he issued during the election campaign from that metropolis to the north-west Enngonia, in which he absolutely ridiculed the proposition to subsidise air travel to and from Tasmania. That is in effect what is happening here. He ridiculed the proposition put by the Australian Labor Party at the last election. I do not have the statement, but J will get a copy of it for honourable members when T can put my hands on it. They will be rather surprised to read what the Minister for Transport thinks of that proposition. Obviously he has caved in on this matter, and it is to his embarrassment that the

1 1 80 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Domestic Air Fares

Government is now adopting a policy put forward during Question Time today, was furiously trying

by the Australian Labor Party at the last election. to determine what to say. All I can say in response

Turning to the fare structure and the changes that have been made, we find minor reductions in fares between Darwin and Brisane, Melbourne

to what he had to say is that I am glad he did not have more time because his remarks could not have been any worse.

and Perth and Perth and Sydney, and increases in This afternoon a statement was made announc

respect of all the other places mentioned. The ing important Government initiatives with rc

point to make there is that these are impromptu spect to air fares in accordance with the Holcroft reactions. They have not been thought through. report and a further statement was made of the There has not been any basis announced for their Government's intention with respect to the future

establishment, other than as a utilisation of the domestic air fare setting formula and air transport

existing formula. There has been no study of the policy in this country, again in accordance with

rate per kilometre or the existing rate being the Holcroft report. For weeks the Opposition has

charged, and there has been no justification for been calling for the Government's response to the

the impromptu change being made to the ftagfall Holcroft report. When at last it gets that response

charges in respect of the F27 aircraft.

the very most it can be is extremely begrudging.

When referring to the rise in airline costs the Minister's statement neglects to mention the rise in airline revenues, the rise in airline productivity and the rise in airline load factors. It seems that

Circumstances have overtaken me, and I seek leave to continue my remarks at a later hour this day.
Leave granted; debate adjourned.

none of those matters have been taken into consideration by the Minister in arriving at these recommendations. In effect, the changes being made

BEHAVIOUR OF CORPORATIONS Discussion of Matter of Public Importance

between some of the fare structures really amount Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-- Mr to robbing Peter to pay Paul. M y understanding of Speaker has received a letter from the honourable

what the Minister wanted to do was that he member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) proposing

wanted to have the fare increases announced, but not make any reference to changes in respect of

that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:

Perth and across Australia, and then at a later The damage to public and individual interests by bad cor

stage announce those as a separate reduction, so that he would get better political impact. What has happened here is that a minor change has been made to Perth-East Coast fares. Another matter which is not addressed by the Minister in his statement and which is relevant and ought to have been addressed is recommendation 1 3 of the Holcroft inquiry which relates to load factors.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

porate behaviour permitted by the Government's inadequate laws and administration in relation to the Prices Justification Tribunal, Trade Practices Commission and National Companies and Securities Commission.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembel's required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr HURFORD (Adelaide) (4. 1 1 )-Over the past couple of weeks thcre have been a number of developments in the corporate sphere of the Aus

Mr SHACK (Tangney) (4. 1 0 ) -This after tralian economy and its administration which

noon we are debating a very welcome statement have all added up to one result. Due to weak laws

by the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt ) . I might and weak administration, the Fraser Government

say that since the tabling the report of the is responsible for the interests of ordinary people

Holcroft Independent Public Inquiry into Dom being sacrificed to the worst features of company

estic Air Fares the Minister has worked consist behaviour. So we have higher prices and the

ently and conscientiously to determine a govern inadequacies of the Prices Justification Tribunal.

ment response in an effort to bring that response We have monopolies resulting in mergers arising,

to public light as quickly as possible, because that for instance, out of the extraordinary recent epi

is what the public has demanded. We have seen an sodes on the stock exchanges. The Trade Practices

incredible response from the Opposition this Commission has inadequate powers. We have

afternoon-an Opposition that had over an hour takeovers running wild and the exposure of the

to prepare some sort of argument on this minis weaknesses of existing laws in relation to the

terial statement. The Opposition spokesman on National Companies and Securities Commission.

transport matters, the honourable member for This relates particularly to the takeover battle for

Shortland (Mr Morris) , who was not in the House Elder Smith Goldsbrough Mort Ltd and the

Behaviour o/Corporations

1 April 198 1 REPRESENTATrVES 1 1 8 1

proposed merger of Elders with Henry Jones (IXL) Ltd.
The first of the developments to which 1 refer is the Government-inspired leak that, at worst, the Prices Justification Tribunal will be abolished and, at best, it will be merged with the Trade Practices Commission. This would be a retrograde step. The Opposition deplores this possibility. The Prices Justification Tribunal has been sufficiently damaged as it is. It has been dismembered. It has a staff of a mere 70, half its previous strength. Even in its present inadequate form and within the limits of its restricted capacity, it does some valu able work in protecting the interests of ordinary people against some of the excessive prices charged by some firms in the corporate sector. I would like the House to listen to this quotation:
Unregulated monopoly may not be tolerable and either public regulation or ownership may be the lesser evil.
r wonder whether anyone in this House could guess from where that quotation comes, even if I gave the clue that it certainly is not from some body who has tendencies to democratic socialism. The quotation comes from none other than the chief disciple of monetarism, Milton Friedman. In his book Capitalism and Freedom he conceded that public regulation-even public ownership; he is conceding public ownership-could be a lesser evil than unregulated monopoly. Of course, the Labor Party believes that regulation is better than unregulated monopoly. Where there is true com petition safeguarding the people's interests, of course, that regulation is not necessary; but we want the regulation where the corporate power is unbridled, where the alternative is unregulated monopoly.
I return the focus of honourable members to the PJT. Even in its dismembered form it has done some valuable work. It should be doing a lot more work. We know, for instance, that in the year 1 979-80 it saved Australian motorists about $ 1 60m. This amount was the difference between what the oil companies were requesting in increased prices and what the PJT granted in the way of increased prices. If this Government dis bands this Tribunal, that will not be the end of regulation. That important regulation of the oil industry in particular is essential. It will be carried out by some of the States, but with much less efficiency. What does the Government think it will achieve by abolishing the PJT? It certainly will not help its friends in the oil companies. Fur thermore, such a blow to the interests of the ordinary motorists in this country will come at a time when petrol discounting is dying. The oil companies will have an open go for profit taking. What about other areas to which the PJT should

be directing its interests? 1 am referring here to the prices charged for aluminium and copper. Why are the companies involved charging import parity prices, whatever their costs, when alu mmium and copper prices in the world economy are on the way up but not charging world prices when aluminium and copper prices are on the way down? Australian aluminium and copper companies ask for cost plus when the world prices are on the way down but they want world parity prices when they are on the way up. This is a scan dal which needs close examination by the PJT.
A similar situation exists in relation to beer prices. Why does a schooner of beer in Western Australia cost more than it does in Adelaide? I believe it is because the Swan Brewery Co. Ltd is making bigger profits which it is using to buy up other breweries and other ventures. Surely this should be examined by the PJT. This would be the case if we had an active and sympathetic government watching people's interests instead of cham pioning company interest.
Mr Jacobi-Where is the Minister? Mr HURFORD-My colleague the honour able member for Hawker asks: 'Where is the Min ister?' The Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) is going to Sydney at dinner time. Originally this debate was to be brought at short notice close to dinner time. The business of the House has been arranged so that this debate will coincide with the Minister's being here, as he properly should be. He can answer the points raised in this important debate. I am looking for ward to his being in the chamber, as I know he is not going to Sydney until dinner time. We have made arrangements for him to be here so that this matter is not left to people such as the honourable member for Higgins (Mr Shipton) and other Government back benchers who would be totally incapable of dealing with a debate such as this. I was talking about the Prices Justification Tribunal and the enormously important role that it has to play. Company profits, after tax, are at a record level. Unfortunately, at the present time a dismembered, toothless PJT can do little about them. Inflationary expectations of 1 3 per cent or 14 per cent are being written into prices. This is adding to inflation. What is the Fraser Government's response to this? The razor gang wants to bring to an end the activities of the PJT which acts on behalf of ordinary people, as little as those activities have been. There are rumours that the Government will go along with this recommendation this weekend. I believe that meetings are to be held on Friday and Monday. I wish to put on

1 1 82 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Behaviour o/Corporations

record that the Opposition deplores this develop It is not good enough to engage in a protracted re

ment. We draw attention to the enormous con view of regulatory functions which are aimed at

trast that such a decision represents to the Cabi undermining the little remaining effectiveness of

n e t ' s other decision not to a cc e p t t h e such bodies as the Trade Practices Commission

recommendation of the Minister for Industrial and the Prices Justification Tribunal.

Relations (Mr Peacock) to abolish the Industrial Relations Bureau. It is the function of the IRB to harass people and unions and to cause confron tation and alienation in this society. In spite of its vast cost to the taxpayer, it continues in existence by Cabinet decision. It is the function of the PJT to protect ordinary people against corporate power. Firstly, it has been dismembered and, secondly, we learn that it is under threat of extinction.

The Opposition is strongly opposed to the further watering down of the powers of these bodies. The Opposition is aware that the public interest is not served by uncontrolled private sec tor activities. In fact, we want more and better regulation. We do not want regulation for the sake of regulation. We want sensitive regulation. Certainly we want to see that that regulation is adequate. We want it to be effective and we want the legislation covering the regulation to be effec

J wish now to turn to the activities of the stock tive in these areas. We want more resources for

exchanges and the ineffectiveness of the Trade more active administration of that improved legis

Practices Commission. Over the last week lation. We are not alone in this view. The minority

Australia has witnessed again a mammoth shareholders of many of the companies, such as

takeover battle which has ended with the Elders, who have been denied proper rights by the

proposed merger of Elder Smith Goldsborough lack of control exercised over takeovers under

Mort Ltd with Henry Jones (IXL) Ltd. Perhaps, current and prospective legislation, would agree

more importantly, this same battle is likely to re on the need for a workable code of conduct. The

sult in Carlton and United Breweries Ltd taking a State governments, particularly in Queensland

major shareholding of at least 25 per cent in the and South Australia, are concerned that some

merged group. This takeover battle and merger, consideration of the public interest, particularly

like the many that have gone before it-J could of the need for the retention of some corporate

mention Herald and Weekly Times Ltd, Ansett decision-making in cities other than Melbourne

Transport Industries Ltd and many others-raises and Sydney, should be given in the case of

a vast array of issues which the current Govern takeovers of companies based in their States. At

ment has virtually ignored.

the moment we have with these takeovers more

Our principal concern in relation to these issues is the public interest, the interests of ordinary people in our community. How is the public interest affected by the rash of takeovers which have been occurring in Australia since 1 977? What damage to the public interest is there, aris

and more decision-making being transferred to Melbourne and Sydney only. I do not believe that this is in the national interest. I know it is not in the interests of the economies of the regions which are built on Brisbane, Adelaide, Hobart and Perth.

ing from the increasing monopolisation of Aus Many business leaders are aware of the need for

tralian industries? What costs are to be borne by mechanisms which vet takeover and merger pro

various sections of the community as a result of posals to ensure that they do not seriously damage

corporate pricing decisions which are not subject competition. Similarly, all the other major com

to the restraints of effective market competition mon law jurisdictions elsewhere in the world

and which, equally, are not scrutinised by any jurisdictions with which we share not only a com

public price justification requirements? What mon heritage but also a strong belief in individual

effect will takeover battles, which are subject to freedom-have enacted laws to regulate and,

the uncertainties of State government action, and where necessary, control the activities of firms

which leave minority shareholders out in the cold, vested with monolopy power. Let me cite one of

have on the efficiency of the Australian equity them. That so-called home of free enterprise, the

capital market and its ability to generate the funds United States of America, through the Sherman

needed to meet Australia's growing investment re and Clayton Federal Acts, has anti-monopoly and

quirements, partiCUlarly in view of the resources anti-merger laws which put our current mish

expansion which is taking place right now? These mash of legislation to shame. The laws in the

are issues of the utmost importance. They are United States now have been operating success

being ignored by the Fraser Government. I t is not fully with a high degree of public approval for

good enough for the Government to talk blandly three-quarters of a century. Yet we have this

of the merits of the private sector and the need to Fraser Government creating this dissension in the

cut the costs of supposed government regulation. community by getting rid of this very minimal

Behaviour a/Corporations

I April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 83

form of regulation which we require to see that talked about unregulated monopoly power. He al

corporate behaviour is channelled in such a way leged that that was taking place in the corporate

that it follows the interests of ordinary people in sector in Australia today. He did not talk about

our country.

the abuse of monopoly power occurring in

I return to the Trade Practices Commission and its Act. In effect the Government abolished con trol of mergers in 1 977. Ever since then, Australia has witnessed a wave of takeovers and mergers. Fortunes, often tax free, have been amassed in this process. In some cases, State governments have intervened or threatened to the intervene in highly unsatisfactory attempts to put some re straint on these activities. As a result, the government's irresponsible abdication of its duties in this area has resulted only in greater uncertainty and inefficiency.

Australia today in the form of abuse of their power by trade union officials and trade unions. He did not talk about the effect on industry and employment of the abuse of that monopoly power by trade unions in relation to the 35-hour working week. He did not say that the trade unions had abused their power by walking away from the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. That is what is happening today in the Australian community. We have had a switch from the nineteenth century, when there were abuses of power by individual managers and owners, with a full circle being turned until today

The Government's inconsistency does not stop in the community the abuse of monopoly power is

there. Whilst it encourages the increasing monop found in the monopoly of unions. By and large, olisation of Australian industry, including such the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission has

trends as increasedvertical integration of industry been ineffective in controlling the abuse of power

as achieved by the Elder Smith-Henry Jones by monopoly unions. Let us hear more on that merger, it still retains the fiction that price deter from the Opposition.

mination in the private economy is based on mar

ket forces alone. This will not happen. Here is The honourable member for Adelaide then Elder Smith, with all the production of primary went on to talk about the Prices Justification Tri

products at its disposal, merging with Henry bunal. He said it was going to be disbanded. I do

Jones, which then buys that. There is vertical inte not know whether it will be disbanded. Let me gration there and great chances for monopoly make and take a point in relation to it. There is a

situations to develop. I am not saying that they case for saying that, if market forces are allowed

will. What I am saying is that we need a trade to determine prices, lower prices will be achieved,

practices commission that will look at that in some cases, than where prices are approved by

situation.

a prices justification tribunal. The history of the

Monopolisation and market competition are di rectly contradictory. The potential for prices to be raised to higher levels or at a faster rate than should be the case inevitably arises wherever market power is concentrated. The inconsistencies and irresponsibilities of the Government are

Prices Justification Tribunal itself is a long one. The first case it dealt with was the Broken Hill Pty Co. Ltd case. If BHP, all those years ago, had challenged the Tribunal's decision it would have found that it was of doubtful constitutional validity in any case. That is my personal view. The

revealed by this recent merger activity. However, how anyone can gain from the recent goings-on. a confident view of the operations of the private sector is beyond comprehension. How it can be seen to encourage small shareholders is also be yond belief.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

honourable member for Adelaide tried to lead the House astray by saying that the PJT was necess ary to regulate the oil industry. The PJT has done a good job occasionally in looking at aspects of the oil industry referred to it for report. It has never been said by the Government-and I am not aware that it has been said by the Opposition before today-that it was meant to be a regulatory authority. It is not. It does not have permanent power to regulate the oil industry. What we are

Mr SHIPTON ( Higgins) (4.26)-1 do not hearing from the Opposition today is a prop

understand the words contained in the matter of osition that the role of the PIT ought to be

public importance which has been proposed by expanded, that more public servants ought to be

the Opposition for discussion today. I believe they allocated to it and that there ought to be more

do not say anything. Similarly, the honourable regulation, bureaucracy and red tape, the total

member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) did not add effect of which, I assume, would be to put up

to our state of knowledge on the subject by what prices to the consumer. The Opposition is not

he told us in the House this afternoon. Let me concerned about the effect of costs-the costs of

pick up some of the points that he did make. He red tape, extra public servants and interference in

1 1 84 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Behaviour ofCorporations

the private sector-on the consumers themselves. It is the consumer who pays ultimately for all the types of bureaucracy and all the regulation of which the honourable member for Adelaide is in favour.
Mr Bradfield-And the taxpayer. Mr SHIPTON-The consumer and the tax payer, as the honourable member for Barton rightly reminds me. The honourable member for Adelaide attacked the Swan Brewery Co Ltd and he attacked profits. I think 'profits' is a dirty word to the Opposition. But profit is the basis of the free enterprise system, the capitalist system. It is out of profits that wages are paid and it is out of wages that wage earners and workers pay taxation, which is a means of revenue for governments. Mr Bradfield-Affluence develops. Mr SHIPTON-As the honourable member for Barton said, affluence develops. Profits are re sponsible for investment. Retained profits are spent on plant and equipment to expand businesses, which creates jobs. I do not think we need to be ashamed of profit or ashamed of the creation of wealth; but the Opposition cringes every time it mentions the word 'profit' and attacks the word 'profit' all the time. I believe that workers understand quite clearly that the greater the profit of their enterprise the greater the capacity of that enterprise to employ them, to re ward them with wages and conditions of employ ment, to create jobs for others and to have the flow-through effect by creating further wealth in the total community.

interests in relation to that matter, but he did not choose to mention the matter. He led us astray. He completely ignored it. I think it is unfair of him to come into this House and say, as he did, that we are championing the corporate sector. That is absolutely incorrect. All the honourable member did was to attack the corporate sector and attack the word 'profit '.
The honourable member for Adelaide referred to the razor gang and then called for bigger and better regulation, as he called it. He is undoubtedly in favour of bigger regulation because bigger regulation means more interference in the mar ketplace. It means achievement of the socialist objective by stealth. If the Labor Party cannot do this in pure terms by the nationalisation or the socialisation of the means of production and exchange, as is democratically possible in terms of the platform of the Labor Party, which it is currently arguing about changing so that we might all think the platform is a little different and is not really there, the Labor Party has to do it by regu lation, by interference with people, by inter ference with corporations, by interference in the marketplace. The Labor Party is for interference so that it can achieve that objective in a back handed fashion, by stealth. Members of the Labor Party are in favour of larger government and that means spending more of the taxpayers' dollars on government. They want to expand government. They want to expand the growth of the public sec tor in this economy. They want to expand the bu reaucracy and the growth of the number of public servants in Canberra. Let there be no doubt that that is what the Opposition in this place is about.

The honourable member for Adelaide alleged that we were championing companies at the ex pense of the individual Australian consumer and the individual Australian worker.
Mr Jacobi-There is no doubt about that. Mr SHIPTON-The honourable member for Hawker interjects that there is no doubt about that. Let me draw the attention of the honourable member for Hawker and the honourable member for Adelaide to one or two things that have been happening in Australia in the last few days. Obviously, those honourable members have not been looking at television or reading the newspaper. If they had they might have heard of references to a company called ICI Australia Ltd and the Government's position in relation to that company. That matter was resolved to the satis faction of the people of Australia, the corporate sector and the Government today. I do not think the honourable member for Adealide could say that the Government was championing company

The honourable member for Adelaide also talked about the Elder Smith Goldsbrough Mort Ltd takeover that is going on at present. He said that nothing was happening in relation to the takeover. Let me remind the honourable member for Adelaide that, in fact, the Trade Practices Commission has this matter under consideration at present. I will repeat that for the sake of the honourable member. The Trade Practices Commission has this matter under consideration at this time. The honourable member for Adelaide did not advert to that fact in his speech. In fact, he tried to lead the House astray by saying that the matter was not under consideration. Let me draw the attention of the honourable member for Adelaide and the honourable member for Hawker to the Trade Practices Act, which I have in my hand. Section 50, the merger section of the Trade P ractices Act, is in place in Australian law today. The Trade Practices Commission is carrying out an investigation at this very time. The section states:

Behaviour of Corporations

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 8 5

A corporation shall not acquire, directly or indirectly, any shares in the capital . . . if-
(a) as a result of the acquisition, the corporation would be, or be likely to be, in a position to control or domi
nate a market for goods or services . . . That section is in the Trade Practices Act; it is in place. At present the Trade Practices Commission constituted under that Act is looking into the question.
Mr Hurford-It hasn't got the staff to do it. Mr SHIPTON-The honourable member should just wait and see. He should ring up the Trade Practices Commission and ask whether it is investigating the matter. I challenge the honour able member to do that. Let us look at what this Government has done in relation to companies and securities. We have established legislation which will see the creation of a National Companies and Securities Commission. Mr .Tacobi-You haven't. It is not on the books yet. What nonsense you talk. Mr SHIPTON-The honourable member for H awker interjects, but he knows that he N ational Companies and Securities Commission legislation has been agreed to by all States and the Commonwealth. Currently, the Commonwealth, Western Australia and South Australia have passed Bills in relation to that matter. We await legislation from Queensland, Victoria and Tas mania. I think New South Wales has legislation on the matter before its Parliament at present. It is contemplated that the agreement will be in place, that all this legislation will be passed, by 30 June and that as at I July we will have a National Companies and Securities Commission, which this Government has legislated for as an example of co-operative federalism with the State governments. That has to be compared with the approach of the Opposition in this place when in government. It was going to act with total disre gard for the States and have a Commonwealth commission. Mr Jacobi-That's right. Mr SHIPTON-That is endorsed by the honourable member for Hawker when he says that that is right. What was the Labor Party going to do? It was going to ignore the State parliaments and it was going to ignore States' rights in creating this body. That would have led to total chaos in markets, total uncertainty in the community and undoubted constitutional challenge. As the House knows, constitutional challenge is not something that can be handled quickly-it takes a lot of time. The Labor Party, by its centralist action, would have taken awaypowers from the States on the one hand and created enormous uncertainty

in the marketplace on the other. Corporations, boards of directors, companies and individuals in fact would not have known what the current position was and people would not have been able to act. Investment would not have taken place. People would not, in fact, know in what areas they were able to plan for the future. That is what the Opposition is about. That would have been a totally unsatisfactory situation.
The National Companies and Securities Commission legislation has a takeover code in it. I draw that to the attention of honourable members opposite. If they read that, ] would hope that they would be enlightened by it. The Government hopes that, following the legislation it has ini tiated, a national companies Act would be the next step and possibly would be in place by January 1 982. 1 understand that discussions between the Commonwealth and the States are at a fairly advanced stage. One would be hopeful of an agreement on a text. If so, the Commonwealth, I hope, would go ahead in the autumn session of this Parliament and the States would follow suit.
In the minutes available let me just sum up where the Government stands on the administra tion of corporate behaviour. The Government's objectives in relation to economic management have been put clearly to the public and I believe are well understood. This Government is applying a steady, consistent approach to management of the economy which has, as its primary emphasis, a strong anti-inflationary thrust aimed at correcting the fundamental distortions which wrenched the economy so severely off course, in the mid1 970s-the years of Labor mismanagement. The Government has therefore sought to promote a satisfactory economic environment, to protect the free flow of market forces, to encourage economic development and efficiency and to safeguard, where necessary, the interests of consumers by proscribing unfair business practices.
I am very pleased to be identified with the Government's efforts in that regard, because it does not represent big business or support the abuse of union power by union officials. It sup ports the individual Australian, the person in the middle. It is a real Liberal Government, with a small ' 1 ' which protects the interests of individ uals in the community. That point needs to be clearly understood.
The Government has also established a frame work within which businessmen and consumers may again take decisions with confidence. As the Government controls inflation, consumers can buy goods in the market-place that are within their reach. There has been no sudden, dramatic

1 1 86 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Behaviour o/Corporations

action by the Government to reduce demand o r to processed stock feed which is sold by Elders. The

expose the economy to increased external compe vertical integration which has resulted from this

tition, as there would have been under a Labor and other mergers will escape any scrutiny by the

administration. Instead, we have had a steady, Government to determine whether these changes

moderate but persistent approach towards the are against the public interest. The Government,

restoration of economic health.

by the inadequacy of its legislation, has tolerated a

As to the assertions of the Opposition, whilst the Government would not deny that there are individual, isolated examples of inappropriate cor porate behaviour, it is absurd of the honourable member for Adelaide and the honourable member for Hawker to suggest that bad corporate behav

situation in which the majority of shareholders in Elders have been deprived of any opportunity to assess alternative offers and to determine the future of their company. The interests of small in vestors have been ignored yet again by the Government which claims to be their champion.

iour is a general feature of Australian business. As I said earlier, the Government has acted to ensure that responsible corporate behaviour is maintained.

The honourable member for Adelaide has already described how the deliberate emascu lation of the Trade Practices Act in 1 977 by this Government has effectively removed limitations

In relation to trade practices, the Government in the way of mergers and takeovers. I want to in

strongly supports the concept of open compe dicate how the absence of effective companies and

tition and the development of conditions to pro securities legislation to cover the actual conduct

mote this. The Government's approach to the of mergers and takeover bids has further acted

Prices Justification Tribunal has mirrored devel against the public interest. It is a disgrace that,

opments in the economy since it took office. As I thanks to the laxity of the Government, the

have said, the Government has created an econ National Companies and Securities Commission

omic environment which has permitted the devel is still not in operation. On previous occasions in

opment of competitive forces. Today the Aus this House I have pointed out that the important

tralian consumer is much better off than he or she and crucial question in this whole area is: Which

was under the maladministration of a Labor form of legislation and which structure will give

government. I reject totally the proposition put to the best security and protection to the investor,

the House by the honourable member for the shareholder, the employee and ultimately, and

Adelaide and am pleased to speak against it.

most improtantly, the community? Obviously, an

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! The honourable member's time has

effective national Act is necessary if we are to provide this protection.

expired.

P articularly glaring deficiencies in the

Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (4.41 )- 1 support Companies (Acquistion of Shares) Act, which is

wholeheartedly the matter of public importance part of the GovernmenCs delayed co-operative

which has been so ably proposed by the honour companies and securities scheme, were also

able member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) . This highlighted in the Elders case. That Act sets a 20

Government deserves the strongest condemnation per cent shareholding threshold at which statu

for its failure to scrutinise the succession of tory controls are to be imposed on acquisitions.

takeovers and mergers which have recently However, the wash-up of the Elders manoeuvres

plagued this country. From the outset we should will result in Carlton and United Breweries be

understand that the motivation behind these coming the largest shareholder, with at least 25

takeovers and mergers has been a desire to lessen per cent of Elders' capital. It has obtained this

competition-to create monopolies, if you domiJ?ant position through its 34 per cent holding

like-or to carry out a smash and grab raid on the in Henry Jones (IXL), plus its purchase of the BT

stock exchange. The recent Holmes a'Court Australia Ltd shares in Elders. Those BT

attempt to take over Elder Smith Goldsbrough Australia shares were originally purchased by a

Mort Ltd and the merger of that company with Holmes a'Court Bell Group shell company, which

Henry Jones (IXL) Ltd illustrated both of these was in turn purchased by BT Australia on behalf

features. The initial takeover attempt by Holmes of unknown clients. The point is that the manner

a'Court netted a $ 1 6m profit, apparently tax free, in which the effective takeover of Elders by Carl

after a three-day exercise on the stock exchange. ton and United Breweries was achieved has effec

That is what is referred to as 'market forces'. The tively circumvented the 20 per cent threshold. In

merger between Elders and Henry Jones has short, the Elders case reveals that no real protec

resulted in a lessening in competition in at least tion for minority shareholders exists under

one area. Henry Jones (IXL) Ltd produces proposed or existing legislation.

Behaviour of Corporations

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 87

The question of collusion in the Elders case the other hand, companies awash with oil profits

must also be considered seriously. The tragedy of are seeking to diversify, and their nearest cousins

present deficiencies in the law is that no one even are other resources companies. Conservatively,

knows the identity of many of the key participants we now have in the United States a situation in

in these events. The so-called white knights pur which oil companies produce 35 per cent of the

chased about 1 8 per cent of Elders to block the in nation's copper, 25 per cent of its uranium and 25

itial Bell Group takeover. Apart from the Adver per cent of its coal. The sheer size of some of the

tiser, which declared its interest on passing the potential acquisitions that could result in the near

mandatory 5 per cent level of shareholding, we do future is enormous, although United States anti

not know who bought another 8 or 9 per cent of trust provision might be invoked. The social im

the Elders shares and what their interest was. This plications of these changes would be far-reaching.

highlights beyond question at least three specific We should be aware that a similar situation is oc

inadequacies of the takeover legislation. Firstly, curring in Australia, but without anti-trust pro

the 5 per cent disclosure level is too high. Sec tection; there is none. The oil companies are

ondly, the time Jag permitted, in which to report swallowing up coal and other mining companies,

to the stock exchange on the attainment of these with little resistance from Foreign Investment Re

threshold level, is far too long. The complex view Board. Foreign corporations such as MIM

Elders takeover exercise was completed in only a Holdings Ltd and Conzinc Riotinto of Australia

few days. Thirdly, the use of nominee companies Ltd have been exempted from even these controls

allows the beneficial owners to be disguised. In the under their artificial status as Australianising

Elders case the merchant bank, BT Australia, companies.

purchased the 1 9.9 per cent Bell Group holding in Elders on behalf of unknown clients.

I would like the honourable member for Barton (Mr Bradfield), who is to follow me in this debate,

Whilst the Elders case highlights serious to explain why in the national companies and se

deficiencies in the existence and application of curities legislation there is no provision covering

takeover laws, the Government's failings in this nominee company or share transactions. Why has

area can be viewed in a wider context. In particu such a provision been deleted? In the case of

lar, it makes an utter mockery of any concern ex takeovers, particularly those in which the Foreign

pressed by the Government that the benefits of Investment Review Board, is involved why should

expanded mineral and energy projects should be not nominee companies or shareholdings be

shared by all Australians through greater equity disclosed? How can we assess the level of foreign

participation. Why should small investors keep equity involved if we cannot make an assessment

getting their fingers burnt? Is it any wonder that of the level of nominee shares or company hold

participation by ordinary Australians on the stock ings? It is a farce; it is a fraud. In this climate, the

market has continued to decline when the number absence of any effective regulation of takeovers,

of rip-offs taking place there continues? We have the omission of any scrutiny over the social effects

progressed little from the days of Poseidon and of the increasing monopolisation of Australian in

the great stock market scandals of a decade ago. dustry and the lack of action by the Government

The increasing monopolisation of Australian in to protect the interests of small investors and the

dustry and its consequences for the community at community at large is nothing short of criminal

large must also be examined in the absence of any negligence, and the Government stands con

effective takeover barriers. The mergers of large demned for it.

firms do more than just reduce competition and raise consumer prices. Fewer and fewer decision makers now determine matters which tangibly effect all Australians, such as the television that we watch or the food that we buy. The decisions made about our mineral and energy resources are also crucially important to our future prosperity.

I conclude on this note when referring to market forces and private enterprise. Over the last decade, that I can recall, time after time companies in the corporate sector have collapsed. Every time there is a move to strengthen the pro visions of the Companies Act to overcome that glaring anomaly, it is opposed on the ground that

We ought to note that the big mining market forces and private enterprise should pre

companies in the United States are now especially vail. It is an utter disgrace. We have had the spec

tempting and vulnerable targets for takeovers be tacle over the last two years of $8m being ripped

cause their profits have hit rock bottom. In many off through the utter incompetence of insurance

cases, their shares have been trading at way under brokers. Yet, when legislation to cover this is

book value. Low metal prices, inflationary costs recommended, we hear the same old argument by

and big spending on anti-pollution measures have the Treasury-we have to leave it to market

kept the industry depressed and short of cash. On forces and private enterprise. In each one of those

1 1 88 REPRESENTATIVES I April 1981

Behaviour o/Corporations

cases it is the consumer who suffers. The cry from the Government is: 'Never interfere with the cor porate sector'. For too long the consumer has been forced to suffer, and regulation in this area, in particular, is a necessity.
Mr BRADFIELD (Barton) (4.52)-When 1 first read the text of the matter of public import ance presented for debate by the Opposition, I wondered what sort of tack its members would take. I have great respect for the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) and the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi), but obviously there was a lot of confusion in the tack they took. The honourable member for Adelaide began by talking about the Prices Justification Tribunal. An analysis of what the honourable member said shows that he both supported it and rejected it. I presume he supported the Prices Jus tification Tribunal simply because there were some rumours around the place that perhaps the Tribunal will not continue. From that point of view, he supported it. Later he said that the Prices Justification Tribunal is only a tool for carrying on inflation and adding the inflation aspect to prices paid by the consumer. He said words to that effect. On the one hand he wants the Tribunal to continue but, on the other hand, from what he said, he wants to have it abolished.
The remarks of honourable members opposite indicate that this Government has done nothing to protect the consumer and nothing about some practices by corporations that certainly are not desired in the community. l and the Government have great sympathy with many of the things members of the Opposition have suggested and many of the problems they have identified. 1 will come to those aspects later. Honourable members should have an understanding of the responsibili ties and actions of the three government bodies referred to by members of the Opposition. It is worthwhile noting that the Prices Justification Tribunal was formed in 1 973. It came into oper ation in the years of a Labor Government. Certainly, it has provided some benefits to the community. It has been active in price surveillance and it has conducted public inquiries. The most notable of its activities has been determining the price levels of petroleum products throughout Australia. Certainly it can be criticised, as the honourable member for Adelaide said. Perhaps it has been a tool that has automatically allowed prices to go up, without taking into consideration improved productivity and efficiency when making some of its decisions.
Be that as it may, the crux of the whole discussion and the government organisation that we should be looking at, which will have a great

future and which clearly shows our concern for what has been happening in the stock market and in the securities business, is the National Companies and Securities Commission. It was formed by this Government, in co-operation and after discussion with all the State and Territory governments in Australia, for the sole reason of having uniform laws and regulations throughout Australia with regard to companies and securities organisations. It was formed to give us the teeth to do something about the situation. The decision to establish the Commission was finalised only in December 1 978 and it commenced its operations in March of last year-just over 1 2 months ago. The objects and responsibilities of the Commission indicate that it will go a long way towards controlling some of the situations identi fied by members of the Opposition. This Government has no wish to tolerate any bad corporate behaviour. It is not beneficial to the country; it is beneficial to no one except a minority. We do not want to see people make money out of speculation. We do not want to see the type of situation that has just de veloped in South Australia involving Elder Smith Goldsbrough Mort Ltd, where a Western Australian company made $ 1 6m on sheer speculation, punting on the stock market.
Mr Jacobi-And paid no tax. Mr BRADFIELD-We do not want to see that. It is through the National Companies and Securities Commission that we can do something about it. The honourable member for Hawker tells me that that company will pay no tax. We are aware of that situation; we are concerned about it and do not want to see it continue. Earlier this week when the Treasurer (Mr Howard) answered a question in Parliament, he too showed concern at the method used by that Western Australian company to take the money that it suppos edly made from that deal. We do not want to see that sort of situation continue. It was this Government that went ahead and formed the Commission and it is this Government that can utilise the Commission to regulate company laws throughout Australia. The Opposition well knows that those laws came under the responsibility of the various State governments-some of them Labor governments-and yet none of them appeared to do anything about the matter. In my State of New South Wales, the Labor Government has done very little to stop the adverse company situations that have developed. A few years ago companies such as Minsec, Mainline and Cambridge Credit-'--and the honourable member for Hawker mentioned Poseidon during the mineral boom--

Behaviour ofCorporations

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 89

Mr Jacobi-And ASL; there has been no pros benefits to all Australians. I totally reject the mat

ecution yet.

ter proposed for discussion by the Opposition.

Mr BRADFIELD-The New South Wales Corporate Affairs Commission did nothing about it, and the honourable member knows full well

The words which have been put down are quite meaningless. The Government totally rejects the matter.

that the Federal Government had no authority to do anything about it at that time. We do have that authority now, through co-operating with the

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Giles)-Order! The discussion is concluded.

States, and we know exactly what we will do. We do not want to see the small consumer hurt; we want to have the teeth in the legislation to protect

DOMESTIC AIR FARES Ministerial Statement

the consumer. In fact, with the co-operation of Debate resumed.

the National Companies and Securities Com

mission, I hope we will be taking over this kind of Mr SHACK (Tangney) ( 5 . 3) -When the de

protection.

bate on this important statement was adjourned, I

I mention briefly the Trade Practices Commission, because little has been said about it in this debate, even though the Opposition clearly has listed it in the matter for discussion. That organisation came into operation in October 1 974. Again, the legislation for the commission was brought into this Parliament during the era of the Labor Government. That body has done much. I recently looked at some of the Bills that have been before the Parliament in the last 1 2 months, amending the Trade Practices Commission legislation. An amendment in April 1 980 brought in certain safeguards to Australia's shippers for their exports. Also in May 1980 legislation introduced provisions on secondary boycotts. When honour

was in the process of congratulating the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) for making what by any yardstick is a very speedy response to a very com prehensive report. It is a report of three volumes containing some 36 recommendations. We have had a substantive response from the Government in only six weeks. I highlighted earlier the desper ation and the transparency of the comments that have been made in this debate by the Opposition. The Minister, over the past weeks, has been cri ticised for not making a response to the Holcroft Independent Public Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares. Now, when he does make a substantial and significant response, of course he is criticised again.

able members look at the combination of the Trade Practices Commission and the Prices Jus tification Tribunal they will see that the Australian consumer has received some advantages from those organisations. But the organisation which is really going to show its teeth and which will go a long way towards rectifying some of the problems that the honourable member for Hawker and the honourable member for Adelaide have identified is the National Companies and Se curities Commission.

Last week in this Parliament I had the opportunity to make some comments about the Holcroft report, and I would like to remind the House what the three main findings were. They were, firstly, that there was evidence of gross cross-subsidisation between routes; secondly, that the present air fare setting formula and procedure were deficient; and, thirdly, that there was a lack of desirable accountability in a regulated environ ment which should have been enforced by the regulatory authority. In response to those three

I hope that the Opposition will stop being nega main findings, the Holcroft committee went on to

tive in its suggestions on this matter, as it usually is put down three main recommendations. Those

on economic policies. As the honourable member recommendations addressed specifically those

for Higgins (Mr Shipton) said, the Opposition three main findings-that is, firstly, to eliminate

does not seem to like private enterprise or the cross-subsidisation; secondly, to establish a new

word 'profit'. While it adopts this attitude, it is not air fare setting formula and procedure; and,

doing very much to further free enterprise in thirdly, to improve the regulatory authority in

Australia. The free enterprise system, even with order that airlines and airline operations would be

its failings, is the system which will benefit the monitored more properly to increase the public

Australian people best. It is the system that over accountability of those airline operators and more

the years has given affluence to the Australian properly and more responsibly to safeguard the

people. We must be prepared to further that sys public interest. When we look at the ministerial

tem, and at the same time, through Government statement and keep in mind the three main

legislation, make sure that the consumers and the findings and the three main recommendations of

small people are protected while this free the Holcroft report, what do we find the Govern

enterprise system is working and providing ment doing? We find it acting in exact accordance

1 190 REPRESENTATIVES I April 1981

Domestic Air Fares

with the Holcroft report. I fail to see how the Government can be criticised on those grounds.
I turn to the first matter-the elimination of gross cross-subsidisation and the establishment of a new air fare setting formula. In his statement, the Minister announced the new fare increase. It must be recognised that this increase, which is justified-it has been held over for some weeks has caused the airlines to lose collectively, not only Ansett Airlines of Australia but also Trans Australia Airlines, $ 1 .2m a week. In delaying that increase for a month the Minister was concerned to make an announcement so that as much as possible of the Holcroft recommendations on the air fare setting formula could be picked up at this time. That is exactly what has been done. As far as is presently practicable, the air fare increase has been announced as being calculated on the Holcroft formula to eliminate cross-subsidisation. I say 'as far as practicable' because, as the report identified, there is much further work that needs to be done to sharpen up the exact apportionment of costs in the determination of future air fares and of future increases. Recognising that, the Government has gone as far as it is able to go at this stage, but it has done the complementary thing it needed to do. It has announced that the entire Holcroft formula will be investigated. The Government has forshadowed the establishment of this investigation, to be concluded before the end of June, which is going to draw on the best ac counting advice available and which will be con ducted thoroughly so that, when it is time for the next fare increase, it cau ,! made totally in accord with the Holcroft recommendations.
What has the Government done concerning the other recommendation in the report, that is, the need for an improved regulatory authority to monitor the airlines and increase that aspect of public accountability that is necessary to safe guard the public interest? It has acted in direct ac cordance with that recommendation as well, by establishing a tribunal. The Minister said that the tribunal will be an independent tribunal established with powers to hear and make decisions on proposals for changes to air fares. That is the regulatory body that this regulated system needs, and that is the foreshadowed decision announced this afternoon.
To repeat that point and to belie the Opposition criticism that has been advanced in this Parliament today, the Government has as far as is practicable moved to eliminate the cross subsidisation in air fares by announcing this increase which is overdue. We do not dispute that it is overdue, but the Government has gone as far as

it can on the information available to it. Recognis ing that more work needs to be done, the Government is establishing an investigation into that work so that the Holcroft formula can be properly calculated once and for all and so that all future increases can be determined on that basis. Recognising the need for more public account ability and a greater monitoring role on the part "f the Government, the Minister has foreshadowed the establishment of the tribunal. I fail to under stand the Opposition's charge that the Government can be criticised for not acting in accordance with the Holcroft report. Again I congratulate the Government for the decisions that have been made and announced this afternoon.
I turn now to some of the fares that have been announced this afternoon. The major reform is that the current flagfall charge has been increased to $40, which brings about fare reductions on the long haul routes and fare increases on the short haul routes, again directly in accordance with the Holcroft report, to try to bring about more equit able relativities between the long haul and the short haul routes of our domestic air transport system. As Mr Holcroft pointed out time and time again, it was the long haul routes that were sub sidising the short haul routes and, in terms of any economic argument, that is simply not justified. The Government has done what it can to date to try to bring about an equitable readjustment of the long haul fares compared to the short haul fares. I believe that we will see more of the fare re ductions we have seen to date once the entire Holcroft formula is adopted after proper investigation.
With respect to the Tasmanian subsidy I make an important comment: The Government is again acting in accordance with the Holcroft report. The Holcroft report discussed subsidies and argued that if, for all sorts of reasons, it is determined that a subsidy on any route is justified and necessary-I am not talking about the making of that decision-that subsidy should be made di rectly and openly; it ,hould not be brought about because of some CI 1ss-subsidisation within the system. I congratulate the Government for pick ing up that point. The Minister for Transport has announced that TAA is to be put on a more com mercial footing than it is on at the moment. Obviously, how that will be done is open to proper in vestigation so that all the possible options can be discussed and - examined closely. I fail to under stand how that decision can be criticised. The other government airline, Qantas Airways Ltd, is asking the Government to place it on a more com mercial footing so that it is not subject to all the constraints that the bureaucracy, for example the

Domestic Air Fares

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 91

Treasury and the Department of Transport, can exercise over it and so that it can compete openly in the market-place and offer the airline consumers the standard of service and fares that they are demanding. If we are moving to commercialise TAA and place it on a more equal footing with its major competitor, Ansett, that can only benefit TAA and members of the public who use the domestic air transport system.
The two matters that require further investigation -the establishment of the tribunal and the restructuring of TAA-go a long way towards fixing up a system which Holcroft iden tified, in colloquial terms, as being crook and rot ten, and which has been that way for many years. Once the findings of those investigations are de termined it will be open to the Government to in troduce the airlines agreement legislation, taking into account the findings on the establishment of the tribunal and the proper commercialisation of TAA. Once that is done, it will be open to the Government to introduce the legislation establish ing the two-airline agreement. I hope that the agreement will have a five-year life, as is provided for in the foreshadowed Bill and the present legislation. In that five-year life the way would be open for the Government, having sorted out the present system as Holcroft recommended, to con duct a proper investigation into the deregulation of the airline industry to see whether that is a vi able option for this coup-try.
Let us reflect for a moment on the fact that the investigations into Australia's domestic air transport system to date, the Domestic Air Transport Policy Review Committee report and the Holcroft report-have had as their base the maintenance of the two-airline system. Holcroft himself was criticised for moving away from that base. He argued that if the goal were to maintain the two-airline system important things would need to be done to improve it on behalf of Australian consumers. The Government courageously has picked up those Holcroft recommendations and is moving to improve the present system. However, Holcroft made a further point. In simple terms he said: 'If you do everything I ask you to do, you will still end up with a second best system'. In Holcroft's opinion, whilst he did not have the time or the resources to investigate fully, the best system for Australia would be one that moved progressively towards deregulation. I have argued for that in the past. Now that the Government is moving to improve the present system I believe the way will be open for it, not to announce deregulation overnight that is not what we are arguing for but to conduct a proper investigation into deregulation and to see

whether it is, in fact, a viable option for this country. Such an investigation could take five years because the airlines agreement, under the present or proposed legislation, has to run for five years. If at the end of that time the investigation proves that deregulation is not a viable option for this country there is nothing to stop the Government from re1egislating for a continuation of the two-airline system. That five-year period should be valuably used to investigate that option and to see whether it can or should be implemented in this country.
In conclusion, the Government is to be congra tulated for moving in the way in which Holcroft asked it to move in order to improve the present system. I believe that it has the scope to take the further step of investigating Holcroft's best sol ution, deregulation, to see whether it is a viable option for this country.
Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) ( 5 . 1 6)-1 find it very difficult to believe that the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack) is the same per son who purports to be the leader of the pack of Liberals from Western Australia who are crusad ing for an end to the two-airline policy and for deregulation of the industry. He has just said that he does not see that as a possibility. He sees the weak, pathetic statement by the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) , which is more of a sick joke than anything else, as the payment he is prepared to receive for a continuation of the two airline agreement. He has completely sold out the campaign which he has been conducting in West ern Australia over the last few months. He has revealed himself and his colleagues as nothing more than a group of charletons. In the last few years we have had, firstly, an inquiry into domestic aviation policy which was set up by the cur rent Minister's predecessor. It was carried out in secret. There was no opportunity for public scrutiny of it. That review suggested some very important changes. Subsequently, the Holcroft in quiry was established. It was sabotaged from the beginning because while it was investigating the whole question of airfares, including the implications of the two-airline agreement, secret deals were made between this Government and the air lines to ensure the continuation of the two-airline agreement for a further 1 0 years.
Now the honourable member for Tangney wants a further five years in which to make any further changes to the two-airline agreement. He is looking much more like a rickety lean-to than a shack. After his statements see the light of day in Western Australia he, his colleagues and their argument will collapse like a pack of cards. There is nothing in the argument. They haye completely

1 1 92 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Domestic Air Fares

sold out the interests of Western Australia. They promised in June for the Holcroft inquiry. The in

will be laughed out of town as soon as the Minis formation did not come to light until a month be

ter's statement is seen and understood by the fore the inquiry was truncated. What will the re

people of Western Australia.

quirements organisation

be to provides

insist that information?

AtnhseettAdi.ndsneottt

After all the months of grandstanding and all

the trauma that we and the Government, the

honourable member for Tangney, the honourable

member for Perth (Mr McLean) and the honour

able member for Moore (Mr Hyde) have been

through, all that this fiercely independent group

can come up with in the interests of Western Aus

tralian air travellers is a 4 per cent to 5 per cent re

duction in air fares. That is all it has been able to

laocuhsieovre, 'peoxscseibpltyf,odraangceoruopules

of meaningless, nebu changes which will be

brought into effect to tinker with the problems

which are so deep seated and long standing. The

results will be completely meaningless.

provide any information to the even though it was promised

bHyoltchreofMt iI.nll9lsutierry.

Ansett said: 'We do not have to appear before

you; we do not have to talk to you about air fares

because the two-airline agreement stands above

and beyond the activities of the Holcroft inquiry

and we are not going to have you or anyone else

meddling in the cosy arrangement which has kept

us fat for so many years'. We really want to know

what are the powers to secure information and to

see that that information is dealt with publicly

and in a way in which it can be analysed and scru

tinised by the whole of the people of Australia. J

suspect that this tribunal will just continue the

cosy arrangement which has existed between the

We are offered an independent tribunal. We bureaucracy and the industry for so many years.

know nothing of it. We do not know what its powers will be or how it will be set up. We do not even know whether it will act in public. All we know is that it is to be an independent tribunal. I ask honourable members to reflect for a minute on the fortunes of the last independent inquiry that was set up-the poor old Holcroft com mittee. It comprises three independent and cour ageous men who were prepared to act indepen dently and give independent advice to the Government. For their trouble they were abused from one end of the country to another. They were accused by the former Minister for Transport of being liars. It will be very difficult for the Government to find anyone who is prepared to act as a so-called independent member of an independent tribunal. The Government will not get any decent people because it does not treat

The industry is one of the most arrogant yet lu crative industries in Australia and it has operated behind the shield of regulation for far too long. There is nothing wrong with regulation in that sense, but, if there is to be regulation, public scrutiny and public accountability are of fundamental importance. That is what we have not had and I do not think we will get it. It would be very easy for the Minister to add the word 'public' as well as the word 'independent' when describing the tribunal to us today. So it is to be a secret tribunal which will just continue the same secretive and cosy arrangements which have operated in this industry for very many years. The Department of Transport has failed to protect effectively the public interest and I suspect that the tribunal will do the same.

them properly. All it will have, if it has anything at all, will be a few puppets. If it is to be a three man tribunal, I suggest that the three names which would be most appropriate for the task that the Government has in mind would be Murdoch, Murdoch and Murdoch. They might be the best three people to put on this tribunal to determine the civil aviation policy of this country because that is where the real power lies, that is the real vested interest that has to be protected by this Government. It is for that reason that the Government has not acted in relation to the real problems of this whole industry.

Another sop which has been given to the lib eral members from Western Australia is the suggestion that Trans-Australia Airlines should be made a public company. What will that achieve except to provide a ready mechanism for the sale of TAA in the not too distant future? It is very much simpler gradually to divest the shares of a public company even if it starts off being owned totally by the Government than it is to start dis mantling a statutory corporation, as TAA is at the moment. What we now have is the promise that TAA will be sold. If this happens we will have a monopoly of the airline industry. I ask honourable

How is this tribunal to work? What are to be

members: What on earth will be the advantage to Western Australians of having one airline instead

I

the requirements in relation to the production of of two? There would be no competition at all. At

information? We know that it took the Minister's least there is some competition at the moment,

department six months to provide information minimal as it may be. If the Government sells

Domestic Air Fares

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 9 3

TAA we would end up with a monopoly, particularly, I suspect, on the Perth to eastern states routes.
Another important matter of which this statement failed to take account is that no attempt was made to justify the current fare levels. All the Government says is: 'We have a current level of fares, and we know there have been certain cost increases; therefore we are going to agree, albeit on a different formula, to an increase having regard to those increased costs'. There is no attempt to justify whether the existing level of fares is proper. Holcroft said he could not do it because he could not get the information from Ansett, he could not get the information from the Department of Transport in time and he could not get the information from the Bureau of Transport Economics. So we still have no justification of the existing level of fares. Yet, on top of that, we are to have this overall increase in fares.
There is no attempt to justify the vast cost of the meaningless amount ofadvertising which both airlines indulge in at the moment. What is the point of one company taking out $2,000 advertise ments - all over the country to publicise the fact that it has better sandwiches than the other company? It is a totally meaningless form of ad vertising. It does not go to the question of price because there is no competition in respect of price. The two airlines are competing only on the basis of a few frills. What is the cost of the ex travagant services that are provided? We know that it cost Ansett $3m a year to provide free booze to first class travellers. There is no attempt to justify that. There is no attempt to see whether that is a fair charge that ought to be passed on to the travelling public. We should not kid ourselves in this respect. Of course that sort of charge is passed on directly to the travelling public.
There is no discussion of what is the importance or the significance of the non-airline activities of both airlines. TAA can be stupid enough to pay $5m for the Hertz Rent a Car franchise; Ansett can lose $ 1 5m in relation to Associated Securities Ltd, and what is the impact of those stupid de cisions on the cost of air travel? There is no attempt to look at that; no attempt to give any reasons or explanations. Airlines can come along, as they have always done in the past, and say: 'We have had this amount of cost increase; therefore we want this amount of air fare increase'. That is a totally inadequate way of doing things. What we need is a thoroughgoing inquiry to establish what are the existing levels of fares and whether they can be justified in any sense at all.

Again, there is no attempt to look at the very -serious question of the use of the excess capacity of Qantas Airways Ltd on the trans-continental routes. We know that Qantas is prepared to offer a return fare between Sydney and Perth of between $200 and $250. We cannot be exact about that because some months have passed since Qan tas made that offer, but at least we know the order of magnitude by which Qantas could fill those empty seats effectively. Of course, the marginal cost of carrying passengers between Perth and Sydney and return on the large aircraft operated by Qantas must be much smaller than the average cost of carrying passengers on aircraft operated by Ansett and TAA. Qantas has an attractive prop osition to offer to us, yet it is prevented from offering seats to the travelling public because, in the first instance, of the existence of the two airline policy and, in the second instance, of a re luctance by the Government to make a change based on a fear about what Ansett Transport In dustries Ltd would think about it.
We know that the cheapest economy fare between Perth and Sydney and return is about $500. Qantas is prepared to offer seats on such routes for about half that amount. That is an important question which has not been addressed in this statement; that is a question which the people of Western Australia have wanted answered for months if not years. I first raised this question publicly in 1 978 and we are still waiting for some response from the Government. We know that there have been some increases in fares. There has been an increase in the advance purchase excur sion fare. One will not get a 40 per cent discount any more; at the maximum one will get only a 35 per cent discount. This reduction, of course, will affect Western Australians more than it affects anyone else because the fare between Western Australia and the eastern States is much higher than the fare anywhere else.
This is a totally inadequate statement. It does not come to grips with any of the real and deep problems which exist in this industry. We know that the statement is a sop which has been handed out to con Western Australian Liberals in return for their support for a continuation of the two airline agreement. Next year all the Liberals from Western Australia will come trooping in here and vote for a continuation of the two-airline agreement. Not one of them will cross the fioor, as they have threatened to do, as they have promised to do, as they have undertaken to do for the Western Australian people, to oppose the continuation of the two-airline agreement. They will vote for a continuation of the two-airline agreement. They

1 1 94 REPRESENTATIVES I April 1981

Domestic Air Fares

will vote for a continuation of the same two Mr GROOM-The honourable member says

airline agreement that was negotiated in secret 'for high living'. They go to the football, and so on.

the secret deal that was struck just before the last We feel that that link is important and therefore it

election by the Government, Ansett and TAA. So is good to hear that this subsidy is to be provided

we now know how cheaply one can buy a Western by the Government. As I said before, I do not gen

Australian Liberal. One can buy a Western Aus erally favour subsidies. As a true liberal [ do not

tralian Liberal with about five pages of mean generally favour subsidies but there are always

ingless drivel which offers nothing to the Western exceptions to that general rule. r have looked

Australian people except a four per cent to five carefully at this decision of the Government, r be

per cent reduction in air fares now and the prom lieve in a critical way, and I have decided that it is

ise of increases in the future once this policy con right, because it is in the interests of the people

tinues on its doomed course.

that there should be a subsidy in this case. I made

the same decision as far as Mount Lyell was con

Mr GROOM (Braddon) (5.30)-1 cannot cerned. Again I looked at that situation carefully.

understand why the honourable member for I looked at the logic of it and all the human el

Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) has been so inactive on ements involved in that decision and [ supported

this issue, and why he has apparently turned his it as I support this one. The Government has

back on the interests of the people of Western really now established a principle in providing this

Australia. In stark contrast, Liberal members on $5m subsidy for 12 months to assist the people of

this side of the House have been very active in Tasmania. That principle is that there should be

protecting the interests of the people of Western this air bridge between Tasmania and the main

Australia. I want to commend honourable land. 1 trust that this subsidy, restricted as it is in

members on this side of the House for their efforts its terms and amount, will continue, and I trust

to assist the people of Western Australia to that it will be reviewed from time to time so that it

achieve justice as far as air fares are concerned.

does not lose its true value, and so that the people

of Tasmania, just like the people of the West, will

I am pleased to take part in this debate. I think I receive justice so far as air fares are concerned.

have about ten minutes in which to say a few

words. J want to say in particular how pleased I J want to comment briefly on the report of the

am that Tasmania has been looked after so well. I Holcroft Independent Public Inquiry into Dom

thank the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) and estic Air Fares. I can see value in that report. I be

the Government for the decision which he has an lieve that in many respects it was a sensible report,

nounced today. I think it is fair to say that all five but I am not overimpressed by some of the con

members of the House from Tasmania have been clusions reached by the three gentlemen con

very active on this issue. We have pressed our case cerned. I do not believe that cross-subsidisation is

as best we can. I do not think we have really ap necessarily to be accepted. I believe that it is a

plied political pressure so much as logic in con puritanical economic approach to the whole ques

vincing the Government of the correctness and of tion. In any business, in a grocery business, in sell

the sense of giving the people of Tasmania a fair ing shoes or in a legal practice, there is always

deal so far as their air fares are concerned. As all cross-subsidisation. For example, in a legal prac

honourable members of this House know, cer tice, the people involved in conveyancing subsi

tainly the honourable members on this side, Bass dise those who are involved in litigation, as the

Strait is a disadvantage to Tasmania. Many of us Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodg

think it is also our greatest advantage. I t is cer man), who is now at the table, and who is a very

tainly a disadvantage, and that air link is so vital respected member of the legal profession in Tas

to the economy of Tasmania and the social well mania, would acknowledge. In almost every busi

being of people living in Tasmania. I think there is ness there is cross-subsidisation. I was therefore

some sense in the point that because we are so surprised at the theory put forward by Mr

close to the mainland-it is only 1 00 miles or so Holcroft that there should be a very direct cost

across the Strait-we use that airlink perhaps determined for each route, and that that air fare

more often than the people from the West use should be borne exactly by those travelling that

theirs. So many people from my part of Tasmania, route. I believe that that theory does ignore some

on the north-west coast, come across to Mel of the human factors involved. In making that

bourne, a city of two million people plus, for criticism of the committee, I do commend it for its

medical treatment, for dental treatment and for work. Time restraints were placed upon it and I

the basic necessities of life.

think that is unfortunate. But given the time re

straint, I think the committee did a fairly good job

Mr Barry Jones-And for high living.

in handing down its report. But that told only part

Domestic Air Fares

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 95

of the story, and I say that to some degree it did ignore real life and the human factors involved.
I hope that the Minister will take particular note of the importance of the F27 services around Australia. An important part of Tasmania, the north-west coast, is serviced by F27 aircraft flying from Melbourne. Mr Holcroft said that the flagfall factor being charged on F27 services was about half of what it should be. I certainly hope that these real human factors are again taken into account so that the increases in air fares to all of the routes serviced by F27 aircraft-not just to Tasmania, but to Queensland, New South Wales and other places-are permitted to continue at a reasonable rate so that those areas can be prop erly serviced and people in them can have the op portunity of travelling to other places if they wish to do so.
lt has been announced by the Minister that there will be a fare fixing tribunal. I am in general agreement with that. But I hope it is not like some of the other tribunals which have been established by this and other governments. I hope that it just does not look at the theory and mathematics of the whole thing. I hope that it looks at the human factor. I think this is where politics are important. We can criticise the word 'politics' but politics are important. This democratic process which we have and which has been used so effectively by honourable members from the west and Tasmania is important. It allows the ordinary person to get his or her view across. I hope that some guidelines will be established by the Government to confine the tribunal, when it is established, in what it might do, and to permit it to take into account the ordinary human factors that are involved in this whole question of air transport all around Australia.
We now have a proposed two-airline agreement which has not yet been ratified by this Parliament. I hope that that agreement, perhaps with some amendments, will be ratified during this session of Parliament. It is important that we do have as much competition as we can have within the system but, overall, certainly along the major trunk routes we have had, as I think most peoply apply ing common sense would agree, a pretty good airline system in this country. I think we should commend Ansett Airlines of Australia and Trans Australia Airlines for providing the kind of ser vice that they have provided. I have not travelled as far as some honourable members of this chamber have. I have not been to the United Kingdom, I have not been to Europe and I have not been to the United States or North America. I know that many honourable members have been to those places. When they compare the kinds of

air transport services provided in those places, they have indicated to me that we compare very favourably with the service we provide, such as the quality of service and even the cost. I agree with the points that have been made by honour able members from the west, and those represent ing long haul routes, that as far as possible we should achieve justice for the people travelling on those routes. I am pleased to see that TAA is to become further commercialised and that it will become a public company. A number of options have to be considered in this respect. No doubt the Government will look very carefully at those options.
Finally, I wish to commend the Minister for the very fair way in which he has approached this whole issue of air fare increases and a new air fare formula and for the other decisions that he has an nounced. lt is a sensitive issue. I said earlier that a lot of representations have been made by all five members who have contributed to this debate. The Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) who is seated at the table is nodding his head in agreement. Many other organisations and councils-this includes the Tasmanian Tourist Council-believe that it is very important for the development of the tourist industry in Tasmania to have air fares set at an appropriate level for people travelling to and from Tasmania.
At a meeting earlier today I made the point that the subsidy for Tasmania is not just a subsidy for that State. It is not to be confined to the citizens of Tasmania. I repeat that if that were the case we would need to have passports issued to us. That is not the case. Any Australian citizen travelling to and from Tasmania will be eligible to receive the benefit of this subsidy. It is not a subsidy for Tas mania but a subsidy for every Australian. I wel come it.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan) (5.42)-1 am sorry that this debate will not be permitted to proceed to such an extent that we can hear formal sub missions from the bevy of Western Australian Liberal members opposite as to their positions on this matter. In fact, we have heard once from the honourable member for Tangney (Mr Shack) , but we have not heard from his colleagues. If what they had to say was as sheepish as they look, it would provide honourable members on this side of the House with no end of entertainment for the rest of the evening. It is not surprising that they should look so sheepish. If they have worked as hard as the various Press leaks which have emanated from them have indicated, as opposed to what has actually been stated by them in this

1 1 96 REPRESENTATJVES 1 April 1981

Domestic Air Fares

House, then they have laboured mightily to produce a pineapplea pineapple nevertheless gut ted by the vaguest possible statement made today in this House by the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt ) . With 1 1 ,000 people in his Department, with an inquiry that has proceeded for six months, with at least a six-week period within which that Minister could review that inquiry, andas was pointed to earlier by the honourable member for Fremantle (Mr Dawkins) -with another inquiry on much the same matter that proceeded for some time several years ago, all that the Minister has been able to bring forward is a statement replete with terms such as 'initial responses', 'more detailed work required', and 'matters raised will be dealt with at a later date'. What a hopeless piece of work to dump on the Opposition at fairly short notice. I am not surprised that honourable members opposite should feel so very sheepish about it.
The Holcroft Independent Public Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares was determined by a specific local problem for the Liberal Party in Western Australia. I n my home State the revolt on the size of air fares that we were paying and the subsidy that we were offering our air travelling colleagues in the eastern States was a very reasonable one. It was a political problem which cut across the nor mal political problem confronting the Government on air fare matters; that is, of course, keep ing Ansett Airlines of Australia well and truly satisfied with the state of affairs in which it finds itself. That need to satisfy was augmented by a change of ownership of Ansett and the emergence of a media leader to head it in the run up to an election. It was a very considerable political problem for the Government. In its normal fashion, this Government acted in an absolutely cynical way. It set up this inquiry and, as it proceeded, away from public view the Minister and his col leagues attempted to subvert it. These facts were brought before this chamber when the Opposition moved to censure the Minister several weeks ago. r do not need to go into them further. I use this occasion only to express my abhorrence at the way in which 1, as a member of the Western Australian public, and my 70,000 electors who live around the airport in Perth, have been so terribly misled by the way the Government has behaved in this matter.
The honourable member for Tangney, who has been full of praise for what he considers to be a magnificent statement and a grand step in the right direction, has said it is foreshadowed that a wide range of the Holcroft recommendations will be acted upon. He cited three recommendations but there are some 36 recommendations in the

Holcroft report. Only three of those recommendations were vaguely touched upon in the statement made by the Minister. One of the things that the honourable member for Tangney loved so much was this independent tribunal. He felt that the statement that has been made in some way meets the Holcroft recommendations on public accountability. What nonsense! The Holcroft committee made quite specific recommendations on the need for public accountability on air fares charged by the airlines. None of that is guaranteed in the Minister's statement. No indication was given on consumer representation on such a tribunal; no indication was given as to its composition; no statement was made concerning public input to such a body; and no indication was given as to whether the type of evasion engaged in by that airline, so beloved of honourable members opposite but so deprecated by the Holcroft in quiry, would be permitted again or whether the independent tribunal could instruct the airlines to produce for it the information it so patently failed to produce for the Holcroft inquiry. This is what the Holcroft inquiry wanted on the question of public accountability. 1 wish to quote from pages 239 and 240 of the report. It states:
There should be public disclosure of balance sheets and profit and loss accounts for those activities subject to special regulation and these accounts should be shown separately from those for the company as a whole. There should be rec onciliation statements for such accounts stating the results for regulated activity together with the overall accounts. This should be supported by sufficient information to show the methods used for allocating relevant items between the two sets ofaccounts.
] realise that honourable members opposite have not read the report. They should take this opportunity to do so. I will read fairly rapidly through the report for honourable members on this occasion. It states further:
There should be a comprehensive collection of information, for public dissemination, on the workings of the air transport industry covering passengers and freight carried by all oper ators, aircraft operations, air navigation charges and the costs to which they are related together with comparative data on efficiencies of financial and technical performance. An indi cation of the type of operational and financial data which the CAB requires to be filed with it by the domestic airlines is set out in CAB Form 41, 'Report of Financial and Operating Statistics for Certificated Air Carriers'
This is what the Holcroft committee was talking about when it mentioned a public inquiry. Not one word of it appears in the Minister's statement. There is not one word to the effect that detailed pu blic accountability will be demanded of the air lines in any shape or form. It is pathetic that honourable members opposite should declare that what has emerged in the Minister's statement con forms in any shape or form to these quite specific and very detailed requirements of that body. Only

Domestic Ail' Fares

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 1 97

very faltering steps have been taken towards some to say about this aspect in their submissions in

degree of air fare justice. Given the whole record cluding the matter on which the honourable

of the debate on air fare matters, we can con member for Fremantle has fought very long and

fidently expect that those very faltering steps will hard and for several years in advance of members

be the last steps taken in this regard. They have to opposite from Western Australia. I refer to the

be taken because the Holcroft inquiry pointed to availability of seats on Qantas Airways Ltd. There

the systematic ripping off of some $20m per is no indication that this will be dealt with by any

annum from the Western Australian public over a form of inquiry. We will continue to have the situ

very lengthy period. I suppose that any reduction ation where we are paying $500 for a trip to Syd

in Western Australian air fares is some advance. ney when all we need to pay is $250 if we use Qan

However, when one looks at the dimensions of the tas. Due to the premature termination of its

cross-subsidisation one can see that this reduction inquiry the Holcroft committee was unable to

is very paltry indeed. If the calculations of the consider seriously the question of the usage of

honourable member for Moore (Mr Hyde) which Qantas seats on that route.

appeared in the newspapers were to have been met by the Government one could have expected a reduction of at least twice that which has been suggested here today. This is in the nature of a sop. If this is all that the vaunted Western Australian back bench revolt can produce those honourable members can be compared collec tively with a brace of penny bangers rattling around in a nuclear holocaust. Many other areas have been left unresolved by these statements of direct interest to Western Australia.

An interested Minister, a Minister attuned to the value and needs of the Australian tourist industry, might have had a few words to say also about the problems that we confront in Western Australia regarding the discrimination that we suffer as an international port of entry. That has a deleterious effect on the tourist industry. It has been spoken about by honourable members on both sides of the House. No indication was given that this matter will receive serious consideration. We were unable to get it from the Holcroft com

I would like to know what will happen on the mittee. Apparently we will not receive it from any F27 aircraft routes. It is true that eastern States further air fare review.

F27 routes were being subsidised by jet route trav ellers to Western Australia. However, F27 routes in Western Australia, most emphatically, have not been subsidised. Does this mean that the internal Western Australian traveller will pay even more highly for his or her travel in Western Australia? Prima facie I would suggest that it does. There are no guarantees that widespread competition will be enforced on that airline that currently covers those routes in Western Australia. No guarantees are contained in the statement, although the Minister did devote a certain amount of attention to the question of internal F27 air fare routes. There was no indi cation that the injustice in this regard which was pointed to by the Holcroft committee would be taken up. That injustice was that Western Australians subsidised eastern States F27 routes but did not have their own subsidised by any similar process.

I am not surprised that the honourable member for Braddon (Mr Groom) should be reasonably pleased with the subsidy that will apply to Tas mania. I am pleased to welcome him into the ranks of the socialists. We look forward to a reg ular change in his voting pattern on a variety of other matters. I do not begrudge Tasmanians that gain. It might have been rather nice, however, if a similarly sympathetic attitude had been extended towards us in Western Australia, given the bur dens we have been carrying for so long. 1 can assure the honourable member that nO matter what Bakke boats might operate between Melbourne and Tasmania, they take a heck of a lot less time to proceed from Melbourne to Tasmania than it takes to travel by rail from Perth to Melbourne or by road from Perth to Melbourne. They are perhaps relevant modes of transport with which to draw a comparison in this instance.
As a Western Australian member, I can only

The Holcroft committee, in the final chapter of feel considerable sorrow at the way in which this

its report, under the heading 'Matters not whole shoddy discussion that has extended over

examined', as it waved its hand like a drowning many months has been conducted and the extent

man being pushed under by the Government, to which very real and sensible grievances raised

mentioned a plethora of matters highly important in this House and in other forums have been

to Western Australians that received no further treated so disparagingly by this Government. I do

attention by the Minister in his statement. Yet hope that we will hear, when the two airlines

groups with a serious concern in the matter of air agreement comes up for consideration and when

fares, such as that involved in the fair air fares an independent tribunal is established, a much

campaign in Western Australia, had a few things more effective response from honourable

1 198 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Domestic Air Fares

members opposite from Western Australia than we have heard here today.

Mr CADMAN ( Mitchell) ( 5 . 5 5 ) -The

Government has a number of contiicting prin

ciples to observe when dealing with airlines and

the services that they offer to Australians. Air

fares, for instance, must be based on cost. Passen

gers travelling by main airline operators anywhere

in Australia should pay approximately the same

fare for travelling the same distance. Air fares

should encourage efficiency also. I t is no good

passengers paying more than is reasonable to pro

vide a greater profit for an organisation but, at the

same time, a high standard of service must be

mpaaritlItcauilnaerldy

nd m

the national interest regard to the use of

preserved, fuel. The

Government must keep in mind that all com

munities should have, as far as possible, a reason

able standard of service as far as frequency and

quality of service are concerned. Some of these el

ements and objectives are conflicting by their

nature. Therefore, any discussion of air fares or

matters relating to airlines develops a lot of

 interest and some controversy. The Government
has sog t to overcome some of these problems by

estabhshmg an expert group of people to advise it.

When one looks at the areas which the Holcroft I ndependent Public Inquiry into Domestic Air Fares had to deal with, one can understand why there is conflict of interest, conflict by communi ties and between regions in Australia to achieve the objectives that the Government sets out to achieve. However, there is no confusion in the Australian Labor Party. There is nothing in the Labor Party. If one refers to its policy as pre sented at the Labor Party conference held in Adelaide in 1 979, and if one turns to the page on transport-the last page of its policy deals with transport because it receives the lowest priority one will see an introduction which refers to organ isation funding and charges, public participation, research and planning, shipping, highways, roads and facilities and international conventions. Nothing on air transport was contained in that report. I cannot find it. I challenge honourable members opposite to point it out to me. They know nothing about aviation. They do not want to know anything about air transport, as today's de bate has demonstrated most clearly to the House. The Labor Party has no policy of any sort in any area relating to airlines.

The Holcroft report has accentuated the difficul ties of establishing a reasonable and easily under stood method of charging air fares in Australia. Air fares are set by a basic formula that is changed from time to time as cost pressures force airlines to apply to t h e Government or other

nstrumentalities, as proposed by Holcroft, for an
mcrease in their fares. Some of the matters that Holcroft has considered include how the time of flight crews is charged, including whether it is charged to the travelling component, the distance component or the ground charges, the flagfall charges, the cost of flight attendants who spend some of their time on the ground and some time flying, the training of airmen and the aircraft catering services. How should one calculate what portion should go to flagfall or distance? Also included are matters relating to aircraft overhaul and maintenance, fuel excise, aircraft de preciation, the cost of fuel excluding excise, ground services and handling. All these matters were dealt with by Holcroft. The Holcroft com
 h mittee said in essence that on the one hand this
policy could be adopted a d, on the other and, that policy could be adopted. One could put a greater proportion into the flagfall, the ground services, the distance factors. That is the way Holcroft dealt with it. If one does one set of sums one will find that the best that Holcroft recom mended for Western Australia was a $3 reduction. One can do another calculation and move it across to the other side of the formula where a $200 reduction would apply.
The fact is that these matters need to be care fully investigated by expert accountants. That is what the Government is proposing to do. It has offered concessions to Western Australia which comprise a 5.4 per cent reduction. In other areas of Australia, such as the area which will affect my family and me when we travel at our own expense-that is, from Canberra to Sydney there has been an increase of alrr,ost 40 per cent. We are looking at a massive change in fare structure of over 40 per cent between different routes in Australia. This is highly significant. The Government needs to be complimented for being so courageous in adopting Holcroft's report to the extent that it has. I think that the statement made today by the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) does deal with air fares and indicates the Government's intention for the future. It moves to straighten out the formula. It offers prospects for F27 aircraft routes and it also gives an opportunity to meet the criticism that the Senate has directed to us to deal with the problems faced by Trans-Australia Airlines.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m. Mr CADMAN-Prior to the suspension of the sitting I was bringing to the attention of the House some of the difficult problems that the Holcroft committee of inquiry faced in coming to grips with establishing a sound base for air fares in Australia, the difficulty it faced in establishing a

Domestic Air Fares

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 199

formula which was sound, which could be tested publicly over a period and which would withstand all scrutiny. The Government has moved soundly as far as it can in the area of supporting the de cisions of the Holcroft committee of inquiry into air fares. The Governmenl's decision will, in fact, result in a decrease .in air fares to Western Australia of about 5 per cent but will result in increases in air fares on some routes, particularly the Sydney-Canberra route, of 38.8 per cent. Part of the reason for the increase in fares on the Sydney to Canberra route is the problem of the time delays that are starting to appear in the Sydney re gion for air traffic. Whilst it is not the subject for debate this evening, I believe that this matter must be attended to by both the New South Wales Government and the Federal Government. As the House knows, it is very much a matter for the New South Wales Government to determine what it wishes to do to meet the travelling needs of the people of that State. The future looks bleak if the present situation of no decision goes on for any length of time.
The Government, in looking at the Holcroft in quiry's report and making decisions for travellers in Australia, recognised that the verification of various matters associated with determining an air fare pricing policy derived by way of a formula will be an exacting task for a regulatory authority. The Government has decided that it will establish a regulatory authority-if possible an independent body-to advise the Government or to make decisions on fares. Part of the Government's decision is to look at the difficulties faced by regional operators-the operators of Fokker Friendship aircraft in country areas. Their position is a tenu ous one to some extent. The large proportion of Fokker aircraft are owned by either Trans Australia Airlines or Ansett Airlines of Australia; the others are owned by operators who are dependent on those aircraft to make profits and to supply services. The Holcroft committee iden tified considerable cross-subsidisation from the pure jet services that travel the main trunk routes to the Fokker services. This means, in fact, that there are lower air fares than can be justified on a pure cost base where Fokker Friendship aircraft are used. This has created a difficulty for organisations which fly only Fokker aircraft. The Government has considered that the cross subsidisation in that area should be removed. Steps are being taken to remove that cross-subsidisation.
I concluQ" by saying that over a period com mittees of this Parliament have identified serious problems with the operation of TAA. As a com mission it is undercapitalised and has great

difficulty in maintaining what would be considered commercial practice and commercial bookkeeping practice. That has affected the oper ation of TAA. It has made it sensitive to changes in aircraft types. It has made it sensitive to changes in service. It would therefore seem that if the Government were to commercialise TAA it would lift the quality of the organisation and cre ate perhaps a greater sense of purpose. Australia is served by airlines which are among the best in the world. As such it is ' important for us to con duct a somewhat theoretical debate about making them even better. The principles espoused in the Holcroft inquiry's report will make our airlines even better. However, we must be careful in all of these decisions to ensure that we retain for the Australian people the high quality of service that we now have.
Mr ROBERT BROWN (Hunter) (8.6)-lt was interesting to hear some of the supporters of the Government speculating' about the detail and information which is quite clearly lacking from the statement which was made by the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt). Many of the claims ' that honourable members opposite made in their interpretation of what the Minister said and their interpretation of what they believed he possibly meant certainly cannot be substantiated or sup ported by the words the Minister actually used. One of the things I am most concerned about is that the statement by the Minister was quite obviously a ploy to lay the ground for some quite sinis ter developments. I will develop that argument shortly.
The essential thing that the statement purports to do is to indicate the new fare structure on the routes listed. If, in fact, that was the chief purpose of the Minister's statement, why did the Ministel raise the question of the restructuring of Trans Australia Airlines? The Minister stated:
The Government has decided also in principle to establish TAA as a public company. The Government has under consideration the nature and structure of such a company. Such an arrangement should enable TAA to compete more effec tively in a mor.e commercial environment.
I have been advised that a little over two hours ago the Minister was interviewed on the subject and that when he was asked to give an assurance that the Government would remain the sole shareholder in such a restructured TAA or, in fact, that the Government would remain the main shareholder in such a restructured TAA, the Min ister refused to do so. The Minister failed to do so. I am not able to identify any denial on the Minister's part at this stage. I think this Parliament and the people of Australia are entitled to know exactly what are this Government's intentions. It

1 200 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 198 1

Domestic Air Fares

is absolute nonsense for the Minister to come in with a statement which is simply, according to him, designed to give information about a restruc tured fare system for domestic airlines in Australia and at the same time conveniently slip into that statement a series of words which in themselves mean nothing but which clearly have quite sinister implications. I think we are entitled to know exactly why those words went into that statement and exactly what are the intentions of the Government and this Minister in connection with the future of TAA.
It has already been pointed out by honourable members on this side of the House that the res tructuring of TAA as a public company will better facilitate the opportunity for this Government to start selling off parcels of it. I hope an answer will be given because all hell will break loose in this country on the part of those people who are concerned about the way in which this Government and previous conservative governments in Australia have been hell-bent on selling out the assets of the Australian people in order to make it easier for all the silvertails out in the community, all of the Government's commercial mates, all the powerful and privileged people that the Government represents in this Parliament, to participate in the lucrative areas of public ownership and to hand those areas over to them. I hope we get clarification of that matter from the Minister because it is a matter of very great, very real, very deep and continuing concern. Already notice has been given of this Government's intention in connection with Trans-Australia Airlines. I n fact, councils of the Liberal Party of Australia already have adopted as their policy the proposition that assets of that kind should be sold. We want to know exactly where the Government and the Minister stand in relation to that.
The statement presented to the Parliament by the Minister is a disgraceful document. I appreciate its pork-barrel content. I agree with parts of that pork barrelling. Earlier speakers from the Government side of the chamber referred to the need for some of the humane issues which may be involved in matters of this kind to be considered. I think it is appropriate that that should be done. But I do not think it is appropriate for attempts to be made to justify pork barrelling in the way we saw it justified tonight.
There are some aspects of the statement, apart from the very sinister implication to which I have made reference already, with which the Opposition agrees. It agrees, for example, with the reference to a cost based nationally consistent approach being adopted by the use of an air fare formula comprising a flagfall and distance rate for

the national jet network. We have no objection to that. Also, we have no objection to the Holcroft inquiry view on the approach to be taken towards discount fares. We appreciate the importance of that. It is important in connection with the selling of tours by tour wholesalers. It is important also to be developing tourist trade in Australia.
We take no exception either to the reduction in the formula for domestic air fares for Tasmania. But I emphasise the fact that that was one of the policy commitments, one of the election promises, of the Australian Labor Party. We are delighted that the Minister and the Government have chosen to accept that. When the Opposition prior to the previous general election, undertook to in troduce such a policy it was opposed by the Government. Now, of course, the Government has completely reversed its position and has adopted the proposition. We support that proposition.
The statement raised a significant number of issues which were insufficiently explained or were left unexplained. Reference to some of those issues has been made already by the honourable member for Shortland (Mr Morris) and by other speakers from this side of the chamber. The first I mention is that related to establishing an independent tribunal. These are the actual words used by the Minister in his statement:
The Government is concerned that special innovative dis counts which are negotiated by the airlines on the basis of their commercial viability must stand the test of public scrutiny.
We endorse that, but it is not clear in the statement just how far the Minister proposes to go with that public scrutiny. He went on to state:
The Government decided that an independent tribunal should be established with powers to hear and make decisions upon proposals for changes to air fares.
The Minister's statement gives no indication of whether the hearings are to be open, public hear ings and whether the independent tribunal is to have consumer representation. Those are matters of concern to Holcroft and are mentioned in the report. The Minister's statement gives no indi cation of whether the airlines will be required to submit claims for fare increases and to justify those claims. I mention also the need recognised by the Minister for further consideration to be given to pricing of the F27 services operated by Anset Airlines of Australia and TAA. We accept that in the future a more detailed consideration should be given to that and a more clear analysis should be made. But the Minister's speech gave no indication of how long that was likely to take. We

Domestic Air Fares

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 20 1

are entitled to expect a clear indication of the direction the Government intends to take in relation to that. We should be given an indication of the means by which consideration will be given to it, who will give consideration to it and what type of evidence will be expected in the consideration which is undertaken.
The proposed new air fare rates for services along the east coast of Australia cause me con siderable concern. An increase of 38.8 per cent is envisaged for the domestic air fare for the Sydney Canberra route and an increase of 1 3.7 per cent is envisaged for the Sydney-Melbourne route. I accept that previously a significant amount of evidence has been presented iri support of the prop osition that there has been cross-subsidisation on a lot of the domestic air routes. But a sudden jump of 38.8 per cent in the cost of a flight between Sydney and Canberra-of course, that would be duplicated along the east coast-and a jump of 1 3.7 per cent in the cost of a flight between Sydney and Melbourne are enormous increases for the market to bear all at once. The effect that is likely to have on the increasing number of air passengers and on the tourist industry along the east coast should be quite apparent. Recommen dation 1 9 of the Holcroft report reads:
Profit before interest and tax, excluding extraordinary items, as a proportion of revenue not exceed 6 per cent, given a continuation of the present levels of interest and income taxation in Australia.
What in fact the Holcroft inquiry is suggesting there is that when we have private operators of the kind we have in the air passenger system in Australia-privately owned and p rivately operated but publicly protected-a maximum limit on the profit those private operators can make should be established. It is absurd that we should have public protection of private interests without establishing a ceiling on their profits. The statement made by the Minister made no refer ences to that. Private operators are protected by this Government but no suggestion was made in the statement of any possible limitation being placed on those profits.
For the benefit of honourable members from Western Australia, I just say that they have been done like a dinner. The Western Australian putsch in this Parliament has been outsmarted and outdone by the Tasmanian putsch. Those people from Western Australia have been prepared to sell themselves for a minute amount as far as those air fares are concerne,d. On the Melbourne-Perth route it is a reduction of $9 in $230, about four per cent. Yet all the Opposition, all the strength and all the principle we saw ex pressed and acted upon by honourable members

from Western Australia earlier this year has sud denly disappeared-for the sake of $9. Of course, what the Government is doing is placating the Western Australians, and it has done it very effec tively. It is placating them not only in connection with this issue to keep them quiet but also in order to have them accept, first of all, the thousands of empty seats which exist on the Qantas Airways Ltd flights between the east coast and Perth and, then, the implications of a renegotiated and res tored two-airline policy. That agreement is not very far off now because all the opposition from where it matters at the present time-that is, from the Government side-has suddenly disappeared.
As I said, the statement is disgraceful. It rep resents a disgraceful effort to provide information to this Parliament and to the pUblic. There has been no detailed explanation of the reasons for the changes which have been proposed. There is a lack of clarity in what is proposed. There is no supporting evidence for the changes that have been suggested. There are serious omissions in regard to many important areas. No analysis is pre sented of the question of the thousands of empty Qantas seats which are available, as the honour able member for Shortland has said, at half price. There has been no attempt to tell us anything about the cost structure of the airlines or to provide a satisfactory mechanism for an investigation of those costs. The real purpose of the statement which the Minister has issued today is, firstly, to placate Western Australian members and to de stroy any effective opposition that they might have shown in protecting their constituents and, secondly, to embark on stage one of the sell out of TAA.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No. 3) 1980-81 Message from the Governor-General recom mending appropriation for proposed expenditure announced. Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (8.23)-I move:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
r present Appropriation Bill (No. 3) 1980-8 1 which, together with Appropriation Bill (No. 4) 1 980-8 1 , which I shall introduce shortly, com prises the Additional Estimates for 1 980-8 1 . In these Bills, Parliament is asked to appropriate moneys to meet essential and unavoidable expen ditures additional to the appropriations made under Appropriation Acts (Nos 1 and 2) 1 980-8 1 .

1 202 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Appropriation Bill (No. 3)

The Additional Appropriations total $520.9m. Of programs, originally expected to be covered by

this, $432.6m is sought in Appropriation Bill (No. revenues from advertising through the multicul

3) and $88 . 3m in Appropriation Bill (No. 4) .

tural television channels.

The Additional Appropriations sought in the Bills are offset to some extent by savings in appro priations made by Appropriations Acts (Nos 1 and 2), resulting partly from the Government's determined efforts to achieve savings in expenditure wherever possible. These savings, amounting to $ 1 47.6m, are detailed under the relevant ap propriation headings in the document, 'Statement of Savings Expected in Annual Appropriations', which has been distributed to honourable members.
Notwithstanding the Additional Appropri ations now sought, current expectations are that total outlays in 1 980-8 1 , including those financed from special appropriations, will be within one per cent of the Budget estimates. This reflects the Government's continued adherence to its policy of maintaining maximum expenditure restraint.
1 now outline some of the main areas where the Government has found it necessary to seek Ad ditional Appropriations in Appropriation Bill ( No. 3) 1 980-8 1 . Included in the amount that Parliament is now being asked to appropriate is $ 1 9 1 . l m to meet increases in award rates and other wage and salary costs since the Budget, con sisting of $ 1 00.7m Civil, and $90.4m Defence. Although the overall Budget figuring contained an allowance of $235m for prospective wage and salary rate increases in the Public Service, including Defence, that amount was not then appropriated.
Under the 'Administrative Expenses' vote, an amount of $3.6m is included for the Attorney General's Department for payments to private legal practitioners by the Australian Legal Aid Office. This is partly offset by a reduction in the counterpart payments through State Legal Aid Commissions due to delays in the establishment of the Victorian Commission. The amount also pro vides for an overall escalation in payments to private legal practitioners.
Under the Department of Defence an amount of $7.4m is sought to cover the increased cost of fares and vehicle hire, together with a general increase in program activities above that provided for in the Budget. An additional amount of $4.5m included for the Department of Housing and Construction results from a higher than antici pated rate of expenditure on the engagement of private architects, engineers and consultants.
Under the 'Other Services' heading, $5 .8m is proposed for the Department of Communi cations, mainly for locally produced television

An amount of $26.2m is required under the De partment of Employment and Youth Affairs for employment training and assistance. The increased provision comprises $1 7.7m for new in itiatives and increased activity under the National Employment and Training System and $8.5m under the scheme to encourage full-time training of apprentices. A sum of $9m is required under the Department of Industry and Commerce to meet increased costs of maintaining reserve capacity in government factories.
Additional significant 'Other Services' pro visions include: $ 1 6.5m for the Department of Defence to cover the increased cost of stores and greater requirements than expected as a result of increased activities; $ 1 0.5m for the Department of Defence to meet the increased cost of repair and overhaul of aircraft, ships and other equip ment; $5.4m for the Department of Education, mainly to cover unavoidable increases in running costs for the Australian Capital Territory Schools Authority; $8.3m for the Department of Foreign Affairs, principally to cover the increased cost of wheat relating to Australia's commitment under the Food Aid Convention; and $5m under the De partment of Science and Technology, mainly to meet increased running costs of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organ isation. I commend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Willis) adjourned.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No. 4) 1980-81 Message from the Governor-General recom mending appropriation for proposed expenditure announced. Bill presented by Mr Howard, and read a first time.
Second Reading Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (8.27)-I move:
That the BiJI be now read a second time.
I present Appropriation Bill (No. 4) 1 980-8 I in which appropriations totalling $88. 3m, additional to those made by Appropriation Act (No. 2) 1 980-8 1 , are sought for capital works and services, payments to or for the States and other services. The proposed appropriations are needed to meet essential and unavoidable expenditures for wh ich provision was not made in Appropriation Act (No. 2) 1 980-8 1 .

Income Tax (International Agreements) Bill

I April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 203

I now mention some of the major items in respect of which Additional Appropriations are sought in the Bill. An amount of $3m is required under the Department of the Capital Territory for the purchase of improvements on two leases surrendered to it during 1 980-8 1 -1 refer to the Deakin Health Spa and YMCA Hostel at Bruce, ACT. An amount of $4.0m is sought under the Department of the Capital Territory to cover labour and material costs increases on works being undertaken by the National Capital Development Commission.
Under the Department of Finance $53.8m is required for natural disaster relief and restoration mainly as a result of deteriorating drought con ditions in New South Wales, Queensland, West ern Australia and Tasmania.There is a require ment under the Department of Social Security of $2.5m mainly to cover increased costs and revised funding arrangements for certain services under the Children's Services Program.
An amount of $2.4m is required for the Department of the Treasury, principally resulting from the transfer of certain Aboriginal programs to the Northern Territory. A further $ 3.2m is sought for that Department in relation to increased debt charges assistance to the Northern Territory. This will be fully offset by an increase in debt charges payments by the Northern Territory.
Other additional appropriations of significance include: $ l m for the Department of Home Affairs and Environment for a new program of construc tion of international standard sports facilities with the States, on a dollar for dollar matching basis; $ 1 . 5m under the Department of Housing and Construction, for payment to Queensland to assist in re-housing of Cribb Island residents affected by extension of the Brisbane Airport; and $ l m for the Department of Industry and Commerce for machinery and plant required to accelerate mod ernisation of the Government factories. I com mend the Bill to honourable members.
Debate (on motion by Mr Willis) adjourned.
INCOME TAX (INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS) AMENDMENT BILL
1981 Second Reading Debate resumed from 26 March, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (8.32)-The In come Tax (International Agreements) Amend ment Bill 1981 is not particularly controversial and is not opposed by the Opposition. Its purpose is to give legislative effect to new double taxation

agreements negotiated between Australia and Malaysia and Australia and Sweden. This Bill presents us with a timely opportunity to examine the international aspects of Australia's taxation system. Some of these have received quite a deal of publicity in recent times and it is patently obvious that certain sections of our tax laws which re late to international transactions are in desperate need of reform.
First, I will deal briefly with the immediate subject of this Bill, that is, Australia's dOUble tax agreements. Australia currently has such agreements in place with 1 2 countries-the United Kingdom, the United States, Canada, New Zealand, Singapore, Japan, Germany, the Netherlands, France, Belgium, Switzerland and the Philippines. In addition, limited agreements are in force with Italy and Greece relating only to air transport profits. Such tax treaties have be come an essential feature of the international income tax system and are directed towards eliminating international double taxing, prevent ing tax evasion and simplifying the obligations of taxpayers. Double taxation can arise when per sons or companies earn income in a country of which they are not a resident. Without international tax agreements there is the possibility that such persons could be taxed on the same income in both countries.
Two chief methods of relieving such double taxation are used. Firstly, taxing rights over certain classes of income are reserved entirely to the country of residence of the person deriving the income. Generally, these include commercial profits if the recipient has no permanent establish ment in the country of origin, and also air transport and shipping profits, pensions, civil ser vice remuneration, remuneration for personal services if the visit does not exceed 1 8 3 days, teach ing remuneration and cultural royalties. Some of these categories may vary between individual treaties. The second method used to relieve double taxation is that all other income may be taxed by the country of origin but the taxing powers for some classes of income are limited. [ n regard to dividends, tax is generally limited to 1 5 per cent to ensure that the effective tax on the dividend income-that is, the tax on company profits plus the tax on the dividends imposed by the country of origin-is less than the tax on the dividend charged by the country of residence, otherwise there would be a disincentive for continued investment in the country from which the dividend is derived.
In regard to interest, tax is often limited to 1 0 per cent so that residents of the borrowing country are not at a disadvantage when seeking

1 204 REPRESENTATIVES I April 1981

Income Tax (lnternational Agreements) Bill

loans for business purposes. As to royalties, tax is again limited so that manufacturing rights and know-how can be obtained for development pur poses at a reasonable cost. Most aspects of our tax treaties substantially reflect the principles of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development model double taxation convention and, in doing so, have facilitated the development of Australia's financial and trading dealings with overseas countries.
The two treaties before us in this Bill, those with Malaysia and Sweden, conform basically to established practice and the only item of any real note is the inclusion of a tax sparing type of arrangement to back up developmental tax incentives given by the Malaysian tax authorities. However, the benefits from such tax agreements are not without their costs. The chief disadvantage of such treaty obligations lies in the likely initial cost to tax revenue. The Taxation Office has acknow ledged that Australia loses a small amount of revenue from the limit on withholding tax on divi dends to 1 5 per cent under the treaties compared to a normal rate of 30 per cent where no treaty applies. Our interest withholding tax is normally 1 0 per cent, so there is little change in that area. Royalties, however, are usually subject to normal assessment, so we would stand to lose revenue when the tax is limited.
Again, however, the situation is not straightfor ward and a number of factors operate to amelior ate the likely loss to revenue. For example, where a tax treaty applies, royalties and interest payable to Australian residents are no longer exempt from tax under section 23 (q) of the Income Tax Act, about which I shall say more later, but are taxed in full subject to a credit for foreign taxes paid. This would act to increase Australian tax revenue above what it would otherwise be.
Also, the revenue effect would be dependent upon the balance of investment flows between the countries involved. Certainly in the case of Malaysia, where the level of Australian investment would be higher than Malaysian investment in Australia, our tax revenue would be boosted by the limitation of Malaysian tax on payments to Australian residents. The reverse would probably be the case under our treaty with Sweden. However, on balance, apparently Australia does lose a small amount of revenue under its treaty commit ments. This loss, however, can be said to be made up by the gains accruing from facilitating the international movement of capital, individual goods and services, and by the assistance such agreements provide in overcoming tax avoidance by transnational companies. Indeed, an element of

our treaties which is assuming ever-increasing im portance is the section authorising the cooperation and exchange of information between taxing authorities in each country to deal with international tax avoidance and evasion, especially through transfer pricing practices of transnational corporations.
Such large corporations have achieved a dominant position on the world economic scene and their intra-corporate transactions represent a very considerable proportion of world trade. The Brandt Commission on International Development Issues estimated in its report last year that between one-quarter and one-third of all world production is controlled by transnational corporations and that intra-firm international trade that is, international trade between transnational parent companies and their subsidiaries-makes up over 30 per cent of all world trade. In such a situation, it has become an increasingly common phenomenon for related companies operating in a group with centralised management, yet with individual members operating under different national tax laws, to manipulate the prices of intra-corporate transactions in goods and services, so that profits are maximised in countries where tax rates are lower and minimised where tax rates are higher.
Within transnational enterprises, many trans actions may take place between members of the group-for example, sales of goods, provision of services, the licensing of patents and know-how and the granting of loans. The transnational cor poration has the ability to manipulate these trans actions to its best advantage and, consequently, the prices charged for such transfers may differ considerably from the prices which would have been agreed upon between unrelated parties engaged in similar transactions. Such manipu lation can have a drastic effect on taxable income of group members and thus pose a considerable threat to national tax revenues. Consequently, taxing authorities in most countries have attempted to deal with the transfer pricing problem in various ways to give themselves power to reconstruct transactions between affiliated resi dent and foreign companies in order to determine a realistic level of taxable profit.
In Australia, the major weapon of the Taxation Office has been section 1 36 of the Income Tax Assessment Act which was initially derived from the 1 9 1 5 Finance (No. 2) Act of the United King dom. Broadly this section provides that, in the case of overseas controlled c( .npanies operating in Australia, the Commissioner of Taxation may determine a level of taxable profits which could be expected to arise if transactions between the

Income Tax (International Agreements) Bill

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 205

Australian company and associated foreign Japanese buyers. This Hong Kong company's

companies had been conducted at arm's length. only function was to buy bauxite from Australia

On the face of it, this section seems clearly to at, for example, 33 shillings a ton and then re-sell

define the Commissioner's powers in respect of it to Japan at 40 shillings a ton.

tax avoidance by foreign-controlled companies.

Yet, like so many other sections of the tax Act it No physical transactions took place in Hong

. has been rendered virtually meaningless by vari Kong. The Hong Kong company only recorded

ous court decisions, culminating in the now infa book entries while the bauxite was delivered di

mous decision by the High Court in the Common rectly from Australia to Japan. In this way profits

wealth Aluminium case last year.

which would normally accrue to Commonwealth

Before proceeding to examine this decision, I must point out that the deficiencies in section 1 36 have not been revealed just in the past few months. Indeed, it has been known from as far back as 1 942 that certain problems existed in relation to this section. In J 975 the Asprey Committee pointed out in its report precisely the defects which the High Court seized on in its recent decision. The Asprey Committee regarded the section as inadequate and detailed a number of ways in which a foreign-controlled company could avoid its operation. The Committee recom mended that the section be replaced with a new section based on reconstruction provisions in relevant double taxation agreements, such as those now before the House. Yet, as with so many other worthwhile recommendations by the Committee, the Government has ignored its findings on trans fer pricing and taken no action whatsoever over the past five years to meet the expected conse quences of court decisions. The Opposition has re

Aluminium in Australia and be taxed accordingly accrued instead in Hong Kong, where they were taxed at low rates, and the proceeds were split between the partners in the Hong Kong company. Commonwealth Aluminium claimed that its as sessable income for the years 1 967 to 1971 was ap proximately $6.7m. The Commissioner of Taxation, however, argued that the company was controlled by its overseas parents, RTZ and Kaiser, and that its business was conducted according to the wishes of these companies. The High Court, amazingly, found that despite its almost total foreign ownership, the company was not foreign controlled. Instead, it held that the taxpaying company itself, not its shareholders, controlled the company's business and thus it was not foreign controlled. The High Court also held that, because a majority of directors at the time relevant decisions were made comprised Australian residents, the company was not controlled by non-residents.

peatedly called for substantial revisions to section 1 36 over the last two years but, again, these warn ings have fallen on deaf ears.

These decisions defy reality. It is surely absol utely absurd to argue that because of the impo sition of a resident holding company controlled by

Even after the High Court confirmed our worst Australian directors-directors who clearly act in

fears, the Treasurer has still not announced any the best interests of the foreign owners-section

plans to redraft the section. He seems to be 1 36 is held not to apply and the company can

placing his hopes-rather vainly in our view, escape paying its fair level of tax. In this case

given the attitudes of the courts-on the new anti almost $3.5m tax revenue was involved and lost.

avoidance section of the Act to overcome the Only one High Court judge, Mr Justice Murphy,

deficiencies in section 1 36. The most recent case attempted to look at the reality of the situation.

involved the Commonwealth Aluminium Corpor He took a broad definition of control by non

ation, a resident company which was in the busi residents, finding clearly that 'the taxpayer's busi

ness of mining and selling bauxite. Common ness is part of a transnational corporation, and is

wealth Aluminium was wholly owned by another controlled by transnational corporations which

resident company, Comalco, which in turn was 45 are non-residents of Australia'. Unfortunately,

per cent owned by Kaiser Aluminium of the this line of reasoning was lost on his colleagues.

United States and 45 per cent owned by Conzinc Hot on the heels of the Commonwealth Alu

Riotinto of Australia. CRA, in turn, was almost minium case are new revelations of transfer

wholly owned by RTZ, a British company. By any pricing practices by another transnational

normal standards, therefore, Commonwealth corporation-this time by Swiss Aluminium

Aluminimum was a foreign-owned and controlled Australia Ltd, a major partner in the Gove ven

company. Commonwealth Aluminium contrac ture in the Northern Territory. According to re

ted to sell bauxite to certain Japanese buyers. The ports, over a period of eight years the company

sale was, however, carried out through an inter recorded a total trading surplus of over $ 1 22m but

posed company in Hong Kong which was jointly paid only negligible income tax. Its minority parl

owned by Commonwealth Aluminium and the ner in the venture, Gove Alumina, paid $5.72m in

1 206 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Income Tax (International Agreements) Bill

tax in 1 979-80 alone on its pre-tax earnings of double taxation agreement, including Article 9 re

$ 1 U rn.

lating to transfer pricing, but the companies in

These results seem extraordinary and even more so in the light of allegations by the Government of Iceland that Swiss Aluminium's parent company understated the profits from its Icelan dic smelter by $US47.5m over seven years due to transfer pricing transactions involving purchases of bauxite from Australia. These transactions involved increases in the prices of bauxite at sea by over 50 per cent. Apparently Swiss Aluminium's tax record is under investigation by the Australian Taxation Office but, given the past record of the courts, there is little likelihood of successful action against the company to recover any tax avoided by transfer pricing. These examples more than ever stress the absolute necessity for effective powers to be granted to the Commissioner to pre vent such abuses of transnational power. As things now stand, there is ample scope for such corporations to structute their affairs in such a way that the Commissioner of Taxation has no re course at all to reconstruct the profits derived in Australia.
A number of potential solutions exist. Section 1 36 could be redrafted, firstly, to ensure that a company will not be excluded solely because it has a majority of Australian directors where effec tive control in fact rests with foreigners; secondly, to broaden the defiition of a foreign controlled company to explicity include the interposing of resident holding companies, and thirdly, to give the Commissioner of Taxation explicit guidelines, such as the use of the 'arm's length' principle, to determine the actual level of taxable income. Ad ditionally, a guide could be taken from Article 9 of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development's Model Double Tax Agree ment 1 977, which is designed to overcome these problems. Australia uses such an article in this or

volved were able to indulge in transfer pricing by interposing another company in a non-treaty country-in this case Hong Kong-so that the provisions of the double tax agreements were avoided. It is quite clear from that example that we cannot rely simply on bilateral double tax agreements to overcome the problem of transfer pricing. We must back that up by provisions in our national legislation which are effective against the operations of transfer pricing. In other words we must introduce a much more effective section 1 36. However, that is not to say that the double taxation agreements, including Article 9 relating to transfer pricing, are of no use at all, even in the case where resort might be had to abuse of third countries to try to avoid the provisions of that Article. The inclusion of such an article in the agreement also enables co-operation by the treaty's governments in ascertaining information relevant to the transaction. Without that information and co-operation by governments it may be difficult or impossible for the tax authorities to enforce the legislation. So they have a very sub stantial relevance indeed in that regard.
To this point I have dealt primarily with problems involving the taxation of income originating in Australia which accrues to non-residents. I now propose to examine briefly the second side of the income tax laws relating to international trans actions, and that is the taxing of foreign source income which accrues to Australian residents. As I have shown, our tax laws relating to the taxation of non-residents are faulty and rife for abuse, so it is also possible to show that the sections of the tax Act dealing with foreign income of residents are just as faulty and just as open to abuse by smart operators wanting to avoid their fair share of the tax burden.

similar form in all of its double tax agreements, in This comes about because two specific pro

cluding those before the House. Because of the visions of the Act-section 23(q) and 46-

provisions of the Income Tax (International between them operate to exclude a very large part

Agreements) Act, this would prevail over the or of foreign income of Australian residents from

dinary provisions of the Act. However, the use of any tax at all. Under section 23(q) residents are

this section would be limited to treaty countries, exempt from Australian tax on foreign source in

since it does not preclude the need for swift action come provided that the income is not exempt

to introduce a more effective alternative to sec from tax in the country in which it is derived. This

tion 1 36.

is so even if the income is taxed overseas at mini

Indeed, the use of such an article in double tax agreements is not satisfactory alone because it

mal rates or if no tax is actually paid due to local concessions.

does not of itself stop transfer pricing since There are three exceptions to the operation of

companies need only trade through a non-treaty section 23 (q) , all giving a credit for foreign tax

country in order to avoid tax by this device. We paid. Firstly, foreign dividends are taxed in

saw this perfectly illustrated by the Common Australia, Section 46, however, allows companies

wealth Aluminium case, The two countries in a rebate of tax for any dividends received and

volved, Australia and Japan, are parties to a thereby exempts local companies from tax on

Income Tax (International Agreements) Bill

1 April 198 1 REPRESENTATIVES 1 207

foreign dividends even if both the dividends and

the profits out of which they taxed in the source country. In

aerfefepcta,idonalyrem. ndlt

viduals pay further tax on foreign dividends. In

come from Papua New Guinea is taxed in

Australia. Interest and royalties are taxed when

they are received from a country where tax is lim

ited by an international tax treaty.

There are a number of major defects with these provisions. The first is the equity consideration. Because of these provisions, two individuals or companies with the same total income can pay markedly different amounts of tax because one gets income from overseas where it is taxed only at low rates and the other gets income from within Australia where it is taxed at full local rates. Sec ondly, these provisions act as an incentive for the diversion of economic activity away from Australia to countries with lower levels of taxation. At a time when unemployment exists in Australia at record levels it is scandalous that our tax system encourages the export of jobs, which would otherwise go to Australian workers, to low tax areas overseas. Already, enough incentives are offered by these countries in the form of low wages, strike prohibitions, provision of infrastruc ture, tax holidays et cetera.

By far the greatest problem associated with sections 23 (q) and 46, is the encouragement which they give to tax avoidance schemes using companies set up in tax haven countries. Such countries provide favourable tax treatment by levying either no tax at all or very low rates of tax. Some notable tax havens are Bermuda, the Bahamas, the British Channel Islands, Hong Kong, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Nauru, the New Hebrides or Vanuatu, Panama and Switzerland. To make use of a tax haven it is necessary to set up some sort of business operation in the haven country and to divert income, which would otherwise have been taxable in Australia, through that operation. Once the income has been taxed in the haven at a low rate it can be brought back into Australia under the present law free of further tax. For example, a simple means of doing this would be for an importing business to set up a purchasing company in Hong Kong which sells goods to its Australian parent at a higher price. I n this way the most profit is made in Hong Kong rather than in Australia. In Hong Kong the tax rate on companies is 1 5 per cent to 1 7 per cent whereas in Australia it is 46 per cent. Therefore, it pays to make profits in Hong Kong rather than in Australia.

The use of such devices to divert profits is rife. In the past I have referred to an article in the Australian Financial Review in July 1 978 which

reported that about one-quarter of a sample of 1 20 of Australia's top companies have subsidiaries operating in tax haven countries. For example, Broken Hill Pty Co. Ltd made a $ 1 .2m profit in Hong Kong in the year in question. Pioneer Con crete Pty Ltd made a profit of $3.2m and Thiess Holdings Ltd made a profit of $ 1 .4m in the same country. There were many others. These are just a small sample of the amounts involved. I find it most disturbing that many of our top public companies are involved in this type of tax avoidance. Many large private companies are also reported to channel most of their big profits through tax havens although these are more difficult to confirm as private companies are less open to disclosure.
Since that report was published in the A us tralian Financial Review two and a half years ago our information has confirmed that the use of tax havens has increased markedly and that revenue losses are considerable. One source for believing that this is the case is the secretary of the Australian Taxpayers Association, Mr Eric Risstrom, who said publicly some time ago that tax losses through the use of tax havens and transfer pricing amount to some $2,000m per annum for Victoria alone. I checked that figure with Mr Risstrom recently. He assures me that he was correctly reported. He believes that figure to be based on excellent advice. If the figure is correct he says that since there is a predominance of company headquarters in Melbourne we could expect the figure for the whole of Australia to be $ 3 billion to $3.5 billion each year in tax losses through such devices as transfer pricing and the use of tax havens. Even if the figure were only half that amount it would still be an extraordinary tax loss to occur each year as a result of the allowing of such tax avoidance by the Government's not amending the tax laws to prevent it. There are provisions in the Income Tax Assessment Act which attempt to stop these abuses but their effec tivenesses is clearly dubious. These sections are section 1 36, to which I have already referred and sections 38 to 43. These sections give the Commissioner of Taxation power to reconstruct deal ings between a local company and a foreign company which are designed to depress Australian profits. Section 3 1 deals with the purchase of trading stock not at arm's length. Much more serious problems for tax avoiders arise from exchange controls. The Reserve Bank of Australia cannot grant authority to certain transactions with listed tax haven countries without the pro duction of a tax clearance certificate from the Commissioner of Taxation. The Commissioner will not grant a certificate unless he is satised_

1 208 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 198 1

Income Tax (lnternationalAgreements) Bill

that no tax avoidance implications are involved. business community reportedly complained of the

These provisions, however, seem to have been disincentive to Australian companies to invest

generally ineffective given the continued use of abroad, the inability of Australian companies to

tax hayes. The Mas,er Tax Guide, published by

h the prIntmg firm, CCH Australia Limited con

sciodnetrrsotlhraetgsuolamtlOnosf

the provisions of can be exploited

the if it

exc ange is necess

ary to do so to set up and maintain a tax haven

ompete on an equal footing with local companies m overseas markets, the difficulties in attracting
 Australians to take employment overseas the
wosening relations with developing natio s as their development oriented tax incentives were

structure. The same publication points out the de offset by higher Australian tax and the reduced

fects in section 1 36 which I have already Australian employment because of a fall in

mentioned.

exports to firms operating overseas . None of these

The Asprey Committee realised that new

measures were clearly necessary to stop tax avoid

 ance through tax haven operations. It recom

tmaexncdreeddi.tthsesointtrhoadtuacltliofnoroeigna

system source

of foreign income of

?  Australian residents would be subject to Aus
tralin tax wit the prov sion of a credit for any
foreign tax pmd on that mcome. In this way, no
a vantges would accrue from setting up oper atlOns m tax haven countries and all taxpayers

would be treated equally regardless of their source

of income. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) ack

nowledged these facts and the tax avoidance

problem when, on 8 June 1 978, he announced the

Government's intention to introduce a system of

 taxing Australian residents on their foreign source

income a ong He descrbed

the the

eliXlestsm. regcmoixmtuernedoefdebxyemApsptiroenys.

and credits as a hotch potch. He said that the

Government:

. . . considers that such outdated and inconsistent rules cannot be retained. The fact that major elements of the foreign source incomes of Australians are not taxable in Australia seriously prejudices the equity of the tax system.

arguments is sufficiently convincing to us to over

om th tax avoidance argument and the equity ImplIcatIOns of not having a foreign tax credit sys

tem. Why should companies which invest abroad

pay less tax than is paid by a comparable local

company simply because their profits are made

off-shore, and especially as is often the case when

those profits are further subsidised by the use of

cheap foreign labour. Far from creating jobs in

 lbiclI.atyl

export t at

industries, Australian

there jobs

is a distinct possi may be lost by

compames taking their operations overseas purely

becuse of tax concessions provided by the Aus

tralIan Government. Generous concessions to

ImetIalplyt

the first $ 1 0,000 proposed by the

of foreign Treasurer

income in June

were 1978

but even this was not regarded as satisfactory.

Not everyone would agree that Australian tax revenue should be forgone to encourage indus
rialistion in Asia, especially with the problems it
IS posmg for the local industry. If such an effect were demed desirable, it could be had through tax sparmg provisions, as is the case in the current

These were fine sentiments but, like so many other of the Treasurer's initiatives, they never got off the ground. On 25 October 1 978 the Treasurer announced that because of a large number of sub misions from a significant spectrum of the Aus

tax agreement with Malaysia. This is preferable to a blanket exemption with its tax avoidance implications. It is imperative, in our view, that some form of foreign tax credit system be introduced as quickly as possible to stop the current abuses.

tralian business community, the Government had decided not to proceed with the measures. In a few months the Treasurer backed down completely on what he said was a necessary change to overcome the mixture of exemptions and credits which he described as a hotch potch and to over come the tax avoidance which resulted from that hotch potch. This is yet another example of the Government's capitulation in the face of con certed lobbying by powerful vested interests, as in the case of the so-called newsboy's tax and the tax crackdown on trusts. It is no wonder that the business community lobbied hard against these proposals considering the unfair tax advantage which it stood to lose.
None of the arguments against the scheme

The provisions of our tax laws which have international relevance are unfortunately complex because they attempt to deal with areas such as foreign source income and the income of non residents over which Australia does not have com
 plete taxing authority. In some cases this com
plexity may lead to double taxation f the same income, which treaties such as those currently before the House attempt to offset. Despite the complexities, however, it is urgently necessary that the international aspects of our tax laws be
b given a thorough overhaul. As I have shown these
provisions have been blatantly abused y the smart money men as yet another avenue for the wpoesainltghya tsotiallvohiedavthieerirtfaaxirbsuhradreenoof ntatxhees ' vtahsutsmima

mentioned the tax avoidance implications. The jority of taxpayers. The Government, yet again, is

Income Tax (International Agreements) Bill

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 209

unwilling to take the necessary action to put an end to these abuses once and for all
The Government has had five years since the Asprey recommendation were published to do something in this area but, apart from a lot of hot air and wishful thinking, nothing has been forthcoming. It has been too beholden to vested interest groups to take any positive action. This Government seems content to watch tax avoidance continue its dramatic growth. The Labor Party has consistently put forward positive policies to overcome the shortcomings I have mentioned and it seems that only a Labor government would have the necessary resolve to rid our so ciety of the cankerous growth of tax avoidance once and for all.
Mr LUSHER (Hume) (9.2)- We have lis tened for 30 minutes-a full 30 minutes-to a harangue from the Opposition's Treasury spokes man, the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mf Willis) . Anybody listening to the honourable member would believe that tax avoidance started on 1 1 November 1 975. The honourable member would have the House and the public believe that in the three years in which Labor was in government there was no such thing as a tax avoidance industry. It just strikes me as being absolutely be yond the bounds of reality that he expects people to believe that.
The honourable member made reference to the fact that companies such as the Broken HilI Pty Co. Ltd, Thiess and Pioneer Concrete actually earn income in places like Hong Kong. They earn income in such places because they have operations there. But the honourable member did not tell us about that. Neither does he tell us that Australian companies are earning money and paying tax in Great Britain, the United States of America and other countries around the world. They are paying tax at the rates imposed in those countries. I think it is a bit beyond the pale for the honour able member for Gellibrand to spend 30 minutes talking about tax avoidance by companies and tax avoidance in general when the same situation existed between 1 972 and 1 975 and the Labor Government, if it had so desired, had a capacity to do something about this problem.
The Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill provides for the bringing into force of comprehensive double tax arrangements with Malaysia and Sweden. The arrangements deal with income which flows between Australia and those other two countries. In general terms, double tax agreements have two functions. They are intended to eliminate international double taxation and they are designed to prevent fiscal

evasion. Each of the two agreements which the House is considering at the moment under this legislation accords in essential respects with the position that Australian governments have taken over the years in relation to double tax agreements. They provide for the country of source to limit its with holdings tax on dividends. Australia is agreeing to reduce withholding tax from 30 per cent to 1 5 per cent.
Both agreements also specify a limit on the other country's tax on interest as well as on royal ties paid to residents in the other country under the agreement. In addition, both agreements con tain measures for the formal relief of double taxation of income that may be taxed by both countries. The country of residence of the taxpayer is obliged to provide the necessary relief. Australian residents' income, in respect of which a limit is imposed by the agreements-that is tax, interest and royaltieswill be taxed in Australia with credit being allowed for the tax of the country of source.
The main features of the arrangements with the two countries are as follows. Business profits, if derived by a resident of one country from a branch or other establishment in the other country, may be taxed in the latter country, other wise they are to be taxed only in the country of residence. Dividends, interest and royalties will be subject to tax in the country of source, but there is a general limit on the tax that that country may charge on such income flowing to residents of the other country. Income from real property is tax able in full in the country in which the land is situ ated. Profits from international operations of ships and aircraft will be taxed only in the country of residence of the operator. Income from personal services, as far as Malaysia is concerned, will generally be taxable in the country where the services are performed. Income from independent personal services in the case of Sweden will be taxed only in the country of residence of the re cipient unless the income is attributable to a fixed base of the recipient in the other country. Income from dependent personal servives as far as Sweden is concerned-for instance, employees' remuneration-would generally be taxable in the country where the services are performed.
Government officials such as diplomats and trade commissioners are to be taxed by their home country. Directors' fees will generally be taxed in the country of residence of the paying company. Income derived by public entertainers from their activities as such is to be taxed by the country in which the activities take place. I would just men tion in passing that that means income from tours ofgroups such as ABBA will be taxed in Australia

1 2 1 0 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Income Tax (International Agreements) Bill

under this agreement. I take it that both the Min determining the rate of Swedish tax on taxable in

ister for Industrial Relations (Mr Peacock) and come, by exempting that other income from

the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Swedish tax. In the case of a Swedish company

Hodgman) have a particular interest in the activi which owns shares in an Australian company,

ties of Mr Bjorn Borg, one for perhaps more other than a company that is largely an invest

reasons than the other.

ment company, dividends paid to the Swedish

Mr Peacock-You mean me, of course.

company will be exempt from Swedish tax on the same basis as if the two companies had been resi

Mr LUSHER-Yes, of course. I am referring dents of Sweden.

to those major tours such as the one recently The Government- -and the National Country

organised with the assistance of people with Party in particular--regards these Bills as being

whom the Minister may have been acquainted. If Bills which will extend, in a responsible fashion,

Bjorn Borg had not been a resident of Monaco, his Australia's financial and fiscal relationships with

income in Australia would have been taxable and other countries in the international sphere. We

this country would have received a little more welcome the entering into of these arrangements

revenue.

because they will provide for more definite and

more specific arrangements between Australia Pensions and annuities will generally be taxed and other countries. J support the Bill before the

only in the country of residence of the recipient. House.

Remuneration derived by teachers and professors for teaching or research during visits of up to two years' duration will be exempt from tax in the country visited, provided it is subject to tax in the country of residence. A student resident will be exempt from tax in the country visited in respect of payments made from abroad for the purposes of his or her maintenance or education. Dual resi dents of both countries are, according to specified criteria, to be treated for the purposes of the agreement as being residents of only one country. The arrangements also provide for an exchange of information and consultation between the taxation authorities of each of the two countries.

Mr HOWE (Batman) (9. 1 1 ) -The honour able member for Burne (Mr Lusher) suggested that perhaps the Labor Government of 1 972 to J 975 might have acted on some of the matters that the ' shadow Treasurer, the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) , mentioned. I think one ought to recognise-certainly the honourable member for Hume ought to recognise--that there has been an explosion in tax evasion in the past five years. According to the Commissioner of Taxation, in terms of figures re leased last year, the level of tax avoidance since 1 975 is 20 times what it was at that time. That is one of the reasons why the Opposition has consist

There is also provision for double taxation re lief which will be allowed by the country of resi dence in respect of income tax in the other country. In the case of Australia, double taxation relief will be effected by allowance of credit

ently tried to get the Government to take much more seriously the issue of tax avoidance which produces such terrible inequity in the tax system. It produces an unfairness in the tax system which discriminates against low income people.

against Australian tax for the other country's tax The Bill before the House will provide legislat

on interest and royalties, where that tax is subject ive authority for the entering into force of com

to a limit expressed in the relevant agreement, and prehensive double taxation agreements between

on dividends received by individuals--dividends Australia and Malaysia and Australia and

received by Australian companies from Malaysia Sweden, respectively. Double taxation agree

and Sweden and all other categories of taxed in ments have two principal functions, firstly, the

come received by Australian residents from those elimination of international double taxation and,

countries being freed from Australian tax by Aus secondly, the prevention of fiscal evasion. This

tralian tax law. Australia wiII also, in the case of Bill concerns itself primarily with the first

Malaysia, grant a 'tax sparing' credit for objective-that is, the elimination of double

Malaysian tax forgone under incentive legislation. taxation -but particularly in terms of the

In Malaysia, the arrangement broadly will be car exchange of information it will have some bearing

ried out by allowance of credit against Malaysian on the second objective. Under the agreements set

tax for the Australian tax on income derived by out in the Bill, Australia is to reduce withholding

residents of Malaysia from sources in Australia. In tax on dividends flowing to the other country

Sweden the arrangement will be generally by al from 30 per cent to 1 5 per cent of the amount of

lowance of credit against Swedish tax for the Aus the dividends. Corresponding legislation has been

tralian tax on dividends, interest and royalties passed in Malaysia and Sweden to set similar

and, while taking other income into account in limits in the withholding of dividends. Secondly,

Income Tax (International Agreements) Bill

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 1 1

both agreements specify a limit on each country's tax on interest and royalties paid to the residents of the other. It is noted in the second reading speech that Malaysia provides exemptions from tax in interest on royalties. In this legislation Australia is agreeing not to tax the revenue for gone by the Malaysian Government-that is, as a tax sparing measure-and is to tax Australian re cipients of relevant interest and royalties, and allow credit against its tax, as if the Malaysian tax of 1 0 per cent of the interest on royalties has been paid. I n the case of Sweden, the tax on the country of source is to be limited to 1 0 per cent for both interest and royalties.
[t would appear that this Bill and the double taxation agreements entered into by Australia with 'Sweden and with Malaysia have little in them that is likely to prevent fiscal evasion-that is, international tax avoidance-and therefore the problem to which J wish to devote the major part of my time in this speech is that problem. It is be coming more important as a consequence of the growing internationalisation of economic activi ties, including the growth of transnational corporations which are increasingly important in international trade. According to the United Nations, intra-corporate transactions-that is transactions between related firms-now represent a consider able proportion of world trade. Approximately 46 per cent of imports to the United States in 1 974 and 50 per cent of exports in 1 970 were similarly affected. The data available indicates that 29 per cent of Swedish exports in 1 975, 30 per cent of United Kingdom exports in 1 973 and 50 per cent of Canadian exports in 1 9 7 1 were on an intra corporate basis. The Australian Treasury estimated that, in 1 97 1 , above one-third of total Australian imports were intra-corporate.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development in its 1 979 report on transfer pricing and multinational enterprises emphasised some of the implications of this interconnected ness. The report reads:
In a multinational enterprise many transactions normally take place between members of the group and sales of goods, the provision of services, the licensing of patents and know how, the granting of loans and so on. The prices charged for such transfers do not necessarily represent a result of the free play of market fees, but may for a number of reasons and because the MNE is in a position to adopt whatever principle is convenient to it as a group, diverge considerably from the prices which would have been agreed upon between unrelated parties engaged in the same or similar transactions under the same andsimilar conditions in the open market.
The scale of these intra-corporate transactions clearly gives tremendous scope for the manipu lation of prices with the resultant effect on profits and hence on both taxable income and national income. Underpricing of exports will reduce the

profits of the exporting company and its taxable income, as well as reducing the foreign exchange income to the exporting country. Conversely, the over-pricing of imports will increase the import bill of the country concerned in terms of foreign exchange, and reduce the profits of the importing country and hence its taxable income. This trans fer pricing can affect not only profits and taxable capacity but also the balance of payments and hence the real income of entire countries.
There have been several examples which have recently been given publicity of transfer pricing arrangements involving transnational corporations in the aluminium industry. The most publicised case was that involving the Commonwealth Aluminium company, a subsidiary of Con zinc Riotinto of Australia Ltd and Kaiser Alu minium and Chemical Corporation, and in turn a subsidiary of Rio Tinto Zinc Corporation Ltd of the United Kingdom which, in the period 1966 to 1 97 1 , shipped bauxite from Weipa to Japan to two Japanese companies although it was sold to a Hong Kong subsidiary.
This subsidiary, Coma1co Bauxite (HK) Ltd was intended to do and did little except by way of book entries. There was no physical delivery to it. It simply purchased the bauxite from the tax payer, forexample, at 33 shillings per ton and sold it to the Japanese companies at 40 shillings per ton. The reason for this measure was explained in an internal Comalco memorandum:
I explained to Mr Shimizu that we had chosen Hong Kong as the location as this would give the maximum tax advantage over the dividends they would draw from the Sales Company.
Similarly, there has also been some publicity given to the suspicions held by the Government of Iceland that the Alusuisse organisation has been diverting huge profits from Iceland through over pricing of alumina from Australia. On 1 6 December 1 980, the Minister for Industry and Commerce in Iceland called a Press conference to announce startling findings that his ministry had compiled concerning sales of bauxite from Australian Alusuisse controlled mines to its subsidiary in Iceland. The Minister's statement reads:
The Minister has since June studied the pricing of alumina to ISAL.
That is the subsidiary company in Iceland:
The result of this study shows that the price of imported alumina is much higher than one would normally expect in view of the export price for alumina from Australia. When comparing these two prices on an equivalent basis (FOB Gove Australia) between January 1 974 and June 1 980 it appears that the alumina price increased at sea 54.1 per cent and in total by $47.5m of the exchange rates prevailing each year. For comparison purposes, the total payment made by ISAC for electricity generation was $3 1 m for the same period.

1212 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Income Tax (International Agreements) Bill

Clearly, this situation would not be in the best interests of either Australia or Iceland. Whilst this is only one example of an industry in which a problem exists, it would appear that the under payment of tax may be a characteristic of the mining industry as a whole. The Fitzgerald report of 1974 concluded:
The Australian Government did not manage to break even in the budgeting give and take with the mineral section as a whole, let alotie derive a significant net return from the industry's prosperity.
What, then, could the Australian Government do to prevent the loss of income as a result of transfer pricing and other means used to reduce taxation? The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development has emphasised the need to ensure that prices are determined on the basis of the arm's length principle. A number of methods exist for estimating arm's length prices. Firstly, there is the comparative uncontrolled price method. The best evidence of an applicable arm's length price is the price paid in transactions between the tax payer and unrelated buyers and sellers for the same goods and services under circumstances similar to those existing between the taxpayer and its related company. However, this comparison may not be readily available due to the very high degree of vertical integration in a number of industries and perhaps the lack of comparable mar kets. Secondly, there is the resale price method. This method applies where goods are sold by one affiliate to another and this is followed by resale to an unrelated party. The resale price method seeks to move from the final selling price and subtract the costs and appropriate profit markup to come up with a more realistic price. The third method suggested by the OECD is a cost plus method where an appropriate mock-up, expressed as a percentage of cost, is added to the manufacturing cost.
Whatever method is adopted, there appear to be two central problems: Firstly, the problem of getting access to all the information necessary to make an effective assessment of a company's income and, secondly, the problem of making any effective assessment stick in the courts. As the honourable member for Gellibrand suggested, the process of revision of legislation appears to be painfully slow. The Treasury's economic paper of May 1 972 on overseas investment in Australia suggests that, whilst no information is available about the extent of profit shifting arrangements, it appears that the need for the Commissioner of Taxation to consider the application of section 1 36 has increased since the mid-1 960s.
I want to speakbriefly about the Asprey report, which was referred to by the honourable member

for Gellibrand, particularly about the comments of the Asprey report on section 1 36, which it appears the present Government is now consider" ing revising. Having summarised section 1 36, the Committee makes the following comment:

In the Committee's view, however, the section does not give the Commissioner adequate power.

A number of paragraphs then deal with the reasons for saying that. I draw the attention of members of the Government parties to paragraph 1 7.87 on page 268 of the report, where the precise circumstances that have arisen in the Commonwealth Aluminium case are discussed at some length by the Committee. The paragraph reads:

And here, too, section 1 36, which can apply to income de rived by a resident, is inadequate. The resident company will
be carrying on business in Australia, but in the deflated re ceipts situation described in paragraph 17.86 the Commissioner's power to substitute notional receipts in a non arm's length transaction is doubtful. Both in this situation and in tfie inflated cost one described in paragraph 17.85, the Commissioner may have no power to reconstruct because the
resident company does not come within any of the clauses of section 1 36 identifying the persons to whom the section may
apply. Clause (b) can be avoided if a majority of the shares is vested in residents, even though those shares carry only a small fraction of rights to dividends or distribution of capital and have no voting rights.

Further down the paragraph reads:

The control contemplated by clause (a), in the case of a

company, probably refers to director control. It may be in

ferred from judicial authorities on the meaning of central

management and control in the definition of residence !ation to a company that it will be enough to prevent the

ionpreer.

ation of clause (a) if a majority of the directors are Australian

residents.

That is, if a majority of directors are Australian residents, irrespective of where the real ownership and control of that company lies, section 1 36 may not apply. That view was put forward in 1 975 in the Asprcy report. The circumstances to which the Commonwealth Aluminium case applied re late to the late 1 960s. By 1981 we still have not managed to achieve a revision of a critical section which is resulting in the loss of tens of millions of dollars and may eventually result in the loss of hundreds of millions of dollars in terms of revenue. It seems to me to be unconscionable that a government which claims that it is on about fair taxation and which claims that it has a record in relation to tax avoidance really has not tackled even the most fundamental principles of dealing with problems in this area of international tax.

The honourablc member for Gellibrand referred to a number of other reforms which were suggested in that report and which might at least have provided a basis for consideration by this Government. One can only believe that what is certainly true of the N ational Party in Queensland-that it is totally behoven in a very

Income Tax (International Agreements) Bill

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 1 3

direct sense to the interests of these international companies, that it has been bought lock, stock and barrel-may well apply to the Government's operations as a whole. No one would suggest that these matters are simple ones. I certainly would not claim to have made a profound study of them. But it stands to reason that if the Australian economy is increasingly moving towards becoming a more open international economy, which many members of the Government parties would rec ommend, and if more and more of our wealth is dependent on foreign economic relaticns and, increasingly in relation to the mining industry, on transfers that will be occurring within the same companies, within related companies or within companies, as in the aluminium industry which formed together in extemely tight cartel or in terms of highly concentrated relationships, one is not in a situation in which the free market is applying and in which one can expect prices to be determined in any sense in response to a market situation. Indeed, that is an issue which is currently before the Prices Justification Tribunal.
If the Government does not permit an inquiry into aluminium prices it will be because the Government is not prepared to have exposed the pricing practices ofthose companies which moved some 1 5 years ago to suggesting that their prices ought to be determined on the basis of international producer prices and which, because that does not suit them any longer, as was suggested earlier today by the honourable member for Adelaide (Mr Hurford) , want to move back to a domestic price situation, presumably so that they can get higher prices and higher profits. For governments to get their share of the wealth generated by these great companies it is absolutely necessary for one to be in a position to determine the basis on which prices may be set. The problem of achieving some kind of measure of the real earnings and the real income of companies is quite central to the issue of international taxation.
Clearly, the principle of arm's length pricing is a very important and good principle, but the reality of situations in which companies are dealing with one another very often in an industry which is totally controlled, to all intents and purposes, by a small number of companies or even one company makes the principle of determining prices and income extremely difficult, to say nothing of a number of other problems with which we will be confronted if we want to take seriously this question of taxation within the international context. One of the present practices of companies is to charge out for the technology which they are importing into a country, to put a value on the technology imported into a country.

One can imagine that the practice will result in considerable reductions in the taxation that might be paid to taxation authorities. On what basis can one really make a fair determination of what the value of that technology which is being imported happens to be worth? The same would apply to intangibles such as research and development transfers which occur and which represent a charge.
This is an extremely complex area. It is an area that the Government is not into. It is an area that the Government ought to be into as a matter of great urgency. I fully support the remarks of the honourable member for Gellibrand that what we need is a comprehensive look at transfer pricing and international aspects of taxation so that we can determine a number of constructive proposals. One does not wish to be too hard on the Government in the sense that these problems are complex, but one regrets the fact that the Government suggcsts it has done a great deal about tax avoidance when it has not tackled this fundamen tal problem.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Bill (on motion by Mr Hodgman) read a third time.
COMMONWEALTH BANKS AMENDMENT BILL 1981 Second Reading
Debate resumed from 26 March, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr HAWKE (Wills) (9.32)-1 say at the out set on behalf of the Opposition that we do not oppose the Commonwealth Banks Amendment Bill 1981 . Therefore, I can be very brief in my re marks. The Bill represents the implementation of discussions and a negotiated agreement between the management of the Commonwealth Banking Corporation and the union of employees in that corporation, the Commonwealth Bank Officers Association. In that respect I refer very briefly to the words of the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in his second reading speech where he stated:

1 2 1 4 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Commonwealth Banks Amendment Bill

The nature o fthe proposed amendments has been discussed with the Commonwealth Banking Corporation and the Commonwealth Bank Officers Association and both parties fully accept the approach taken.
This represents the implementation of the policy of the Opposition, in that the way to deal properly with issues actually or potentially in dispute is that there should be negotiation between manage ment and the union of employees concerned. I would only make the comment in passing- -I do not want to be disputatious about it that the tragedy is that this approach has not been allowed to operate in respect to the major area of Commonwealth employment dealing with the same sort of issues that are covered by this amending Bill.
I also make the observation in support of our position on this Bill that we welcome the pro visions of clause 6 which removes a discrimination between the sexes. The current position is that the minimum and maximum retiring ages are 60 and 65 years for male officers and 55 and 60 years for female officers. Under the provisions of clause 6 there will be a minimum retiring age of 55 years and a maximum retiring age of 65 years for all officers of the Corporation. 1 need delay the House no longer. For all the reasons 1 have given the Opposition does not oppose this Bill.
Mr SPENDER (North Sydney) (9.35) -ln view of the Opposition's attitude to the Commonwealth Banks Amendment Bill 1981 , I think I can be almost as brief as the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) . 1 agree with him that clause 6 of the Bill is to be welcomed. The clause does put men and women upon an equal basis as to mini mum and maximum retirement ages. J think there are one or two other clauses of the Bill which should be referred to brielly because they improve the position of officers when they are faced with action taken by the Commonwealth Banking Cor poration against them which might affect their position or their emoluments. I refer to the action which has been taken in respect of section 1 02 of the Commonwealth Banks Act. There is now a right arbitrarily to retire an officer after he has reached retirement age; that is, the minimum re tirement age as specified in the existing Act. In place of that there is to be provision for grounds and for a right of appeal by an officer. No right of appeal existed beforehand and no grounds had to be made out against an officer.
Section 106 of the Act is to be amended in favour of officers. It will apply only to persons below the age of 55 years. As I read the section, it circumscribes somewhat the gounds on which action can be taken for retirement of an officer. Under proposed new section 1 08 of the Bill a right

of appeal is to be introduced which I think is most important not only for action taken under section 102, sub-section (2), to which J have already referred, but also to action taken under section 103, sub-section (2) , which is a provision that if no position is available for an officer the Corporation may retire him from the service. There is now to be a right of appeal against that kind of decision. J welcome the amendment as I am sure does the honourable member for Wills. 1 need detain the House no further. I commend the Bill to the House.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith. Motion (by Mr McVeigh) proposed:
That the Bill be now read a third time.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (9.38)-1 do not wish to delay the House for very long but certain matters which relate to the Commonwealth Banks Amendment Bill need to be touched upon. I feel that some remarks ought to be made without my unduly delaying the passage of this piece of legislation. The general approach of an employer taking unto himself the right to override the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission and to override the procedures which are associated with the arbitration system, does not help and cannot help industrial relations. It is a pity that the Government has embarked on this total course. Whilst this Bill, which is one of a series, is acceptable to the Opposition, the general principle of what could be considered a reason able industrial relations policy is totally obnoxious.
Question resolved in the affirmative. Bill read a third time.
ANTARCTIC MARINE LIVING RESOURCES CONSERVATION BILL 1981
Second Reading Debate resumed from 26 March, on motion by Mr McVeigh:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr BARRY JONES (Lalor) (9.40)-The Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Bill is a ratification and implementation of the Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources which was agreed to following an international conference held at Canberra from 7 to 20 May 1 980. Honourable members will be glad to know, J am sure, that the

Antarctic Marine Living Resources Bill

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 1 5

Convention was signed for Australia by the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) who I hope will be speaking later in the debate. The Convention which appears as a Schedule to the Bill has as its primary aim the conservation of Antarctic. marine living resources. The contract ing parties undertook to do this by:
Recognising the importance of safeguarding the environ ment and protecting the integrity of the ecosystem of the seas surrounding Antarctica; . . .
And, although this sounds somewhat inconsistent:
Considering that it is essential to increase knowledge of the Antarctic marine ecosystem and its components so as to be able to base decisions on harvesting on sound scientific
information; . . .
The Convention applies not only to the marine living resources, that is, fish, birds, seals, whales and crustaceans but also to the marine ecosystem, defined as the complex of relationships of Antarc tic marine living resources. Conservation, inciden tally, is also defined as including 'rational use'. The term 'rational use' however is not defined. The protected area is defined as the area south of the 'Antarctic convergence'-a line drawn on the map marking the natural boundary where the colder waters of the Southern Ocean meet the warmer, temperate oceans in the north. Between the 1 50th meridian of longitude east, that is, the line that runs through eastern Australia from Cape Howe to a mid point between Rockhamp ton and Mackay, the Antarctic convergence runs along the 60th parallel of latitude to the 50th mer idian west-almost half way round the globe. From the 50th meridian west the Antarctic convergencegoes due north from 60 degrees south to 50 degrees south, then runs east along the 50th parallel to the 30th meridian east. This variation covers the area in the South Atlantic Ocean across to a point almost due south of Durban in the east of South Africa.
Mr Les Johnson-Why don't you get the map incorporated in Hansard?
Mr BARRY JONES-I was going to suggest that. In the Victorian Parliament it was possible to have maps and charts incorporated in the Hansard report but unfortunately because of the rigours of producing a daily issue of Hansard, while it is possible to have tables of figures incorporated in our Hansard it is not possible to have maps and charts incorporated. One has to rely on language. At the 30th degree east the Ant arctic divergence goes due north again up to the 45th parallel, then runs due east along the 45th parallel to the 80th meridian-the mid point of the Indian Ocean due south of Sri Lanka. This last divergence, by the way, includes Australia's

Heard Island and McDonald Island in the Ant arctic convergence. At the 80th meridian the line runs due south to the 55th parallel, then due east along that line including the eastern part of the Indian Ocean and the area south of Western Australia, South Australia, Victoria and Tas mania along to the 1 50th meridian where it drops down to the 60th parallel-the point at which I began my description.
As I said, it is easy to follow on a map. It would have saved you a lot of mental anguish, Mr Deputy Speaker, if we could have a map incor porated in Hansard. One weakness of the Con' vention, which is incorporated in the Bill as a Schedule, is that it evades the question of whether the 200 mile or 370 kilometre exclusive economic zone-or EEZ-is applicable to the Antarctic continent. The concept of the Antarctic conver gence appears to override any EEZ claim. Article IV, paragraph 2 of the Convention states:
Nothing in this Convention and no acts or activities taking place while the present Convention is in force shall:
(a) Constitute a basis for asserting, supporting or denying a claim to territorial sovereignty in the Antarctic Treaty area or create any rights of sovereignty in the Antarctic Treaty area;
(b) be interpreted as a renunciation or diminution by any Contracting Party of, or as prejudicing, any right or claim or basis of claim to exercise coastal statejurisdic tion under international law within the area to which this Convention applies;
(c) be interpreted as prejudicing the position of any Con tracting Party as regards its recognition or non recognition of any such right, claim or basis of claim; . . ,
However, to add to the problem here, Article IX paragral1h 6 sub-paragraph (c) states:
If a member of the Commission , , .
That is to say, the contracting parties which join the Commission to be set up under the Conven tion which, of course, is referred to as the Sched ule to the Bill we are dealing with tonight-
within mnety days following the notification specified in sub paragraph (a), notifies the Commission that it is unable to accept the conservation measure, in whole or in part, the measure shall not, to the extent stated, be binding upon that Member of the Commission; . . .
In other words, if we want to opt out of it we simply say: 'Look, we don't regard ourselves as being bound. To the extent that we say that we do not regard ourselves as being bound, we do not have to be part of it'. Also, in my view, if we look at Article XII there is another part of a double veto. Article XII paragraph 1 states:
Decisions of the Commission on matters of substance shall be taken by consensus. The question of whether a matter is one ofsubstance shall be treated as a matter ofsubstance.
Mr Hodgman-As a matter of substance.

1 2 1 6 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 198 1

Antarctic Marine Living Resources Bill

Mr BARRY JONESRight, absolutely. Mr BARRY JONES-Of all the Australian

Then, as the Minister for the Capital Territory States, it is easily the best qualified. But the point

with his quick legal brain would note-that is not is that the area in which there is likely to be the

to imply, of course, that the Minister for Housing most serious infringement will be on the other side

and Construction (Mr McVeigh) who is at the of the Antarctic continent--

table is not taking any less keen interest in the legal problem-if we go on to read Article XII paragraph 2 we will see that it states:

Mr Hodgman-It was a unanimous choice of all the Treaty nations, as witnessed by the honour able member for Hawker, who was there.

Decisions on matters other than those referred to in para graph 1 above--
That is to say, the non-substantive matters-

Mr BARRY JONES-Absolutely, but that still does not resolve the question that I raise. If the headquarters are based on one side of the Ant

shall be taken by a simple majority of the Members of the arctic continent and the area with the overwhelm

Commission present and voting.

ing probability of contention is on the other side

If we refer to a procedure of voting by a majority with regard to non-substantive matters, that is, matters of procedure, the only implication that

of the Antarctic continent, I put it to honourable members that there will be some difficulties in implementation.

we can draw is that that reference to consensus in Mr Hodgman-Where would you put it?

Article XII paragraph I means that we must have a unanimous vote. Either we have that or it simply means that somebody can abstain and say: 'We don't propose to veto it but we don't particularly go along with it either'. It means that, although the terms of the Convention read very nicely, when we come to issues of substance it is difficult to get much joy out of the Convention. There is an irony in the evasion, of course, because a major reason for the increased interest in the possibility of exploiting the Antarctic waters has been the impact of the 200 mile EEZ proclaimed in European waters which has disturbed fishing rights which have been traditionally shared-for example, the German activities in the North and Baltic Seas and the Poles in the northern waters of Europe.
The second weakness is one of practical con trol. The headquarters of the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Re sources will be in Hobart. That is not something we oppose but it will be set up, I fear-I hope there is a reassurance to the contrary-with limited resources and limited personnel. The difficulty is that the major areas of contention seem certain to be on the other side of the South Pole in South Atlantic waters. If one looks at the map of the areainvolved and realises that the area that is likely to have the heaviest exploitation will be that area covered in the South Atlantic between the continent of South America and the continent of South Africa, it would be hard to think of a more difficult spot to be effectively supervised from than Hobart on the other side of the earth. I know that Tasmanians are amazingly gifted. It would seem to me that there are a number of technical problems.

Mr BARRY JONES-Clearly, there would need to be more than one base. I simply point out that, if it is to work properly, it will have to be very effectively manned.
The third point is, as I said earlier, that the double-veto provisions of the Convention make it easier for those nations which want to destroy its principles to do so. Fourthly, the potentially important issue of iceberg harvesting is excluded from the Convention. The definition in the Bill of 'living marine resource' obviously does not in clude the iceberg. Yet it seems clear also that ice bergs will be quite fundamental to the preser vation of the existing ecosystem. Paragraphs I , 2 and 3 of Article I and paragraph 1 of Article II always use the term 'a marine living resource'. Yet it would seem quite clear that, if the pack ice is to be seriously disturbed, it is not in a technical sense a disturbance of a marine living resource but it is fundamental to the survival of the marine living resource.
The fifth point which seems to me to be a fun damental weakness of the Treaty is that agreement on the preservation of krill has been relatively simple to achieve, although somewhat protracted in its execution, because krill plays a relatively minor role in our concept of a modern technological society and rapid economic growth. The adoption of this Convention, however desir able in itself, may create the false impression that unanimity can or will be reached about possible future resource exploitation of oil and other min erals. Since 1 959, Antarctica's only export has been scientific data. The continent, far bigger than Australia or the United States of America, has been under the nearest thing to a world government that the world has ever known. As Jon

Mr Jacobi-It was the best choice there was. Tinker wrote in the New Scientist of l 3 Sep

There is no question about that.

tember 1 979:

Antarctic Marine Living Resources Bill

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 1 7

Cynics would say . . . . that international idealism was fine so long as the typical person interested in Antarctica was a botanist studying the 'epontic' algae that grow on the
underside of pack ice. The cynics would add that as soon as

which would be a contradiction of the Conven tion's aim of allowing depleted whale populations to recover.

anything more valuable than epontic algae was discovered down there, internationalism would start to melt away like an

It is not quite clear what the total resource of

iceberg in the Red Sea.

krill is in the waters around the Antarctic. Calcu

One hundred million years ago, Antarctica was linked to Australia, Africa and South America and the' minerals found in those three continents will be found in abundance in Antarctica. Met allic minerals already identified in Antarctica in clude chromium, nickel, cobalt, copper, gold, sil ver, manganese, molybdenum, iron, titanium, platinum, lead, zinc, tin and uranium. It also seems overwhelmingly likely that there will be vast reserves of coal and deposits of oil and natu ral gas. Admittedly, for the present they are unec onomic to exploit, but what we need to consider is what will happen when those resources reach a

lations to date have put the standing stock at values of between 800 million and 5,000 million tonnes of krill. The International Institute for Environment and Development in its report stated that research on ground krill showed a high concentration of fluorine in its shell which may preclude its use in human food. Unconfirmed re ports suggest that West Germany, on the basis of its studies, has discounted krill as a food. We know that in Chile they are actually selling krill fingers, which would seem to me unlikely to dis place even the much despised fish fingers in an Australian context.

point of development. I am apprehensive that the unanimity that has been achieved as far as this Treaty is concerned will then appear to be not particularly relevant.

The International Institute for Environment and Development market survey concluded that three products were likely to be significant, namely, krill mince, krill protein concentrate and

We have only the vaguest idea of the mineral wealth of Antarctica and we are just as ignorant of the wealth of the surrounding seas. We know very little about the life cycle, breeding habits and the relative abundance of the living marine resources down there. But at the moment a number of nations are investigating these marine resources for the purpose of harvesting. Most interest has been attracted to krill. Krill are small prawn-like creatures which thrive in great abundance in the

krill meal. They show the most promise in com parison with products on the market now. Krill mince is used in soups, pie fillings, salads and to extend sausages and fish cakes. However, its use is limited by its strong flavour, which may be chari tably described as revolting, and by its relatively high price compared with other protein sources, such as soya beans and fish mince. It is estimated that krill could capture 1 0 per cent of the world protein market by 1 985.

extraordinarily nutrient-rich cold waters of the Krill are extremely important to a whole var

Southern Ocean.

iety of creatures. The whale is the most written

Mr Shipton-Crustacea.

about, but krill is important to a whole range of other species as well. The most reliable calcu

Mr BARRY JONES-Indeed, they are crus lations of the amount of krill that each predator

tacea. But they are no gourmet's delight. They are eats has been presented by Dr R. M. Laws of the

central to maintaining the ecological balance of British Antarctic Survey. The main predators are

the Antarctic because they feed on abundant phy whales; seals, mainly crab-eater seals; birds,

toplankton and in turn are fed on by many larger mainly Adelie penguins; squid; and fish. Dr Laws

animals. In particular, they form the staple food estimates that whales currently consume about 43

of whales. They are increasingly being recognised million tonnes of krill each year, seals about 64

as a potential source of protein for man; hence the million tonnes and birds between 1 5 and 20

need for a convention which controls man's ex million tonnes. Calculating the amount eaten by

ploitation in such a way as to be non squid is more difficult as the estimates can be

discriminatory between different nations and at made only from our limited knowledge of the

the same time to maintain the local ecosystem. Dr amount of squid that sperm whales eat and then

John Beddington of York University has stated assuming the size of the squid population from

that he regards the spirit of the Convention on that estimate. Dr Laws suggests that squid con

conservation as worthy but he is critical of its sume about 100 million tonnes of krill each year,

scientific approach. He argues that in particular it but he considers that not enough information is

does not take into account the fact that the great available even to guess how much fish consume.

est net annual increment in a population can be Adding up the totals for whales, seals, birds and

achieved only by removing its predators. In the squid gives an annual consumption of more than

case of krill that would mean killing whales, 200 million tonnes a year.

1 2 1 8 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Antarctic Marine Living Resources Bill

D r Laws has also calculated that before whaling commenced the baleen whales were consuming no less than 1 90 million tonnes a year. Thus, as a consequence of whaling, whales have ceased to be the principal consumers of krill. Among the mammals and birds at least, the crab eater seal, with an annual consumption of about 63 million tonnes seems to have taken over. As to the visible effect that the depletion of whales has had on other krill predators, Dr Laws found that crab-eater seals now mature sexually earlier than they used to. The numbers of fur seals, which were reduced to a mere few thousand as a result of hunting early this century, have also increased fas ter than would have been expected. Today there are at least 300,000 of them.
A number of honourable members wish to speak on this Bill, so I will bring my remarks to a close. I conclude by restating this warning. There has been a remarkable degree of international unanimity on the question of the development of the resources around the Antarctic. This has been so because the stakes have not been high enough. It is true that krill could be an enormously significant source of protein--it is also extraordi narily rich in vitamin Abut the stakes are not big enough to lead to the wholesale development and exploitation of the resources of the Antarctic. There is a very real danger that if, in the 1 980s, the enormous mineral wealth of the Antarctic is developed on a large scale, or indeed any attempt to develop it is made, all of the former agreements we have reached will not be worth the paper on which they are written. There will be an international scramble which will make the scramble for Africa in the nineteenth century or the great gold rushes of Klondike and Australia, also in that century, appear absolutely miserable by comparison. So it is an area where we have to move very carefully.
I am naturally very enthusiastic about the en couragement of research and development in Australia. This is one of the areas in which we ought to be increasing our miserably small budget for that purpose. We hope that the Convention will prove to be effective. I congratulate the officers of the Department of Science and Tech nology who have worked to bring it about. I hope that the Antarctic will always remain a zone of peace and that there will not be severe interna tional competition for it, but would point out that a number of very important questions need to be answered but have not been.
I conclude by referring to a question that the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) put to the then Minister for Foreign Affairs on 20 September 1 977. That question suggests the

extent to which we are in the dark. The honour able member asked:
( 1 ) Is the exterior limit to the Antarctic Territory at the edge of (a) the continental landmass or (b) the ice mass.
(2) Who owns unattached icebergs within (a) the terri torial sea, (b) the economic zone and (c) the high seas.
(3) Does it make any difference whether the territorial source of the iceberg, is, or is not, known.
(4) What aspects of international maritime law apply to the towing oficebergs.
(5) What are the potential international liabilities for any ecological or other damage due to the harvesting or transpor tating oficebergs.
The Minister answered:
The questions raised by the honourable member involve complex issues of law that in many respects are unsettled. It would therefore not be appropriate for me to canvass these legalproblems at this stage.
In other words, the answer of the brains trust at the Department of Foreign Affairs is: 'We do not know; there is no way of finding out; we are in the dark. ' We are still in the dark. I hope that it will all work out for the best but I think that on the whole we have not been well-informed about de velopments in Antarctica and I hope that in the next few years we will see an enormous increase in the amount of information that is available to the Parliament so we can discuss this area, which is physically so close to us and is obviously so central to our future and probably also to that of the civi lised world.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) ( l 0.5)-At the outset, might I express my gratitude to the Minister in charge of the Bill, the Acting Minister for Science and Technology (Mr McVeigh) , and the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) for permitting me to make a contribution to this debate because it concerns a subject with which I have been completely fasci nated for more than a decade. I cast my mind back to 1 97 1 when, as a very junior member of the Legislative Council of the Parliament of Tas mania, I dared to put forward the suggestion that Australia, and preferably Tasmania, might at some future time be the logical headquarters of an international body involved in the management of the resources of the Antarctic.
Today is most historic for Australia, for this Parliament and for those who see the Antarctic as an area which must be properly managed by man kind if mankind is to ensure that in the twenty first century this unique and superb continent, and its resources, are utilised for the benefit of the world. What pride we must have as Australians that today, with the passing of this Bill in the House of Representatives, and subsequently in the Senate, Australia will become the first nation to ratify the new Convention on the Conservation

Antarctic Marine Living Resources Bill

April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 2 1 9

of Antarctic MarineLiving Resources, a conven a n international organisation. Honourable

tion which was finally hammered out at a confer members can imagine my pride and the pride of

ence in Canberra in May of last year. It was signed all Tasmanians, as loyal Australians, that Article

by some 1 5 nations and, for the record, may I XIII ( 1 ) of the Convention provides:

simply read into Hansard their names, because I

The headquarters of the Commission shall be established at

do not think that they have yet been recorded Hobart, Tasmania, Australia.

therein. They are: Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Chile, the Federal Republic of Germany, France, the German Democratic Republic, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, the Republic of South Africa, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, the United Kingdom and the United States of America.

What is the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, and what will it do? The international commission which will be responsible for the management and the organisation relating to the observation of the Convention will comprise each of the nations which have already signed the Convention. It will

It must also be a very proud night for the also, as a matter of interest, include other nations

honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) be which determine that they wish to accede to the

cause he was one of four Australian parliamen provisions of the Convention, It will be the world

tarians, and if I may say so the longest-serving headquarters of a commission which will be

Australian parliamentarian, to take part in the responsible for the management of this Conven

conferences which brought this Convention to a tion. It is significant that whilst the Antarctic

conclusion. The honourable member was one of Treaty consultative nations are all members of

our parliamentary representatives at the 1 976 this Convention and all have the right to ratify it,

conference. He was there again last year and, if I others which are not Antarctic Treaty consulta

might say so, I am sure that his colleagues, tive nations already have been included. I refer

Senator Sibraa, Senator Puplick and the former specifically to the Federal Republic of Germany

honourable member for La Trobe, Mr Marshall and the German Democratic Republic. Of course,

Baillieu, would acknowledge that he was in all there were representatives of the European Econ

senses the leader of that delegation. He actually omic Community at the conference. I make the

signed the convention. That is a little bit of history prediction that upon ratification by eight Treaty

of which I am proud, of which the Parliament nations, which brings this Convention into effect

should be proud and of which I believe the under international law, we will see a number of

honourable member for Hawker is rightly proud. countriesparticularly Third World countries

It was a magnificent contribution.

which will wish to participate in the management

While I am paying tribute, could I please pay tribute to, firstly, the former Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Honourable Andrew Peacock, who

and utilisation of the resources of the Antarctic. I draw particular attention to the words set out in Article I I (2) of the Convention. It states:

took a very keen and, if I might say so, extensive For the purposes of this Convention, the term 'conser interest in this proposal. Ambassador John vation' includes rational use.

Rowland, who is presently our Ambassador in Whilst it is correct, as my colleague the honour

France was, I believe, the first Australian diplo able member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) pointed

mat to become directly involved and did initial out, that the basis of the Convention is the conser

work. Ambassador Keith Brennan who is cur vation of resources, let it not be forgotten that, if

rently our Ambassador to Switzerland and an it will mean the saving of mankind from star

acknowledged world expert on the law of the sea vation and deprivation, then that rational use of

and Antarctic matters, really performed the task those resources is included in this Convention. I

of a Goliath. Last, but by no means least, Mr John say here and now that in a real world the ideals to

Ryan, the Deputy Head of the Department of which we aspire may not always be achieveable. I

Foreign Affairs, actually chaired the final confer know there are people in this country and in other

ence last year which led to the signing of the Con parts of the world who would love to see the Ant

vention. I was fortunate to be present as an ob arctic left completely alone, almost to the stage of

server on the final day. The import of the saying that man should keep away from this most

Convention and what it would mean were be a u t i f u l , m a j e s t i c  y e t I s h o u l d add

brought home to me very forcibly during the sign resource-richcontinent.

ing ceremony, which took place here in Canberra in May of last year.

To give an example of the degree of sensitivity of the Antarctic, and of those who love the Ant

This is a most historic occasion because the arctic, I will tell a very short story of a friend of

ratification of the Convention brings to Australia, mine who recently visited the Antarctic. At a

for the very first time, the world headquarters of basenot an Australian base-he found, to his

1 220 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Antarctic Marine Living Resources Bill

horror, two small budgerigars in a bird cage. Be cause of what he said, the two budgerigars were destroyed immediately. He, as an eminent scien tist, pointed out to me that had those two birds, which had been taken there in a cage by one of the expeditions passing through Australia, had New castle disease, for example, they could have wiped out the entire bird population of the Antarctic. The eco-system of the Antarctic is so sensitive and so prone to reaction of a substantial nature from any interference, that man has even to tread care fully in that area. Without going into the details, we know that the simple movement of a foot near the wrong part of a precipice can immediately change the entire system.
Australia's involvement in the Antarctic goes back to 1 8 1 0 with the discovery of Macquarie Island. It is often forgotten that that is a part of Tasmania, although it is also a part of the sub Antarctic. From 1 8 1 0 to 1981 shows that our nation has had a substantial involvement in the area. I mention in passing that the acceptance of this Convention in no way interferes with national sovereignty or claims to territorial rights in the Antarctic. The Convention very carefully ensured that that sort of squabble did not eventuate.
As others wish to contribute to this debate I will bring my remarks to a conclusion. It is the first time that Australia has been the depository nation and the host nation providing the headquarters for any international organisation. The unani mous choice of all the delegates was that the most ideal and appropriate place to site the world head quarters was Hobart. This gives me great pride and it gives great pride to many people who worked very hard to ready this proposition for discussion and, it was to be hoped, for acceptance. The fact that the scientific committee will also be meeting normally in Hobart further enhances the activities of the Commission because that scien tific committee will form the nucleus for forums for discussion involving the world's leading scien tists on the question of the management of the Antarctic.
At this time. I want to pay a tribute to a former Minister for Science, Senator Jim Webster, the present Minister for Science and Technology (Mr Thomson) , the present Acting Minister for Sci ence and Technology, who is the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) and who is now present in the chamber, and to the De partment of Science and Technology. The De partment has opened my eyes and the eyes of many Australians to the calibre of people we have in this'country, whose status is such that their rec ognition by Australians is infinitesimally low when compared to their recognition in other parts

of the world. I refer, for example, to Dr Wild of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Re search Organisation. That he has recently received a gold medal and is a member of the Royal Society is something that I do not think one out of 1 0,000 Australians would know. Y et, that is the eminence of that man. I think of people like Dr Farrands and the others who have been so actively involved in this matter. We can go back to people of the eminence of Dr Phillip Law and the current director, Mr Clarrie McCue. After looking at the quality of Australia's contribution to Antarctic activity, I can say without wishing anyone to draw any conclusions that the Minister for Housing and Construction is fortunate, as is the Minister for Science and Technology, to be in charge of such a dynamic and exciting depart ment. As I have explained, Australia's Antarctic involvement has run for 1 7 1 years. I believe that we are in a position to offer a management poten tial for this superb continent which will place us in a situation in which the world will look to us in many instances for a lead. That will be a very great tribute to our achievements to date. That leaves me with my final comment. Ten years ago I dared to believe that this was a possibility. This Convention, and the world headquarters of the commission to manage the Convention, deals with Antarctic marine living resources.
Mr West-It could not be in a better place, either-Hobart.
Mr HODGMAN-I appreciate the comment of the honourable member for Cunningham. 1 know he means that because recently he was in Hobart and discussed the matter with me. The question yet to be determined is where will the commission for the management of the continen tal Antarctic resources be established? This Con vention deals with marine resources. The world has still to make a decision. The honourable member for Hawker knows that there have been discussions, and it has been suggested that Argen tina could be looked at as a potential site. If nations cannot reach spontaneous agreement as to the management of the continental resources, I suggest that we follow the lead of nature and put water and land together. I am quite certain that, as Hobart can provide the world headquarters for a commission to manage the marine living resources, it can also provide the facilities for world headquarters for a commission which will manage the continental resources of the Antarctic.
I congratulate both the Government and Opposition members of this House and the Senate, the two departments which worked enormously hard and the several Ministers to whom I have already referred for bringing to fruition the most historic

Antarctic Marine Living Resources Bill

I April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1221

international treaty to come before this Parliament and the first to ensure that Australia is the host nation for an international organisation. No one could be prouder than the member for Denison that it is all going to happen in his electorate.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN ( Kingsford-Smith) ( 1 0. 3 1 )-1 wish to address my remarks to some of the matters which relate to what you, Mr Deputy Speaker, would call foreign policy and to the problems that may or may not arise because of matters such as this. The Antarctic Marine Living Resources Conservation Bill relates to matters of marine living resources and their conservation. The Antarctic Treaty is a unique achievement and, I am reminded, it was drafted in the midst of a cold war. It side-stepped the territorial claims of rival nations and, in what is called an extraordinary feat of international diplomacy, dedicated the Antarctic continent in the interests of all. I t was dedicated as a scientific laboratory, free from armies and weapons. If honourable members look at the Treaty they will notice that there is to be a prohibition against any nuclear activity and also a clear affirmation that the Antarctic is to be a land of peace.
We congratulate those who were responsible for bringing this Treaty about, not the least of whom would be my colleague the honourable member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) , and also our re spective Australian ambassadors who led the negotiations and brought them to a successful conclusion. We note with interest that the Commission is to be established in Tasmania, and we welcome that. I know that even the honourable member for Denison (Mr Hodgman) has no objection to the Russians going there on this basis. I make the point that we are talking about the protection of the environment, and my colleagues will be dealing with this matter.
I want to comment I think it is appropriate to all of us-on how apathetic we, as a nation, have been when we have talked about research and the amount of money that we are allocating to it. We have neglected that area and it is essential that we do something about it. We have territorial claims to 40 per cent of the Antarctic territory, but I am told that our performance in financial resource al location is very meagre indeed-about $ 1 5m a year. [ am reminded that West Germany, which is not really one of the original countries involved in claiming any territorial sovereignty, proposes to spend several hundreds of millions of dollars over the next three years.

If Australia is to talk about capacity, It IS important for us to have the ability to do some thing about implementing that capacity. It is dis turbing to realise that Australia has no distant water fishing fleet to take advantage of the permits of the Treaty. The Japanese fleet can reach Antarctic waters and fish there, so can the Soviet fleet and so, indeed, can distant water fishing fleets of other countries, particularly Poland. Not only must we protect the Antarctic environment, but also we must ensure that we have the capacity to share in those resources. This Government has done nothing to encourage the development of an adequate Australian fishing fleet. We must con duct a full scale review of our policy in Antarctica as wel l as of our policy towards the other members of the international community with respect to claims to exercise sovereign rights. When I say 'the international community', 1 mean not only those states which were the original signa tories of the Antarctic Treaty; I mean the entire international community. We do not have to give up our claims, nor can we continue to say that we are only going to exercise some sort of superficial significance. The fact is that we have done com paratively little.
The matter that will be brought home very forcibly to us concerns the law of the sea negotiations. In those negotiations there has been rec ognition that those countries with the wealth and technology to exploit the resources of the high seas must, to some extent, share their portion or their good fortune with the less developed countries. That also applies whether we are talking about scientific research or resources. It is a matter of great regret at present, particularly to the Opposition, that the United States of America Administration has recently taken action which has seriously jeopardised the successful conclusion of a comprehensive law of the sea. So we have the problem that wealthy countries which have hitherto exercised exclusive competence over the protection, exploration and exploitation of the Antarctic continent, are likely to meet vig orous competition from many other countries on the basis that as they are poor and need resources, they ought to be involved. It is important that they do become involved.
We make great play of the question of the North-South dialogue and we are critical of the great disparity between rhetoric and the absence of any substantial move to assist developing countries. If we are really serious about looking for areas where we can in the medium and long term, as well as in the short term, produce a more equitable international economic order, then an

1 222 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

A djo urnment

acknowledgement of the right of the poorer countries to share in the marine and mineral resources wealth of the Antarctic would be a logical step. I believe that we should reconsider and revise our policy in this matter as a matter of urgency. We cannot continue to perpetuate the management of Antarctica by what is called a wealthy elite, par ticularly if we wish to ensure the continued exist ence of our influence in the area. I endorse entirely the objectives of the Antarctic Treaty and the convention that the Antarctic remain both a zone of peace and a zone of international cooperation. But it is short-sighted in the extreme not to realise that those objectives will be best promoted by extending the family of nations interested in the Antarctic and committed to its preservation rather than by limiting that family to the present wealthy countries.
I want to make this point in relation to the law of the sea: In his second reading speech the Acting Minister for Science and Technology (Mr McVeigh) did not refer to the fact that when an international law of the sea convention is concluded, the Antarctic Treaty parties will be obliged to negotiate with the international auth ority established under that convention concern ing that area of the high seas which lies south of 60 degrees. This problem may be only one oj' two years away, and it is very important. The points which I have made with respect to increased cooperation with the developing countries are important in this regard. We cannot expect a sym pathetic hearing from the 1 40-odd countries which are not members of the Antarctic Treaty if we do not take a more forthright attitude with respect to their interests. We ought to be laying the groundwork for those negotiations now. It is essential that we actively review our policies in this regard because this Convention constitutes the first occasion on which the Antarctic Treaty parties have purported to act with effect beyond the traditional Antarctic zone delineated by the 60 degree south latitude.
Debate interrrupted.
ADJOURNMENT
Expenditure in Election Campaigns-Australian Softwood Corporation Ply
Ltd-Angola-Persecution of Syrian Jews-Amnesty International: Report on EI Salvador-Anstralian Airlines: Scheduling
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millal') Order! It being 1 0.30 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
MI' YOUNG ( Port Adelaide) ( 1 0. 30 )  Tonight I want to touch very briefly o n what I

consider to be one of the major reasons for which this Government has continually and traditionally not sought to introduce any reform into the elec toral laws of this country. Last week the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) made available figures on expenditure by the various political parties on radio and television in Queensland during the 1 980 election campaign. ] will give the Parliament some idea of the expenditure of the various parties and a very firm indi cation as to why the Liberal and National parties will not entertain the idea of reform, why they will not have a public register of the people who donate to their parties and why they are afraid and not prepared to tell the people of Australia who is making massive donations to their parties.
I will run quickly through the expenditure on television stations in Queensland at the last State election from the time of the issue of writs until the blackout of media coverage 48 hours before the election. On BTQ7, the Australian Labor Party spent $ 1 8,600; the Liberal and National parties spent $54,000. On QTQ9, the Liberal and National parties spent $ 1 1 5,000; the Labor Party did not spend anything. On TVQO, thc Liberal and National parties spent $ 1 00,000; the ALP spent $4,700. On RTQ7, the Liberal and National parties spent $ 1 9,000; the ALP spent $6,700. On SEQ8, the Liberal and National parties spent $35,000; the ALP spent $2,500. On DDQ1 0, the Liberal and National parties spent $26,000; the ALP spent nothing. On FNQIO, the Liberal and National parties spent $21 ,500; the ALP spent $6,000. On ITQ8, the Liberal and National par ties spent $ 10,000; the ALP spent $3,200. On MVQ6, the Liberal and National parties spent $4,600; the ALP outspent them with a total of $5,400. On TNQ7, the Liberal and National par ties spent $34,500; the ALP spent $ 1 2,500.
I will now compare the totals. In the Queensland election campaign, the Liberal and National parties spent on television alone--this figure does not incl ude radio programs approximately $419,000. The Labor Party, at the other end of the spectrum, was able to accumulate and spend $47 , 1 00. It is a fact of life that expenditure by political parties on election campaigns in this country has got completely out of hand. Re cently we saw the allocation of the Winchester South coal lease. The companies involved are making massive donations to the campaign funds of the Liberal and National parties. Neither party is prepared or game to allow a list of the people who make political donations to their parties to be made available to the Australian public. They know that, if that were done, the Australian people would reject any system which allows

Adjournment

I April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 223

these parties to receive the sorts of funds for plantation areas for the year 1 978. The company

which the figures have been made available to us. was pleased to inform him that the development

Those parties are then allowed to brainwash the and maintenance of the plantation areas had been public during the election campaign in terms of continued in accordance with good forestry prac

what policies are right and wrong.

tice. It stated:

What happens in Queensland is only the tip of the iceberg. What happened in the Federal election campaign was exactly the same. For every television commercial the Labor Party was able to purchase in Sydney where it has the most federal seats of any capital city, the Liberal Party had nine such commercials. It had nine times the

We are satisfied that throughout the year all obligations f the Company under your agreement have been faithfully fulfilled.
There was no mention whatsoever where the plantations are situated or any other particulars. On 2 1 December 1 979 Mr Newman received a similar report.

expenditure of the Labor Party in Sydney. The Liberal Party and National Country Party during the last federal election campaign would have spent from their head offices alone nothing less than $5m. The people of Australia are entitled to

Finally, on 28 November 1 980, he received a letter from Forest Custodians Pty Ltd. It stated:
Dear Grower, Re: You and Australian Softwood Corporation Pty Ltd
Plantation No. 6 1 .

know where that $5m came from and what the No doubt you will have seen the press reports of the bush Liberal Party and the National Country Party fires which occurred on the South Coast during last month.

Government have to do in return to get the same amount of money in 1 983. Reform of the electoral laws and the media laws must be brought about so that all the political parties are able to present their points of view in a proper manner and so

That was the first indication of where the plan tations might be. The letter continued:
Unfortunately, the Plantation in which your trees are grow ing was in the path of the fire. The extent of the damage, which was extensive, is currently being assessed, and as soon

that the people of Australia know who is making the donations and who is able to manipulate and to formulate the policies of the Government. We are seeing, on the one hand, the handing out of leases for our natural resources and, at the other end of the street, we are seeing cheques handed over to the Liberal and National parties so that the leases are given to those people making the donations.
Mr O'KEEFE (Paterson) ( 1 0.35)-My speech tonight concerns a constituent named John W.

as we are in a position to do so, we will let you have a report on the position; incorporating as well our recommendations.
A Coronial Enquiry is to be held to determine the cause of the fire-regrettably lives were lost-and after that enquiry has been concluded, we will advise you further in light of the findings made.
Yours faithfully Forest Custodians Pty Ltd D. B. WILKIE, A.A.S.A., J.P.
Nothinghas been received by John Newman since the letter of 28 November.

Newman of 6 Warrena Street, Gunnedah, and a n There is considerable doubt as to the propriety investment in his name with the Australian Soft of these companies. It is requested that the Minis wood CorpOlation Pty Ltd of 47 Edward Street, ter for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr

North Sydney. Eight companies are registered at Moore) investigate their activities for the benefit this address. They are: Australian Softwood Cor of people who have invested funds in what are poration Pty Ltd, Australian Softwood Forests supposedly softwood forestry companies. I com

(Overseas) Pty Ltd, Australian Softwood Forests mend this matter for the Minister's attention. In

Pty Ltd, Plantation Sixty-Five (No. 1 ) Pty Ltd, my opinion there is no doubt that many people

Plantation Sixty-Five Pty Ltd, Plantation Sixty will have lost the money they had invested in

Six (No. 1 ) Pty Ltd, Plantation Sixty-Six Pty Ltd these companies. No particulars have been given

and Forestry Custodians Pty Ltd. Mr Newman in any of the correspondence about the location of

has been to the address I have given. He has a sup the softwood forests. I feel that these are bogus

posed investment with the Australian Softwood companies.

Corporation Pty Ltd. He has been unable to obtain any satisfaction as to the current value of his investment or any o ther information whatsoever.

Mr HOWE (Batman) ( 1 0.40)-The Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) today in a question to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) referred to a silent, generally unpublicised and cer

Each year he receives a report on the letterhead tainly very bloody war which is taking place in

of the company as to the development of the plan Angola. The question drew the Prime Minister's

tation. On 19 December 1 978, he received a re attention to some of the terrible atrocities which

port from the company advising him that it had are being committed in Angola by forces which completed its final inspection of all nursery and are under the control of the South African

1 224 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Adjournment

Government. I n particular, I refer to No. 3 2 Bat Of his colleagues, Edwards says:

talion of the South African Defence Force, one of
 8 battalions of the South African armed forces in
cluding a company of motorised tanks, curre tly inside Angola. No. 32 Battalion was formed in

When it comes to killing women, hanging them and things, there are some of them who laugh about it. They love killing. They take photographs of themselves with bodies. They don't see them as people,just as things that are there.

1 975 by the South African military intelligence. [t It would appear that South Africa is involved in a

is largely formed ofmercenary white soldiers who systematic policy of striking economic and mili

have been recruited for the purpose of fighting tary targets in Angola, despite official denials. It

this war in Angola, initially against the Popular would seem that Angola's claims concerning

Movement for the Liberation of Angola-the South African military intervention are substan

MPLA-and now against the South West African tially correct, that is, that it is facing an unde

People's Organisation, which is known as clared war in which there are present in a pro

SWAPO, and the Angolan Government.

portion of the white population as many men as

The Manchester Guardian of 8 Pebruary 1981 includes a first-hand account of one of the mer cenaries of what fighting in Angola has meant. Trevor Edwards, a soldier of fortune who pre viously fought in Zimbabwe, confirms the fact
t that the unit was formed in South Africa that it
receives official support from the authori ies and that atrocities have been committed by the bat talion in Angola. The general strategy of the bat talion is clear, according to Edwards. He says:

the United States of America committed to the Vietnam war at its height.
There is another reason why the Australian Government should seek to oppose publicly in the strongest terms the violation of Angolan territory. It is simply that this unofficial war is involving atrocities and violations of humanity which re quire the strongest possible condemnation from the international community. Why is Australia so silent? We have not hesitated to speak out on Afghanistan and more recently EI Salvador,

Our main job is to take an area and clear it. We sweep

through people,

eitvearnydthwineg.kiWll eevaerreytohuintgtoinsftroopntSWofAusPOcaattnled'

goats
so w

tshtoepttimheemthgeettoincaglisndtoonth'tekvnilolawgewshfaotr'fsogoodinagndonw. aWteer.jBusutt

half beat

although what we have had to say about that country hardly relates to the violation of human rights. Perhaps we are not free to speak. A recent South African military mission to the United

them up and It gets out of hand. Some of the guys get a bit carried away. And SWAPO still get by us and cross the cut line between Angola and Namibia. It's not as if we are stopping

States is reported to have proposed a joint United States-South Africa force.

them.

The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser)

Edwards makes clear that in the fighting on a number of occasions the mercenaries have been involved in direct attacks on Angolan army and
military insallations, and the civilian population,
attacks whIch are always denied by the South African Government. He mentions the particular
t example of the attack on Savate of May 1 980
which was reported by the Angolan Governmen
! to the United Nations but denied by the South
Afr can Government as an attack involving South Afncan forces. However, Edwards points out that this attack was unusual because it had a specific objective. The regular job of No. 32 Battalion was to go into Angolan bush with a couple of companies and spend four to five weeks clearing a designated area. He said:

claimed today that he was unaware of these facts. He should rapidly inform himself of them and speak out in the name of the fundamental human rights of the Angolan people. He should deplore the violation that has taken place of Angola's ter ritorial integrity. He should inform himself of the United Nations resolution of 27 June 1 980, which strongly condemns South Africa for its premedi tated, persistent and sustained armed invasion of Angola, as well as its utilisation of Namibia as a springboard for armed intervention and destabil isation of Angola. It demands that South Africa should withdraw forthwith all its military forces from Angola, cease all violation of its space and henceforth scrupulously respect Angola's sover eignty and territorial integrity.

Some of it's pretty heavy. Sometimes we take locals for questioning. It's rough, we just beat them, cut them, burn them. As soon as we are finished with them we kill them
. . . Sometimes you have to do it with children to make
the adults talk. There was a 1 2-year old \Joy. We wanted to know what was going on. We wanted his mother to talk so we
swRstmitueerdaktt p.hhhlii?mimevmdseemr.tulyofp.sthoThliiihokSfeaektmemaknoldcwethhsoei.ecftTrkoddhealenkdmn,nhww,aitminettedhpollluhpautiuys.sseHwahdneerdywiwstathhostiiuenmbrlgedp.ahnIobi'nntloodctuhrtwhye, i,ilet;hehntebdhajhuiwcmimsket:

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mf Millar) Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr BIRNEY (Phillip) ( 10.45)-1 draw the attention of the House to the remorseless and ruthless persecution of Syrian Jews. In the past 1 2 months, this persecution has accelerated and internal strife in Syria between the present Government and the fanatical Moslem brother

just left him in the water to drown.

hood has progressed to a state of civil war with

Adjournment

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 225

statements emanating from that organisation that it would massacre all Jews in Syria if it managed to seize control. It is a fact that only one Middle East government still holds Jews hostage in its land. None of the 5,000 Jews in Syria is permitted to leave and the abominable conditions under which these Jews must live constitute a per manent offence to the principle of the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The Jewish quarter in Damascus is not a ghetto in the nazi sense, but I am given to understand that entering it is like going back 500 years com pared with the rest of the city. It consists of low houses with courtyards, is in a filthy condition and the municipality provides no cleaning services whatsoever. A number of reports coming out of Syria in the last year indicate that there has been a worsening of the situation of the Jews in Syria over and above the continuing ban on their right to emigrate. These are the Jews virtually forgot ten by the free world, who live in a prison city. There are approximately 3,000 Jews marooned in Damascus living in a squalid rabbit warren of back alleys in the old part of the city. Life for them is harsh and brutaL
There has been a dramatic worsening of the attitude of Syrian authorities to the country's 5,000 Jews. Jews are being beaten up regularly in many centres in Syria, including Damascus and Aleppo, and there has been a reimposition of re strictions on internal travel and transfer of prop erty. In the Jewish quarter of Damascus, a police man with a submachine gun is constantly on guard at the entrance to the area. The Jews of whom 1 speak are the descendants of Jewish com munities which have been in Syria for centuries. Jews are closely watched by a network of in formers and are not allowed to receive foreign visitors freely. The Jews would like to leave Syria but they are not allowed to emigrate and illegal emigration by any of the Jews would prompt a fierce reaction from the Government against those left behind.
I shall enumerate some of the restrictions which the Syrian Government imposes solely on Jews. Jews must not move more than 4 kilometres from their place of residence. Jews must carry special identity cards bearing the word 'Mussawi', which means Jew, in red 'letters. Jews are denied the right to vote. Jews may not be employed in the public service, in public institutions or in banks. They may not serve in the police or armed forces. Jews cannot obtain driving licences. Jews are not permitted to have telephones. Jews are subject to a 1 0 p.m. curfew. The possessions of deceased Jews are confiscated by the Government, and

their heirs must then pay for the use of their prop erty. In Kamishliye, all Jewish houses must bear a special distinguishing mark. Moslems are officially advised not to buy in Jewish shops, and government and military personnel are expressly forbid den to enter them. Mail of Jews is censored, and they are under constant police watch.
This despicable form of suppression and per secution must be condemned by all those who cherish freedom and the democratic way of life. I urge the Government to set up a committee of in quiry into the plight of Syrian Jewry along the same lines as this Parliament's inquiry into human rights in the Soviet Union.
Mr MORRISON (St George) ( l0.49)-My participation this evening is not in my capacity as a member of the Opposition but as Chairman of the Parliamentary Group of Amnesty Inter national. Honourable members will be aware that the Parliamentary Group comprises members of all political parties represented in the Australian Parliament. Although Amnesty International does not deal with political issues as such it does, because of its concern for human rights, get involved in matters of political concern. However it does not get involved in a party political or party partisan way.
This evening at a meeting of the Group we received the report on El Salvador of the Amnesty I nternational secretariat in London dated 2 February 198 1 . That all-party Group expressed its wish that the two-page report be incorporated in Hansard. I will seek leave to incorporate that report at the end'ofmy observations.
The report states:
The human-rights situation in EI Salvador has deteriorated sharply in recent months . . . Peasants and young people appear to be particular targets.
It goes on to say that Red Cross clinics have been attacked by troops. It also points out that members of the Roman Catholic church and others helping refugees and victims of the civil fighting have been hampered in their work by the security forces. National police raided the legal offices of the Archbishopric of San Salvador 1 7 times in one week. Members of the E l Salvador Human Rights Commission have been harassed, abducted and killed. The Commission had repor tedly been accused by the President of El Sal vador, Jose Duarte, of being anti-patriotic. The offices of the Commission were surrounded by troops on 1 8 January and the Commission has seen itse1f forced to close down.
Amnesty International fears that the current wave of extra judicial killings and disappearances will continue to escalate as Salvadorean security

1 226 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Adjournment

forces use the cover of civil warfare to carry out large scale killings of young people, peasants and others not shown to be involved in guerrilla activi ties. On this occasion I will not add my personal comments on the situation in EI Salvador, but I would encourage all honourable members of the House to read the report. I seek leave to incorpor ate the report of Amnesty International on EI Salvador.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
2 February 1981
Amnesty International International Secretariat
10 Southampton Street London WC2E 7HF England
AI Concerns ill EI Salvador
The hIlman rights situation in El Salvador has deteriorated sharply in recent months. Amnesty International is seriously concerned and fears a further increase in summary execution, torture and abduction by government forces as civil conflict continues between guerrillas and the government. Of some 8,000 Salvadorians estimated to have been killed during the past year, many are known to have been the victims of extra judicial execution by the armed forces. Peasants and young people appear to be particular targets. Sources in the country say that nearly 3,300 peasants were among those killed for political reasons in 1980.
Despite government claims that those killed by its forces are guerrillas and guerrilla sympathisers many victims of tor ture and death at the hands of the security forces were not generally shown to have any direct involvement in armed guerrilla activity.
International attention was captured by the killing on 3
December 1980 of three nuns and a woman missionary, all United States nationals, reported to have been abducted by security forces the previous day. However, in the week after those killings, from 6 to 12 December, according to sources in El Salvador, 144 people were killed, 66 of them by uniformed members of the security forces.
On 17 December 1980, members of the National Guard raided the town of Cojutepeque in the department of San Sal vador and killed eight leaders (names on attached list) of the Central Campesina Salvadorena (Salvadorian Peasants Organization) who were meeting to discuss plans for partici pation in the government's agrarian reform program. There have been similar attacks in the past.
There is evidence that young people are singled out because of their youth. On 10 January 1981 , troops took 22 teen-agel's from Mejicanos; all were later found dead, with marks show ing that they had been tortured. An army spokesman said they died of bullet wounds in a confrontation with troops; but a doctor who examined 17 of the bodies said they had all been shot after dying. Five of the young women were unidentifiable because their faces had been erased.
AI has received reports that Salvadorian paramilitary squads regularly cross the border into Honduras to attack Sal vadorian refugee camps. Inside El Salvador, church sources report that refugees have been taken from camps and killed.
On 31 December 1980 soldiers from San Carlos garrison
searched the Domus Mariae refugee centre in Mejicanos and took away Marcial Cruz, aged 18. He was later seen at the gar rison, and on 9 January was found dead.

Red Crossclinics have been attacked: on 12 January, troops broke into a clinic in Chalatenango. They killed wounded people being treated there and abducted five young women aged from 14 to 22. On the same day, three men, members of the Baptist Church, were seized by security forces in San Sal vador as they delivered provisions to the Red Cross. The whereabouts of all the people abducted in these two incidents are unknown.
Killings and 'disappearances' of foreign journalists, including journalist John Sullivan, United States citizen, who was abducted on 28 December, have been widely reported in the international media; but Salvadorian journalists have also been victims of the armed forces. On 1 5 January 198 1, nine staff members of the newspaper El Independiente, including journalists Vida Cuadra and Francisco Ramirez Avila, were taken from the newspaper's offices by troops. The authorities deny that they are in detention. (On 25 January, the newspaper closed down and its director Jorge Pinto took ref uge in the Mexican Embassy.)
Members of the Roman Catholic Church and others help ing refugees and victims of the civil fighting have been ham pered in their work by the security forces. The Archbishopric of San Salvador reported in mid-December that it had been forced to close its legal aid office (Socorro Juridico) because it had been raided 17 times in the previous week by the National Police. Even government offices have been subject to army raids. On 9 January, the publications department of the Edu cation Ministry was raided by troops while it was printing leaflets with instructions for refugees; eight staff members, including the director of the department, were seized. Their whereabouts are unknown. Members of the El Salvador Human Rights Commission who witnessed the seizures have denied army allegations that subversive literature was found on the premises.
On 25 January, a leading member of the El Salvador Human Rights Commission, Victor Medrano, aged 29, was abducted from his home by plainclothes members of the National Police. Althoughhe has been seen in the barracks of the National Police in San Salvador, authorities deny that he is in detention and there is very serious concern for his safety. Two other members of the same commission have been killed since the beginning of October last year. One was Maria Magdalena Enriquez, its press secretary who was found dead in a shallow grave about 20 miles from the capital. She was abducted on 3 October 1980 while shopping and appears to have been killed the day after her abduction. Witnesses con firmed that two of the heavily armed men who detained Sra. Enriquez were uniformed members of the National Police. Representatives of the Junta (that headed the government of El Salvador until December 1980) however denied that police carried out the detention and stated that the government 'was not implicated' in the matter. The other member of the com mission killed was Ramon Valladares Perez, who was shot dead on 26 October while driving a car in the capital. The El Salvador Human Rights Commission is an independent human rights monitoring group that provides both assistance to victims of human rights abuse and publicises their cases. The Commission's offices have been destroyed by bombings three times last year in the presence of the permanent police guard on the premises. The Commission had reportedly been accused by the president of El Salvador, Ing. Jose Napoleon Duarte, of being 'anti-patriotic' a few days before the abduc tion of Victor Medrano. The offices of the Commission were again surrounded by troops on 18 January and the Commission has seen itself forced to close down.
People have been killed because of their association, or pre sumed association with peasant, labour or religious organiza tions, or with political parties or other organizations which do not actively support the present government. Although these

Adjournment

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1 227

killingS took place against a background of conflict between government forces and guerrilla organizations, evidence reaching AI shows that many civilians not involved in guer rilla activity are being tortured and killed by the security forces. Most of the deaths have occurred after people were seized at their homes or places of work.
During 1980 the government of El Salvador repeatedly claimed that independent 'anti-communist' assassination squads beyond government control were responsible for these abductions and murders. However, evidence collated by AI from hundreds of individual cases proves the responsibility of the regular security forces for serious violations of human rights. By attributingdetentions, torture and killings to groups beyond government control, the government of El Salvador seems to' have sought a means of evading accountability for the extra-legal measures carried out by its own security forces.
AI fears that the current wave of extrajudicial killings and 'disappearances' will continue to escalate as the Salvadorian security forces use the cover of civil warfare to carry out large scale killings of young people, peasants and others not shown to be involved in guerrilla activities.
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) ( 1 0.5 1 )-Tonight in this debate there have been a number of contri butions by various honourable members of the House on human rights matters in the broad. We heard a discussion on human rights matters in South Africa, Syria and now El Salvador. One of the most meaningful ways in which people can involve themselves ' in trying to do something and achieve something in this world in the area of human rights, I believe, is to belong to the organisation Amnesty International. It is for that reason that I rise to speak in this debate, also as an execu tive member of the Parliamentary Group of Am nesty International, to speak a little about the role of the organisation and to say something about some material on the subject of the organisation generally which was distributed ' recently to members.
Amnesty International is a world-wide human rights movement which is independent of any government, political faction, ideology, economic interest or religious creed. It works for the release of men and women imprisoned anywhere for their beliefs, colour, ethnic origin or religion provided they have neither used nor advocated violence. These people are termed political prisoners, or prisoners of conscience. Amnesty I nternational opposes torture and capital punishment in all cases and without reservation. It seeks observance throughout the world of the United Nations Uni versal Declaration of Human Rights and the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners. It has groups in some 3 3 countries, and individual members in some 7 8 countries. People who belong to adoption groups-a special form of membership or collective membership-participate in trying to release three prisoners of conscience in countries other than their 'own, usually people who are chosen especially because they come from countries

which are politically different. They usually find that they are advocating the release of prisoners who are held in countries of the Right as well as countries which may be regarded as being of the political Left, and others of the Third World.

Amnesty International has consultative status

with the United Nations, and that is an important

factor. It is financed by subscriptions and do

nations. It does not accept direct support from

governments. I n our report tonight from the

Chairman of the Australian National Section,

John Coombs, Q.c., we heard of the very difficult

financial position of Amnesty International, re

lying as it does upon financial support from indi

viduals throughout the world and not from

governments and large financial bodies. It has t (1

be acknowledged that operating in the Unitert

Kmiantgtedrosmi nisth, ae

very area

difficult task with of money working

exchange against il,

and with the demands to pay its staff reasonable

wages. I t has a very large research staff of some

1 20 people in London collating information on

prisoners of conscience. The Australian section

wishes to be able to contribute significantly to

those financial demands, but of course it has its

own difficulties in that regard. But Australia is

seen as a wealthy country and one which ought to

be able to contribute significantly .

Members, of course, can look at the group a nd participate in it and supporting it as a worthwhile organisation. I draw the attention of all honour able members to the history of the Parliamentary Group of Amnesty International which I cii culated this week. I will not ask for it to be incor porated in Hansard because it has been sent to all honourable members. [n inviting their attention to it I invite them also to consider membership of the Group because that will enable them to par ticipate in a worthwhile way in a genuine human rights organisation which is totally non-party political.

Mr BRAITHWAITE (Dawson) ( 10.56) -  During the adjournment debate tonight I wish to raise not the actual two-airline agreement, but some of the factors affecting both airlines. I have read with interest the Ansett Airlines of Australia position paper of 1 0 February 1 980. Under the heading of 'Scheduling to Suit the Public', the report states:

The system of airline scheduling by which aircraft from both airlines tend to depart at about the same time draws more criticism than any other aspect of domestic air transport.

The Ansctt Airlines decision to re-equip to an all Boeing jet fleet will lead to major improvements in an area that has irri tated the public for many years.

It goes on:

1 228 REPRESENTATIVES 1 April 1981

Adjournment

This fleet will give Ansett Airlines great flexibility and the ability to provide the public with frequency ofservice, a major requirement of Australian passengers . . .
Any serious study of scheduling shows that it is complex and that the reasons for parallel scheduling have been, and are, very real.
Finally it states:
The Australian travelling public has shown over the years that it prefers to fly at certain times.
These are very fine words, but I want to give a few examples of the absolute stupidity and rigidity of parallel scheduling to the disadvantage of the public, and apparently approved by the present two-airline agreement. For instance, during day light saving times, flight times are adjusted in Queensland to retain the southern State sched ules. That does not say much for the retention of preferred travelling time for Queenslanders and their convenience. Again, for the past three years, on a Friday flight, both airlines schedule a Sydney to Brisbane flight to land at the Brisbane airport at 9 . l 5 a.m. At exactly the same time, 9. 1 5 a.m., two flights to Mackay depart, one from each airline, thus making a Brisbane connection from the south impossible at that time. Surely 9 . 1 5 a.m. is not the preferred critical public flying time for passengers of both airlines. Why not make it 9.30 a.m. or just a little later?
In the 1 980 winter schedules, it was possible on Friday to get an aircraft later in the morning, about 1 1 a.m. Again, a choice of either airline was available. All of a sudden in 1981 both airlines de cided that the public preferred time was for a 1 . 3 5 p.m. Brisbane departure, and neither airline fly the late morning flight. It is not a matter of pre ferred time. It is a matter of the two airlines ghost ing each other so that one does not take an advantage over the other, but both must suffer in viability and economics in not giving the public a choice of time. It appears to me that the two com puters of the airlines have got themselves hitched together or married to get the scheduled times, and that man is not capable of programming the real human considerations into those schedules.
I do ask that the airlines do not treat the public so contemptuously, or as fools. Parallel schedul ing is not necessary and, under the terms I have outlined above, it is not in the public interest. I understand that the honourable member for Capricornia (Dr Everingham) has suggested that the airlines alternate each week or each month or each year, so that if there is a preferred travelling time, ' then each airline can get that advantage equally and allow the public an additional or alternative travelling time. While I am on the subject of air travel, could I raise yet again the subject of allowing cigarette smokers on flights--

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) Order! It being 1 1 p.m. the debate is interrupted. The House stands adjourned until 1 0. 30 a.m. tomorrow.
House adjourned at 1 1 p.m.
NOTICES The following notices were given:
Mr Hunt to present a Bill for an Act relating to guarantees of certain borrowings by a domestic airline.
Mr MeVeigh to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Designs Act 1 906, and for related purposes.
Mr MeVeigh to present a Bill for an Act to amend the Patents Act 1 952, and for related purposes.
Mr MeVeigh to move-
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Committee Act 1969, the followingproposed work be referred to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for consideration and report, namely, CSIRO Marine Laboratories at Hobart, Tasmania
REQUESTS FOR DETAILED INFORMATION Library Committee
Mr Jacobi to ask Mr Speaker:
( I ) Did Committee Report No. 727, prepared at the request of the Library Committee for submission to its meet ing of Thursday, 27 March 1980, state inter alia that the motion by the Houses constituting the Committee gives it no powers.
(2) If so, what legitimate functions can the Library Committee perform.
(3) Are there any current proposals to give powers or added functions to the Library Committee; if so, what are these proposals.
(4) How many meetings of'the Commitee have been held in each of the last 2 years.
(5) What recommendations has the Committee made dur ing the same years, how many of these recommendations have been (a) implemented and (b) rejected and what was the reason in each case.
(6) How many sub-committees of the Library Committee currently exist, who are their members and what are their re spective terms ofreference.
(7) Do members of the Library Committee receive pay ment for their attendance at Committee meetings.
(8) Are staff of the Department of the Parliamentary Li brary routinely called before the Committee to give information on proposals relating to their particular area of oper ation; i fnot, is there any proposal for this to occur.
(9) How many Committee meetings have staff attended in each of the last 2 years, who were those staff and in what capacity did they attend.

Adjournment
Parliamentary Accommodation Mr Barry Jones to ask Mr Speaker: ( I ) Did he give an assurance to the House on 18 Septemher
1980, that a joint Presiding Officers Committee would be established to advise the Presiding Officers on parliamentary accommodation.
(2) What are the terms of reference of the House Committee.
(3) Why was it necessary to establish a joint Presiding Officers Committee and why was it not possible for the House Committee to perform the express functions of advising the Presiding Officers on all matters relating to parliamentary accommodation.
(4) How many meetings of the Presiding Officers Committee or Committees, meeting jointly or separately, have been held as at I April 1981 .
(5) What decisions were taken by that Committee, o r those Committees, meeting eitherjointly or separately.
(6) What advice was forwarded to the Presiding Officers by that Committee, or those Committees, and when was it forwarded.
(7) How many staff and from which Parliamentary De partments, have been moved from Parliament House within the 3 month periodto 31 March 1981.
(8) What staff currently located in Parliament House wi\J be transferred to offices in the Hotel Kurrajong, and when will these transfers take place.
(9) Why have staff movements taken place, and been planned, prior to the Parliament being informed of the Presid ing Officers Committee recommendations.
Parliamentary Library Mr Milton to ask Mr Speaker:
( 1 ) Who is the current Parliamentary Fellow in Political Science in the Parliamentary Library.
(2) Is this a full-time position.
(3) Is the Parliamentary Fellow readily available for con sultation by Members of Parliament.
(4) What office space is currently occupied by the Parliamentary Fellow and where is this located.
(5) How many consultants are currently employed by the Parliamentary Library.
(6) What are their subject specialities, in each case.
(7) Who made the decision to employ these consultants, in each case, and were these positions filled by advertisement.
(8) Was the Library Committee consulted about the employment of these consultants.
(9) What hours do these consultants work, what office space do they occupy and where is this located, in each case.
Parliamentary Library Dr Blewett to ask Mr Speaker:

1 April 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1229

tsotad(fIfeC1ISW.IaolhnlassteocnfltirohmnesaLloIbfmrteahcreyh,aPsnaoirrsbg,?aasmeesxanittsl.atOrnyfoaLrnidcborfanUrsnyucltwtiaoittniho. nrewgairthd

(2) What is the rate section, for each of the

of staff turnover last 7 years.

within

the

Library'

by

(3) Have Library staffmade any representations regarding increased staff consultation during that period; ifso, when was it made and what action followed these representations.

(4) Have there been any expressions by staff about any matter which would indicate reduced staff morale during that period.

Accommodation in Parliament House: Government Information Unit
Mr Kerin to ask Mr Speaker:
( I ) Has his attention been drawn to the item entitled 'Pulse of the Nation' in the National Times of29 March 198 1 .
(2) Is it a fact that the Government Information Unit is to occupy scarce space within Parliament House.
(3) Is he able to say how many people are employed in this Information Unit, and what are their duties.
(4) Was this a recommendation of the Presiding Officers Advisory Committee on accommodation in Parliament House; if not, who took this decision

Parliamentary Committee Reports
Mr Scholes to ask Mr Speaker:
Which Parliamentary Committee reports presented to the House during the 3 1 st Parliament have not been responded to by Ministers within 6 months of their date of tabling, contrary to the undertaking given by the Prime Minister in the House on 25 May 1978.

PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 1 April 1981 , pursuant to statue:
Bounty (Agricultural Tractors) ActRegulations Statutory Rules 198 1 , No.58.
Bounty (Drilling Bits) ActReturn for period t October 1979 to 30 September 1980.
Customs Act-RegulationStatutory Rules 198 t, No. 49.
Health Insurance Act-Regulations Statutory Rules 198 1 , No.50.
National Health Act-RegulationsStatutory Rules 198 1 , No.52.
Public Service Act-RegulationsStatutory Rules 1981, No. 5!.
Telecommunications Act-Australian Telecommuni cations Commission-By-Laws-
Telecommunications (Charging Zones and Charging Districts)-Amendment No. 3.
Telecommunications (Community Ca\ls) Amendment No. 6.


