House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 124, 1981 Wednesday, 16 September 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--THIRD PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-THIRD PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the
Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House "Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry "Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas AnthQny
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.c.
Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee - The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.c.
The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senatonhe Honourable Anthon~ John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, K.e.M.G., QC. Chairman a/Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deput)' Chairmen a/Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Dona.ld Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader a/the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader a/the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden DeplIl)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader oJthe Liberal Party oJ Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. Deput), Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAllstralia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G. Leodera/the Nalional Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony DepulJ' uaderofthe NatiollalCountry Par/yofAustra(ia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Lobor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor PartJ'-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony, Rt Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewell. Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.e. Brown, Robert James Bungey, Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Hon. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest
Child,Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Han. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley
Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, e.H. Free, Ross Vincent Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey Q'Halioran Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John
Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.e. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles
Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allen Clyde Howard, Han. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunnet Hurford, Christopher John Hyde, John Martin Innes, Utquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher,Qld
Richmond, N.S.W. Chiftey, N.S.W. Macatthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. Bonython, SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith, N.S. W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qld Parramatla, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic.
Hunter, N.S. W. Canning, WA. Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden, Qld
Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
Henty, Vic. Robertson, N.S. W.
Wentwotth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne,N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld McMillan, Vic.
Lilley, Qld Fremantle, WA. Herbert, Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. ,
Holt,Vic. Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Faner, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S.w. Fraser, A.e.T. Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas. Braddon, Tas. Boothby, SA Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qld. Riverina, N.S. W.
Petrie,Qld Denison, Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Griffith,Qld Gwydir, N.S.W.
Adelaide, SA Moore,WA. Melbourne, Vic.

NCP
NCP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP LP
ALP LP LP LP LP LP
NCP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP ALP ALP LP
LP NCP ALP
ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP
ALP LP ALP
Ll' LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP
LP LP ALP ALP NCP LP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP NCP
ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles Killen, Hon. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
K.e.M.G. MacKellar, Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., e.H.
McVeigh, Hon. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Han. William Lawrence Mounlford,John Graham Newman, Han. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Han. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Han. Andrew Sharp Parler, James Robert Robinson, Han. Ian Louis Rocher, Allen Charles Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scoll, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden, Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., Q.e. Spender, John Michael, Q.e. Street. Han. Anthony Austin TJlmbling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.e.
Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Han. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George West, Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.e.
Willis,Ralph Wilson, Han. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker,S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle, N.s.W. Bowman,Qld Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S. W. Canberra, A.e.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Watringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S. W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S. W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld La Trobe, Vic. Ryan,Qld Shorlland, N.S.W. St George, N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid, N.S.w. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S. W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. Sturt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP' LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Counlry Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins (to 8 September), Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Scott (from 8 September), Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY -Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Oonald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATloNs-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERs-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges,Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKs-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman (from 25 August), Senator Kilgariffand Senator Martyr (from 25 August), and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston (from 9 September), Senator Georges, Senator Hamer (from 8 September), and Senator Robertson (to 9 September), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman (from 20 August), Mr Dean (t020 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen (from 23 September), Senator Elstob, Senator Hill (from 23 September), Senator Kilgariff (to 23 September), Senator McIntosh, Senator Martin (to 23 September), Senator Martyr (from 23 September), Senator Sibraa, Senator Teague (from 23 September), and Senator Young (to 23 September) and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOusE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Mi~ister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin (from 25 August), Senator Missen, Senator Sibra. and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE A: Parliament-Mr Speaker, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Hurford, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Barry Jones, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister assisting the Prime Minister), Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Holding, Mr Hurford, Mrs Kelly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Foreign Affairs-Mr Street (Minister for Foreign Affairs), Mr Beazley, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Fry, Mr Jacobi, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Defence-Mr Killen (Minister for Defence), Mr Burr, Mr Campbell, Mr Connolly, Mr Kerin, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Morrison, Mr Peacock, Mr Scholes, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE B: Department of Social SecuritY-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport and Minister representing the Minister for Social Security), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Harris, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mildren, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.

Department of Health-Mr MacKellar (Minister for Health), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Cunningham, Mr Harris, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Veterans' Affairs-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology and Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mrs Darling, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Mr Macphee (Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs), Mr Adennann, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs), Mr Adermann, Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Milton, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE C: Department of the Capital Territory-Mr Hodgman (Minister for the Capital Territory), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Dr Cass, Mr Coleman, Mr Fry, Mr Harris, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lusher and Mr Scholes.
Department of Home Affairs and Environment-Mr Wilson (Minister for Home Affairs and Environment), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Howe, Mr Lusher, Mr Uren and MrWest.
Department of Science and Technology-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mrs Darling, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Mildren.
Department of Communications-Mr Sinclair (Minister for Communications), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Wallis.
Department of Administrative Services-Mr Newman (Minister for Administrative Services), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Humphreys, Mr Lusher, Mr Milton and Mr Scholes.
Attorney-Genera!'s Department-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister representing the Attorney General), Mr Birney, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Coleman, Mr Dean, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Holding and Mr Lusher.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE D: Department of the Treasury-Mr Howard (Treasurer). Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Mr Willis.
Department of Finance-Mr Howard (Treasurer and Minister representing the Minister for Finance), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Hurford, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Mr Shack and Mr Tambling.
Department of Transport-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Jull, Mr Morris, Mr Scott, Mr Shack, Mr Tamblingand Mr Wallis.
Department of Primary Industry-Mr Nixon (Minister for Primary Industry), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Kerin, Mr Mildren, Mr Tambling and Mr Wallis.
ESTIMA TES COMMITTEE E: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs-Mr N. A. Brown (Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Mildren and Mr Peacock.
Department of Industrial Relations-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations), Mr Burr, Mr Charles, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Dr Theophanous.
Department of Education-Mr Fife (Minister for Education), Mr Beazley, Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Dawkins, Mr Fisher, Mr Free, Mr Barry Jones, Mr McLean and Mr Peacock.
Department of Housing and Construction-Mr McVeigh (Minister for Housing and Construction), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Howe, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Mr Uren.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE F: Department oflndustry and Commerce-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs acting for the Minister for Industry and Commerce), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hicks, Mrs Kelly, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Trade and Resources-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of National Development and Energy-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources representing the Minister for National Development and Energy), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Howe, Mr Keating, Mr Milton, Mr O'Keefe, Mr Porter and Mr Uren.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. O. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (TableJ-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (ProceduraIJ-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk Assistant-A. R. Browning Clerk Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-I. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-I. C. Cochran Procedure Office-J. K. Porter
Table Office (ProgrammingJ-B. C. Wright (Acting) Table Office (Bills and PapersJ-J. W. Pender (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaJJ(HouseofRepresimtativesJ-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaJJ(SenateJ-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. de S. C. MacLean (Acting)
JOINT HOUSE
Secrelary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 123 of 1981)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Apple and Pear Export Charge Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 147 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Export Ch~rge Act 1976.
Apple and Pear Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1460f 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Levy Act 1976.
Appropriation Act (No.1) 1981-82 (Act No. 1640f 1981)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 165 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year endingon 30June 1981.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 145 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 124 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 126 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 125 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 130 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (lnsurance Bus;ness) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Life Insurance Business) Act 1981 (Act No. 128 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of certain life insurance business having a connection with the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981 (Act No. 129 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of the registration of certain vehicles in the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian CapitalTerritory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 127 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 150 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 50 of the Austrillian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1977.
Australian National University Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1660f 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Natiollal University Act 1946.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 168 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 177 of 1981)An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905, and for related purposes.
Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 151 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act 1905 in relation to the exportation of food.
Commonwealth Grants Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 173 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973.
Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 153 of 1981)- An Act to amend laws relating to companies and securities and for related purposes.
Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 182 of 1981)An Act to amend the Continental Shelf(Living Natural Resources) Act 1968 to facilitate the collection of levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and of amounts payable under certain agreements, and for certain other purposes.
Crimes (Currency) Aat 1981 (Act No. 1220f 1981)An Act to make provision with respect to offences connected with the counterfeiting of money or certain kinds of securities and other activities injurious to Australian currency, and for related purposes.
Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 152 of 1981)- An Act ~to amend the Cllstoms Act 1901 in relation to the exportation of food.
Customs (Valuations) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 157 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.
Defence Acts Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 178 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relat,ing to defence.

Derence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 144 or 1981)- An Act relating to retirement and death benefits in respect or members or the Derence Force.
Departure Tax Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 131 or 1981)An Act to amend the Departure Tax Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Departure Tax Collection Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 132 or 1981) An Act to amend the Departure Tax Collection Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981 (Act No. 148 or 1981)An Act to provide ror confidentiality in relation to certain epidemiological studies.
Export Grants Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 119 or 1981)- An Act relating to export grants.
Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1800r 1981)- An Act relating to payments under certain fisheries agreements.
Fisheries Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 181 00981)An Act to amend the Fisheries Act 1952 to racilitate the collection or levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and or amounts payable under certain agreements, and ror certain other purposes.
Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 (Act No. 179 or 1981)An Act to impose a levy on the grant or certain licences in respect or roreign fishing boats.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1750r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1981 (Act No. 156 or 1981)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes or companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation runds.
Income Tax (Indi dduals) Act 1981 (Act No. 15500981)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes or companies, or corporate unit trusts and or superannuation runds.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 143 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Internationa! Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act(No. 3) 1981 (Act No. 1540r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Judges' Pensions Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 158 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Judges' Pensions Act 1968.
Meat Export (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 149 or 1981)An Act to provide penalties ror certain offences against the Exports (Meat) Regulations.
National Health Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 163 or 1981)- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953.
Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 174 or 1981)- An Act to amend section 3 or the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966.
Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 161 or 1981)An Act to amend the Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1977, and ror related purposes.
Norrolk Island Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12000981)- An Act to amend the Norfolk Island Act 1979.
Queensland Grant (Special Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 172 or 1981)- An Act to grant financial assistance to Queensland.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 198i (Act No. 121 00981)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16000981)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.1) 1981 (Act No. 1330r 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 13400981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1981 (Act No. 13500981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1981 (Act No. 13600981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1981 (Act No. 137 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1981 (Act No. 138 or 1981)-
An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.

Sales Tax Amendme~t Act (No.7) 1981 (Act No. 1390f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1981 (Act No. 1400f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1981 (Act No. 141 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1420f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Services Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 159 of 1981)An Act to amend the Social Services Act 1947, and for related purposes.
Social Services Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 170 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 105A of the Social Services Act 1947.
States Grants (Capital Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 171 ofl981)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure of a capital nature and to authorize the borrowing of certain moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 1620f 1981)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act(No. 2) 1981 (Act No. 167 of 1981')- An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1760f 1981)An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 169 of 1981)An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Crimes Amendment Bill 1981__ )nitiated in the Senate. First Reading.
-Domicile Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Domicile (Consequential Amendments) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Dried Sultana Production Underwriting Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Read...g.
Freedom of Information Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. IA-9A) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.

Petitions

16 September 1981 REPR ESENTATIVES 1367

Wednesday, 16 September 1981

3. That the Government has breached a 1980 election promise to increase its financial assistance to all youth programs.

Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia who respectfully showeth their anger and condemnation at the Fraser Government's decision to abolish all Community Youth Support Schemes on 31 st October 1981.
Further they denounce the decision for the disastrous effects it will have on growing numbers of unemployed young people around Australia.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government immediately and fully reverse its decision and restore complete funding to the Community Youth Support Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Coleman, Mr Cowan, Mr Kerin, Mr Les McMahon and Mr O'Keefe.
Petitions received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that a need exists within the community for the Community Youth Support Schemes.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government not remove any funds for the Community Youth Support Schemes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Donald Cameron.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens respectfully showeth:
I. That the Federal Government's Budget decision to disband the Community Youth Support Scheme is a total abandonment of the so-called "hard-core unemployed" and indeed of all unemployed youth.
2. That the Government has ignored the valuable contribution made by CYSS Centres in teaching basic skills and self reliance and in mediating between the community and the unemployed.

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will call on the Government to revoke this Budget decision and restore funding to CYSS in line with its 1980 election promise.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the honourable, the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully demands:
That the decision of the Government to end funding for the Community Youth Support Schemes on October 31st, 1981 as announced by the Treasurer in the Budget speech of 18th August, 1981 be reversed.
Community Youth Support Schemes have operated successfully for five years and provide community support and educational opportunities for unemployed young people which will not be adequately provided by other Government programmes. The full effect of the abolition of Community Youth Support Schemes will be felt by the unemployed people whose opportunities to participate in the Australian Community will be further diminished.
The petitioners humbly pray that the House of Representatives take all steps necessary to ensure that continued Government funding of Community Youth Support Schemes.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Wilson.
Petition received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the honourable, the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Victoria respectfully showeth:
That the serious youth unemployment problem is a direct result of the Community's failure to create sufficient jobs.
In these circumstances the decision to abolish Community Youth Support Schemes (CYSS) is a socially retrogressive step. The CYSS projects provide valuable support services and work training for many young unemployed.
We the undersigned are concerned that the closure of CYSS projects may lead young unemployed to become involved in anti-social behaviour such as crime, vandalism, prostitution, rebellious behaviour and mob action. There is the even more frightening prospect that many more young people will give up hope of obtaining a job, become idle and even contemplate suicide.

1368 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Petitions

Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Federal Government reverse its decision to abolish CYSS project and provide sufficient funds to enable the various CYSS centres to continue their valuable work with the young unemployed in the future.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Sir Phillip Lynch, Mr Ewen Cameron, Dr Cass, Mr Hawke, Mr Holding, Mr Howe, Mr Innes, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Kent and Mr Milton.
Petitions received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the honourable, the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Ballarat respectfully showeth:
(i) that the action of the Government in terminating the Community Youth Support Scheme will have serious effects upon the life possibilities of a significant number of young people who, through circumstances totally outside their control, are not able to find any form of paid employment,
(ii) that the action of the Government fails to understand that many unemployed youth do not fit into the retraining initiatives proposed and that part of the need within the total context of school-to-work transition is to have support structures based around the Community Youth Support Scheme model,
(iii) that the failure to provide such supports will place many young people in a position of high vulnerability to crime, violence, vandalism, drug'abuse, and even suicide, and that the incidence of homelessness and family breakdown will be further aggravated.
Your petitioners humbly pray that the Government give immediate attention to the re-instatement of the Community Youth Support Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy and Mr Mildren.
Petitions received.
Community Youth Support Scheme
To the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. We, the undersigned, citizens of the North West Coast of Tasmania, hereby humbly plead that the Federal Government reverse the decision to cease funding to the Community Youth Support Scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Groom.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Tallangatta Post Office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ewen Cameron. Petition received.

Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Newborough Post Office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that .the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham.
Petition received.

Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate downgrading or closure of Bunyip Post Office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Cunningham.
Petition received.

Postal Services

To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of
Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The
humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:

That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to
downgrade postal and mail services throughout Australia will place in jeopardy the existing services and the security of the mails by:

Downgrading a large number of official post offices

Reducing. the number of post offices open for business

during the lunch period

.

Reducing the number of stre:et posting boxes

Delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery

offices

Downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified staff

Using private contractors for mail cartage.

Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will
downgrade the postal and mail services of the citizens of Australia.

Petitions

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1369

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrLloyd.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Capricornia respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade postal and mail services throughout Australia will place in jeopardy the existing services and the security of the mails by:
Downgrading a large number of official post offices; reducing the number of post offices open for business during the lunch period; reducing the number of street posting boxes; delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices; downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified staff; and using private contractors for mail cartage.
Your petitioners tilerefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will downgrade the postal and mail services of the citizens of Australia..
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Everingham.
Petition received.

3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed a further mining lease against the advice of conservationists.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys and Mr Millar.
Petitions received.
Trans Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition -of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans-Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans-Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sale of Trans-Australia Airlines would inevitably result in-
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia;
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans-Australia Airlines.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent and Mr Morris.
Petitions received.

Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Bowman respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of Manly, Queensland 4179 post office places in jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrJull.
Petition received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. J'he humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That sandmining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the interim list of the Australian Heritage Commission, imd the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.

Unemployment
To the Honourable Speaker and Members bf the House of Representatives of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia, respectfully showeth that:
While an average of over 450,000 Australians are now suffering unemployment at anyone time,
over one million people have been unemployed for one or more weeks during the last year and of these,
62% of women unemployed and 41 % of men unemployed received no unemployment benefits, and further that While the poverty line for a family (one income, one child) is $117.90 per week and the average weekly earnings are $243 per week, the income for these one million unemployed Australians is on average $62 per week for women and $110 per week for men.
We the undersigned citizens therefore declare
that unemployment with its attendant consequences of massive poverty is the major domestic, political and human question facing the National Government at this time,
that the central issue for the'! 980 Federal elections must be the economy and the creation of jobs so that all Australians who choose may work.
We call for the right to work guaranteed as a fundamental human
right the restoration of full employment the maintenance of real wages and the creation of accept-
able social conditions the maintenance and expansion of the public sector

1370 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Petitions

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Adermann. Petition received.

Aboriginal Land Rights

To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Federal Parliament assembled. The
petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That the humble petitioners respectFully believe that the recent report of the World Council of Churches team which visited Australia, June 15 to July 3, 1981, emphasises the central importance of land rights to the Aboriginal people.

And noting that all attempts by white Australians to man-

age Aboriginal affairs for them have failed.

.

Your petitioners thereFore pray:

That the Federal Government will accept its responsibility and use its powers under the Constitution to over-ride racist state legislation, particularly to provide Land Rights with Freehold title, and
That in addition the Government Fulfil its stated policy of self-determination and self-management for Aboriginal people, by funding all housing, health, education, legal, employment strategy and welfare matters concerning Aboriginal people directly through Aboriginal Community-based Community-controlled organisations.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Dr Blewett.

Petition received.

Health Care Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth:
that many Australians will be financially disadvantaged by the health changes proposed by the Federal Government, especially the withdrawal of Commonwealth medical benefits For the uninsured, and the introduction of a means test For free public hospital care;
that the health insurance changes promote inequity, inefficiency and lack of universal coverage;
that the. public hospital system and community health programmes Will be financially disadvantaged by the abdication of Commonwealth responsibility and funding.
Your petitioners thereFore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will take all steps necessary to reintroduce a system of health' care based on ability to pay, and access to health care based on medical need.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Blewett.
Petition received.

Aborigines
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in (he Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the humble petitioners respectfully believe that the Federal Government has the power conferred on it by the 1967 ReFerendum to intervene on behalf of Aboriginal people in any conHict with any State or Territory Government. Your petitioners therefore pray:

That the Federal Government will assume its full responsibility for Aboriginal Affairs, and use the powers conferred on it by the people of Australia in the 1967 Referendum to intervene on behalf of Aboriginal people i]\,any conHict with any State or Territory Government; "
That the Government respond to the report of the Senate Standing Committee on Constitutional and Legal Affairs on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders on Queensland reserves which sets out precisely the Commonwealth constitutional and legal position under Section 51;
That in addition the Government fulfil its stated policy of self-determination and self-management for Aboriginal people, by funding all housing, health, education, legal, employment strategy and welfare matters concerning Aboriginal people directly through Aboriginal Community based Community controlled organisations.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrDean.
Petition received.
Privacy and Personal Information
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of ,Australia respectfully showeth that:
Paragraphs 107 and 108 of the Privacy and Personal Information discussion paper number 14, brought down by the Law Reform Commission in June 1980, undermines the family unit and the authority of parents, which is the Christian basis of our society, by proposing that "between 12 and 16 years, a child should be entitled to object to disclosure of information to a parent".
It is your petitioners' sincere belief that:
(a) an adolescent between the ages of 12 and 16 is not at a mature enough stage of liFe to decide whether or not the disclosure of information to a parent will be in the best interests of the adolescent.
(b) as a record keeper has no responsibility For the child, and as his moral standards may be different to those of a parent, he should not be permitted to come between child and parent.
(c) a parent has a unique position whicl1 may enable him/her to perceive a situation that the record keeper does not. The parent must therefore be aware of the problem if remedial action is to be taken, and has the right to guide the child in the direction he/she feels fit.
Your petitioners thereFore pray:
That the Members of the House of Representatives will reject the recommendation of the Law Reform Commission and find some other means to protect children from the excessive abuse of some parents.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Dobie.
Petition received.
Eagle Farm Airport
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia showeth:
(a) That residents of densely populated suburbs in the vicinity of the airport and residents of other suburbs in the flight path of international and domestic jets are experiencing an unreasonablt; degree of aircraFt noise.

Petitions

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1371

(b) Further, that these same residents will be subjected to prolonged bouts of such aircraft noise if a decision is taken to extend the curfew at both the domestic and international airports.
(c) That this decision has been foreshadowed on two occasions as follows:
(i) In submissions to the Public Hearing held by the Public Works Committee of this Parliament in regard to Stage One~Redevelopment of Brisbane's International Airport; these submissions proposed an extension of the existing curfew when the new runway is completed (approx. 1986). This proposal received the full support of the Queensland Government.
(ii) TAA's request for an extended curfew to coincide with the introduction of the Airbus.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will refuse to extend the existing curfew and will reconsider its siting plans for the proposed new runway so as to minimise noise pollution over high density suburbs.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker, and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That the decisions arising out of the Review of Government Functions (undertaken by The Razor Gang) in relation to tertiary education funding will severely impair the process of developing the nation's intellectual resources.
2. That the inevitable outcome of the decisions will, in general terms be~
(i) the financial impoverishment of small and mediumsized universities;
(ii) the abandonment of non-vocational courses and the possibility of widespread academic unemployment.
3. That amongst the particular consequences of the decisions, namely consequences following on the re-introduction of tertiary fees for selected categories of post-graduate students will be-
(i) the discouraging of part-time post-graduate students and all those not receiving Commonwealth or University scholarships;
(ii) the weakening of the national research effort to which post-graduate students have in the past made a significant contribution.
4. That the provision of the maximum TEAS benefit to only 14% of all students, indeed, the failure to adequately support financially all undergraduate students, will be a disincentive to enrolment in tertiary institutions.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to re-consider the decisions arising out of the Review of Commonwealth Functions and urgently initiate a full and complete inquiry into the following:
(i) employment in tertiary institutions; (ii) the effects of the Government's decisions upon the
national research effort and upon post-graduate enrolments; (iii) the adequacy of tertiary student support systems.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.

Labelling of Cosmetics
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That continued use of animal ingredients in cosmetic products, and the inhumane use of animals in scientific research for cosmetic products is abhorrent and barbaric.
That the Industries Assistance Commission, because of the Commission's terms of reference, seems unable to impose any regulation or recommend any regulation which might restrict the activities of Cosmetic Companies which produce cosmetics in which animal ingredients have been used, or for which animals were subjected to research.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will:
Legislate to require comprehensive labelling of perfumes, cosmetics and toilet preparations to indicate:
(I) whether a product contains any animal derivative. If so, the ingredient and source should be indicated.
(2) whether the research and development of that product or any of its ingredients involved experimentation on animals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that the proposed changes to assistance to the passenger motor vehicle and components industries after 1984 shall lead to the collapse of the vehicle manufacturing industry in Australia. Your petitioners therefore pray that the Industries Assistance Commission report be not given effect.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hurford.
Petition received.
Lebanon
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. The Israeli military campaign of raids and attacks on the territory of the sovereign state of Lebanon has caused en'ormous destruction and loss of civilian life.
2. This campaign is primarily directed against the Palestinian people, and Lebanese supporters of the right of the Palestinians to return to their homeland.
3. In this campaign the Israeli Government has the assistance of US-made weapons and military supplies.
4. There will be no peace in the Middle East until Israel's attacks on the Palestinians are ended and the rights of the Palestinians are fully recognised, including the right to national self-determination and the recognition of the PLO as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.
Our petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will call on the Prime Minister and the Minister for Foreign Affairs to exert all possible diplomatic

1372 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Petitions

influence on the Government of the United States of

America, in order to persuade that Government to:

j'r,

A. Exert maximum US Government opposition to Israel's military campaign in Lebanon and to prevent its recurrence.

B. 'Desist from supplying Israel with military or economic
aid as long as it continues to occupy Arab territories and deny the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people' in accordance with United Nations Resolution,
3414.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Innes.

Petition received.

Pensions To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the Ho~se of
Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth, that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is not fulfilling its responsibility in ensuring an adequate standard of living for all Australians, which is causing untold hardship on relief agencies' limited resources, and require the following steps to be taken as a matter of urgency:
I. That the Commonwealth Government raise the level of all pensions and benefits at least to the poverty line.
2. That the Commonwealth Government reconsider its recent decisions in relation to the health system and cuts to Commonwealth activity.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert further poverty and suffering in our community by implementation of the above measures.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Innes.
Petition received.

Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) the financial situation of students enrolled at Australian post-secondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) the imposition of post-secondary tuition fees of comparable levels to those imposed prior to 1971 would force many currently enrolled students to discontinue their studies and deter many persons willing and able at present to undertake post-secondary study from doing so.
(iii) those students and potential students from social groups currently under-represented and disadvantaged in the post-secondary education system would be most severely affected by the reintroduction of fees for post-secondary education.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
I. post-secondary education tuition fees not be reintroduced for any courses or for any category of students
2. the visa charges upon private overseas students be removed immediately ,

3. 'the Minister of Education immediately clarify the Government's attitude to the reintroduction of postsecondary tuition fees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
'The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is increasing Interest Rates on Home Mortgage Loans without due concern for its impact on the general community and ask that the Government re-consider its attitude to Low and Middle income earners.
Your Petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert any further effects of increases in interest rates on Home Mortgage Loans which cause Financial, Social and Psychological pressures on families.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Kent.
Petition received.
Aboriginal Land Rights
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members 'of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the projected repeal by the Queenslal)d State Government of the Aborigines Act 1971-1979 and the Torres Strait Islander Act 1971I979 will almost certainly lead to the degazettal of all Aborigimil reserves in Queensland, as has already been the case with Aurukun and Mornington Island.
Thatif, as is likely, the Aboriginal communities from these reserves are placed under similar shire council legislation on ' fifty year leases, they will be exposed to serious encroachment on their land by mining and tourist interests.
That it is also quite clear, on past evidence, that these interests will have the full backing of the Queensland Government and the rights of Aboriginal people to land rights and self-management will not be granted by that Government.
That the Commonwealth Government has the power to legislate and acquire land for Aboriginal people under its constitutional powers since the amendments to the Constitut,ion in 1967, but it is your Petitioners' sincere belief that it failed to act in 1978 and thus, failed in its duty before the people of Aurukun and Mornington Islan~.
That the Aboriginal people of Queensland have stated that they want land rights and self-management.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government make use of its constitutional and legislative powers to grant full land rights and self-management to the Aboriginal people of Queensland:
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Les McMahon.
Petition received.

Petitions

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1373

Funding of Women's Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia/N.S.W. respectfully showeth:
That many thousands of women and children in the Australian community who use the services of Women's Refuges, Rape Crisis Centre and Women's Health Centres:
I. Express their concern at the decision of the Federal Government to pass to the States the responsibility of funding those essential services because of the poor record already demonstrated by some States;
2. Call on the Federal Government to reverse that decision;
3. Request that the Government ensure that there is one department which will administer all funds for the above under the heading of Women's Services;
4. Propose that future funding should be on a guaranteed triennial basis which must take into account inflation and indexation rises;
5. Request definite government policy commitment to a substantial injection of funds to consolidate existing services and develop new ones. That such funds be distributed in such a way as to ensure equitable national distribution of these resources.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Morris.
Petition received.
Taxation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The Petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
. I. Our grievance that taxation on interest earned in bank and building society savings accounts is thus a law and
2. Our grievance that interest charged on home mortgage loans is not at this time, an allowable taxation deduction.
Your Petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled should:
I. Allow interest earned in bank and building society savings accounts-to the approximate amount of $500.00 (five hundred dollars)-to be NOT counted as taxable income.
2. Deem that interest charged on home mortgage loans be an allowable taxation deduction-to the approximate amount of $1,000.00 (one thousand dollars). This only applicable on the private home of the taxpayer, and not on any investment properties.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Rocher.
Petition received.
Family Allowances
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble Petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Prime Minister has failed to ensure that his Government honour his 1980 election promise to assist Australian families by redistributing increased oil levy revenue to enable increased family allowances.
That this breach of promise has exacerbated even further the serious financial hardship experienced by one-parent and single income families and permitted the further erosion of family allowances which at the beginning of calendar year

1981 had suffered a 56 per cent loss in value since 1976 when they were last altered.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will call on the Prime Minister to honour his election promise by immediately making budgetary provision to adjust family allowances to rellect the increase to the cost of living since 1976 and to, in future, index allowances to rellect annual CPI increases.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrWhite.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned members of the electorate of Phillip respectfully shows our concern regarding the proposed introduction of fees for post-graduate researchers in Universities and Colleges of Advanced Education, since it appears likely that this action will have a serious and detrimental effect on cultural, scientific and technical research and development within the Australian community.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly pray that the Government will change the decision to introduce tuition fees for post-graduate study.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Birney.
Petition received.
Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned members of parents and citizens associations respectfully showeth:
That retention of the Schools Commission and the Curriculum Development Centre in their present forms is essential for the balanced and progressive allocation of educational resources and facilities in the Australian community:
That serious concern has been generated by the decision, within the Schools Commission guidelines, to cut funds to the general recurrent and capital programs by reallocation to transition, the decision not to implement the school improvement program; and the divisiveness created between government and non-government schools due to increases of $43.25m to non-government schools while government schools funds have not increased.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Government will reverse these decisions-will retain the Schools Commission and Curriculum Development Centre in their original forms; retain the Schools Commission proposals including recurrent and capital funding proposals; basket of services and the schools improvement program.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrDean.
Petition received.
Vitamins and Minerals
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the electors of the division of Macquarie respectfully showeth that the proposal to restrict the potency and open sale of certain vitamins and minerals is

1374 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Petitions

not supported by credible scientific evidence .and is not justified in the interest of public health and, thereFore, Government interference over and above existing regulations is not warranted and is an infringement of the right of the individual to exercise his Freedom of choice and that in future all interested parties (industry or consumer) be given the opportunity to voice their opinion on matters which so directly affect their well-being and health.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the proposed regulations not be enacted.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Free.
Petition received.
Staging of American B52 Bombers
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned in the Northern Territory respectfully showeth:
That the proposed use of Darwin Airport as a refuelling and Rest and Recreation base for American B52 bombers:
Jeopardises the welfare of the citizens of Darwin and of all Australians, in that it establishes a stronger potential of Darwin being a nuclear target in any conflict between the USA and another power.
Impedes the sovereignty of the Australian nation in that Australian citizens would have neither control nor knowledge of whether B52's:
(a) Carried nuclear weapons (b) Were engaged in bombing missions against another
State.
Violates the Australian people's independence and links this nation irreconcilably with United States foreign policies thereby destroying the potential for independent Australian defence policy.
Violates democratic procedures in committing the Australian nation to participation in future wars without due consultation and -informed assessment by Australian citizens and further increases the militarisation of the Indian Ocean thereby increasing the likelihood of super power conflict in this region.
Jeopardises the welfare of the Citizens of Darwin, in that noise pollution and the threat of accidental radioactive fallout will increase substantially to the residents.
Negates the potential of the Australian nation to establish itself as a nation of Peace in the Pacific region and violates Australia's commitment to the Nuclear NonProliFeration Treaty.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Members of the House of Representatives will ensure that the Prime Minister withdraw the offer of Darwin, or any other location in Australia, as a base or depot for American B52 bombers. And that furthermore will ensure that any request of such usage by the US Government be rejected.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrKent.
Petition received.
AIR TRAFFIC CONTROLLERS
Notice of Motion
Mr MORRIS (Shortland)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-

deplores the failure of the Minister for Transport to ensure that sufficient air traffic controllers are employed by his Department to keep Brisbane Airport open during normal operational hours;
notes that the recruitment of Australian air traffic controllers by overseas countries exceeds Australia's recruitment of air traffic controllers overseas; and
calls on the Minister for Transport to take positive action to prevent further deterioration of services to Australian aviation.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES
Mr HAYDEN-I ask a question of the Deputy Prime Minister, or perhaps he is the Acting Prime Minister.
Mr Nixon-Do you want another lesson in politics?
Mr HAYDEN-Certainly I would not address a question in that direction if I were in search of ethics. I refer to the Minister's remarks in this House yesterday. concerning trade unions and the industrial situation in Australia. Does he recall saying in a speech in Japan on 26 January this year that there are more strikes in the United States of America, Great Britain and other industrialised countries than there are in Australia? Does he also recall telling his Tokyo audience that, in terms of days lost, the impact of strikes in Australia was small and 'the industrial situation in Australia is given too much prominence by some people' and that our industrial problems are 'relatively minor'? Finally, with the benefit of a refreshed memory, will the Minister now stop blustering and answer the question I asked yesterday-that is, what does he intend to do to alter the damaging impact of the Government's fiscal, monetary and especially exchange rate policies on traditional farm and manufacturing export industries?
Mr ANTHONY-In 1975 I happened to be in Japan at the same time as the then Minister for Minerals and Energy, the late Rex Connor. He came back to Australia on that occasion and accused me of having a different point of view from that of the Government of Australia, and of trying to undermine that Government. That would have been very ea~y for me to do, but I did not happen to do that. I took a national point of view in the interests of one nation. On this occasion when I went to Japan I also did my best to put a national point of view. I could quite easily have sabotaged Australia's interests in Japan by telling the Japanese about all our weaknesses and disadvantages. Certainly, in the industrial area we have a very poor record indeed. There are holdups everywhere. Yesterday I mentioned the fact

Questions Without Notice

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1375

that 46 ships were being held off the New South Wales coast and were not able to load coal for Japan. Is it any wonder that the Japanese are concerned about industrial action in this country? Any words I might have used in Japan were said to try to put Australia in the most favourable position, and I will always do that.
RURAL ROAD FUNDING
Mr EWEN CAMERON-Is the Minister for Transport satisfied that State governments are adequately matching Commonwealth road grant funding, particularly for rural municipalities?
Mr HUNT-I am satisfied that some State governments are making a very responsible contribution to local and shire roads within their States. The Victorian Government certainly is making a very valuable contribution to local government within its State.
Mr Barry Jones-Not in housing, of course.
Mr HUNT-We are discussing roads at the moment. For instance, the Commonwealth grant for local roads in Victoria was $29.668m for 1980-81 and the estimated State expenditure was $18.5m. The Commonwealth grant for Queensland in 1980-81 was $28.875m and the estimated State contribution was $9.6m. For the newly self-governing Northern Territory the Commonwealth contribution was $6.8m but the estimated Northern Territory expenditure was $11.8m. I now come back to New South Wales.
Goyernment members-Ah!
Mr HUNT-Ah! The Commonwealth grant for New South Wales was $42.417m for 1980-81 and the estimated State contribution was a miserable $1.5m for a few traffic lights and a few traffic facilities around New South Wales. Of course, the Premier of New South Wales is running around the countryside, almost in parallel with the XPT train. The train is going from one centre to another. Nobody knows where it will ultimately run or what sort of service it will provide. But the Premier is running around blaming the Commonwealth Government--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Minister was asked a question about roads.
Mr HUNT-Well, I am on roads. The Premier of New South Wales is blaming the Commonwealth Government for the inadequacy of road funding in New South Wales. The truth of the matter is that the New South Wales Government is also withdrawing funds from New South Wales local government through the local government assistance fund. Over the last three years it has progressively reduced its contribution to local government, to local needs and to local people.

What has the Commonwealth Government done? The' Commonwealth Government has contributed 2t per cent of personal income tax revenue collected, so that in this financial year a total of over $350m--
Mr Sinclair-Two per cent.
Mr HUNT-Two per cent; the right honourable member is right. The Commonwealth Government has contributed $350m to local government throughout this nation of ours. Since 1976 a total of$I,350m has been allocated to local government to assist with roads and other needs. The New South Wales Government quite obviously-is retreating from its responsibility to assist local government and local roads.
Mr SPEAKER-I suggest that the Minister bring his answer to a conclusion.
Mr HUNT-I just wish that the New South Wales Government would take a leaf out of the book of the Victorian Government, the Queensland Government and other governments, live up to its responsibility for roads in its own State and stop blaming the Commonwealth for something that it is not doing.
KAMPUCHEA
Mr MORRISON-My question is directed to the Minister for Foreign Affairs. Will the Government, in adhering to its commitment to derecognise the Pol Pot regime, firstly, denounce the dangerous farce of supporting a coalition built around the remnants of the Pol Pot regime and, secondly, vote against or at least abstain from voting on the credentials issue in favour of the Pol Pot regime at the United Nations General Assembly which starts today?
Mr STREET-As I have said in this place more than once, the Government will decide its position on voting on the Democratic Kampuchea credentials issue in the light of circumstances at the time. Since I last answered a question on this matter there have been two developments. One is the international conference on Kampuchea held in New York, which I attended, and the other is that following that conference there have been efforts to form a coalition government from the various anti-Vietnamese factions in Kampuchea. A preparatory meeting was held in Singapore a few weeks ago. I understand that further meetings are planned. The Government has always said that it hopes a truly representative coalition of forces opposed to the Heng Samrin regime will emerge in Kampuchea. I think it is far too early yet to say that such a truly representative coalition has emerged, but we shall watch the developments at the meetings which are now taking

1376 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Questions Without Notice

place or are planned and make our final decision in the light of what happens then.
ECONOMY
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-My question, which is directed to the Prime Minister, is in effect a request to review the assumptions on which the Budget was based. Is the Prime Minister aware of the adverse economic and financial trends in the economy that commenced at the beginning of 1981? Does he agree that the assumption of a very large flow of private capital into Australia, which was claimed to be an essential ingredient of success, has not occurred? Does he know that there has been a fall in our international reserves from $6.1 billion to $4.45 billion in August, with a consequent serious effect on the money supply? Does the Prime Minister know that the Reserve Bank of Australia has somewhat tardily increased lending by the trading banks by2 per cent over the previous level? Does this indicate that the Budget estimate was wrong because the minimum liquidity ratio for trading banks went down to the minimum of about 18 per cent? As well, does the Prime Minister agree that the barbarised interpretation of the Gregory thesis by government officials-that industries, mainly manufacturing, had to move over or go broke in order to provide space for energy-related industries-has proved to be wrong? Would he inform manufacturers that tariff changes will be carefully chosen over a reasonable period? Has the Gregory argument been proved wrong by the August trade figures, which showed that imports were $1,834m and exports were $1 ,685m, and by the growing unused industrial capacity of this country? Will he look at the changes in the exchange rate, and the enormous and debilitating losses to Australian producers who export, because of the revaluation of the currency, which is still going on, and the losses which have been caused to Australian manufacturers competing with imports, with the consequent effect on unemployment and gross nonfarm production? I ask these questions because of the Prime Minister's very deep knowledge. I ask that a committee be established, comprising the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the Minister for Industry and Commerce, the Treasurer and the Minister for Primary Industry, so that these matters can be considered.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Mr Speaker--
Mr Dawkins-Did you get notice of that?
Mr Barry Jones-He gave it to him.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Lalor will remain silent. I am quite sure that the Prime Minister does not need the

honourable member's help in answering the question.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Oh, I am grateful for it. The Government regularly reviews the
economy and what is happening in the economy. The Government regularly gets reports from the Treasurer on changes in the economy. That, of course, will proceed as a matter of course. But I think there are some aspects other than those to which the right honourable gentleman drew
attention which also ought to be borne in mind. In recent times there have been some encouraging bond sales. That has been a good turnaround from earlier weeks when, at the prevailing rates, it had been difficult to sell Commonwealth paper. Capital inflow certainly has been much less over the last several weeks than it was throughout the generality of last year. The capital inflow is notoriously volatile and, obviously, would be influenced by the very high interest rates in the United States. Despite rates being high in this country, they are still not as high as they are in the United States. That, I think, is significantly to the credit of the broad thrust of the Government's economic policies. Obviously, again, a very significant domestic Budget surplus would be a significant element in that.
Lack of capital inflow, as is the case in so many economic matters, has some good points and some bad points about it. From one point, it makes it much easier to achieve the Government's monetary targets. The fact that the trading banks have been given permission to extend their advances at a slightly greater rate is obviously recognition by the Reserve Bank of Australia that some accommodation in that area is helpful. I do not think anyone should read too much into that change, which has been announced today but which took effect some weeks ago, because, quite plainly, the Reserve Bank, through the banking system, will be making adjustments from time to time. The settings are not made at the time of the Budget and left there inflexibly throughout the year. One would expect the Reserve Bank, through the banking system, to be monitoring and watching what is happening in the economy. The Reserve Bank has reacted in a way which I think many people would regard as responsible.
The right honourable g~ntleman also raised the question of tariffs. I think that in everything the Government has done we have indicated that we wanted to moderate the impact of high protection but, at the same time, do it in a reasonable and gradual manner which will not unduly disrupt Australian industry but which, at the same time, will provide an incentive to greater efficiency and rationalisation within Australian industry. What

Questions Without Notice

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1377

we did in relation to the textiles, apparel and footwear industry a little over 12 months ago, I think, is a significant example of that. The decision not only gave confidence to the industry but also established the circumstances in which a larger part of the domestic market would be available for import competition as each year passed. In relation to tariffs and protection matters, that is the way in which the Government wants to operate. It wants to operate in a way which maintains the confidence of domestic industry but which, at the same time, encourages greater efficiency.
Revaluation has obviously reduced returns on Australian exports. But, again, the revaluation against the basket of currencies needs to be looked at against the background of the movements in relation to the Australian dollar and the United States dollar. The movements have gone in the opposite' direction and therefore have greatly moderated the impact on many Australian exporters. This has taken place over a significant period. Nevertheless, a strong Australian dollar is something which I think, by and large, all Australians want. There is not the slightest doubt that the appreciation of the Australian dollar over the last 12 months is one of the factors which led to the moderate inflation rate over the last 12 months. If we had had a weak dollar there would have been much greater impetus to inflation from overseas, with unhappy results for Australian producers and exporters. In making those comments '1 have sought to put the position contained in the right honourable gentleman's question into perspective. Nevertheless, the points he raised have been noted by the Treasurer and by me and his point of view certainly will be taken into account when we are examining these matters.
'EXPORT NOW' CAMPAIGN
Mr HURFORD-My question is directed to the Minister for Trade and Resources. Was Australia's seriously adverse balance of trade situation known when the decision was taken to terminate the 'Export Now' campaign? Is it not a fact that the Minister's weekend speech and the Government's replies to questions raised at the meeting of the Estimates committee examining his Department have pointed to sound reasons why the 'Export Now' cflmpaign should be retained, indeed continued with even greater enthusiasm? As the Prime Minister stated in the answer he gave to the last question that the Government is regularly reviewing the economy, in view of the very adverse balance of trade' situation, will the Government reverse its erroneous decision to terminate the 'Export Now' campaign?

Mr ANTHONY-I think the Australian Labor Party is trying to dramatise our overseas reserves position, which is still very strong. It talks in terms of re-examining the question of the termination of the 'Export Now' campaign because of recent trade figures. I do not know how the Government could have made that decision when it announced three years ago that it was going to be a three-year campaign terminating in July of this year.
TOURIST INDUSTRY
Mr CADMAN-My question is directed to the Minister for Industry and Commerce. I commend him for his support of and policies directed to. the Austr!llian tourist industry. Has he received the full co-operation of State governments in the promotion of tourism in Australia?
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH-Tourism will be-
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I assure honourable members on my left that if the answer is heard in silence it will be given more quickly and more questions will be able to be asked. I ask honourable members to remain silent.
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH-Tourism will be one of Australia's major growth industries in the 1980s and the Government derives very considerable encouragement from the developments that have taken place during recent years as a consequence of a number of initiatives that this Government has directly provided to promote significantly the development of Australia's tourist industry. I must say that there is an effective working relationship between the Commonwealth and the States in developing that industry. This was certainly reflected in the National Tourism Outlook Conference which was held recently in Canberra.
Very serious and continuing concern is felt about the lack of co-operation from the New South Wales Government in relation to the futlJre of Sydney Airport. As early as 1976 the New South Wales Premier and the Prime Minister agreed to a joint study of the major airport needs of the Sydney region. Those recommendations were released in 1979. The New South Wales Government has refused to accept them, despite the fact that traffic congestion at Sydney Airport has reached a critical level over recent years. Sydney's status as the most popular city for short term overseas visitors is being placed in jeopardy by virtue of the indecision of the New South Wales Government, and that indecision spells very bad news indeed for the development of the industry in that State. Increased traffic congestion will significantly inhibit the growth of tourism in

1378 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Questions Without Notice

Sydney and ultimately in Australia. Investments in accommodation proposals in New South Wales totalling $535m will be placed at risk, as well as the obvious spin-off effect on employment of investments of that magnitude. The simple point is that it is high time the New South Wales Premier and his Government got their act together. Their continuing failure to do so will place in jeopardy the otherwise encouraging prospects for the development of tourism in that State and in Australia.
WORLD MEDICAL ASSOCIATION: SOUTH AFRICAN MEMBERSHIP
Mr SCOTTI refer the Prime Minister to the decision of the Australian Medical Association to support an application by its counterpart in South Africa to rejoin the World Medical Association. I also remind him of the deliberately racist policy under which the South African Medical Association operates. I ask the Prime Minister whether he intends to ask the Australian Medical Association to reconsider its ill-conceived decision? If not, why not? Finally, is the Government's inaction on this matter to date a reflection of its tendency to persuade--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. The question is in order up to the last sentence.
Mr SCOTT-I will repeat the last sentence.
Mr SPEAKER-No, the honourable gentleman will not repeat the last sentence. I call the Minister for Foreign Affairs.
Mr STREET-The Government's attitude on the association of non-government organisations with South Africa are well known. We hope, and make known our view, that they do not become concerned in a close way with organisations involving South Africa. Equally, the Government recognises that non-government organisations have a right to decide on their own affiliations and those with whom they wish to be affiliated. The Government would not wish to interfere with that free right in Australia.
WELFARE HOUSING
Mr HICKS'----I ask the Minister for Housing and Construction whether welfare housing is a responsibility shared by the Commonwealth and State governments. If so, are the States shouldering their responsibilities?
Mr McVEIGH-I am grateful to the honourable member for Riverina for an excellent question. It is true that since 1945-the iirst year of the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement on

welfare housing-there has been a shared responsibility between the States and the Commonwealth. At this stage only two of the States have released their Budgets, so one cannot answer the honourable member's question generally. However, it seems to me to be appropriate to compare the two State Budgets that have been announced. I take South Australia first. We find that in its Budget which was announced yesterday that State saw fit to increase its allocation for welfare housing by the huge sum of $17m, or by 30 per cent.
Mr Braithwaite-How much?
Mr McVEIGH-An increase of 30 per cent or $17m. Quite obviously, the Minister of Housing in South Australia took note of my advice to him at a .recent meeting in Sydney when I suggested to him that he should obtain more money from his State. The action of the South Australian Government reflects its attitude over the years. We find that in 1979-80, the last year for which statistics are available, that State Government spent $47 a head on welfare housing.
I turn to the other State which has announced its Budget. The question sought a comparison of those States that are sharing and those that are not sharing the housing welfare burden. We find that in New South Wales the allocation for housing decreased by 16 per cent and the allocation for welfare housing decreased by 14 per cent. Those decreases reflect that Government's concern for welfare housing over the years. In the year in which I said South Australia was giving $47 a head, New South Wales gave the second lowest allocation in the Commonwealth. It gave only $13' a head.
Mr Beazley-How much is it in Victoria?
Mr McVEIGH-It is $6 in Victoria. It concerns me to find that New South Wales has the highest number of people on the waiting list for welfare housing in Australia-38,000. I know that I am not supposed to advertise-I take note of that-but this morning in the Sydney Morning Herald, which is supposed to be a good newspaper, it was pointed out that in New South Wales at least 66 per c~nt of the people in welfare housing should not be t\1ere because their incomes are above the permissiole level. In answer to the excellent question asked by the honourable member for Riverina I come to this conclusion: New South Wales just is not interested in providing funds for welfare housing; it would rather spend the taxpayers' money on funding frivolous election campaigning.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will remain relevant to the question.

Questions Without Notice

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIV ES 1379

COMMONWEALTH HEADS OF GOVERNMENT MEETING
Mrs KELLY-Can the Prime Minister explain the amount of $3,000 in the Budget Estimates for medical services related to the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting for the weekend retreat in Canberra? Does the Prime Minister acknowledge that Royal Canberra Hospital, which is only one kilometre away from the lakeside retreat, has had its standards of medical service severely depleted by the Government's policy of cutbacks? Is this amount of $3,000 based on the Prime Minister's view that, while the Royal Canberra Hospital facilities are good enough for the locals, they are not good enough for the heads of government; or is it related to the need for personal attendance on the basis that in two days heads of state will absorb the full amount of the $27,000 available for what is described as hospitality?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-With 40 heads of government and very large delegations coming into this country and being here over a short period, I would have thought that the honourable member would want appropriate medical services to be available. That will be the case in Melbourne; it will also be the case in Canberra. Obviously the two issues are quite separate. The Royal Canberra Hospital is a first class hospital and has been given first class support by this Government.
BANK LENDING
Mr SHACK-My question is directed to the Treasurer and I too refer to the announcement last night by the Reserve Bank of Australia that there would be a relaxation of trading bank lending constraints. If it is true, as has been reported, that several of the banks have been lending over the previous level, what likely real effect, if any, will this relaxation have on satisfying the high demand for funds and on reducing interest rate pressures?
Mr HOWARD-The first thing that should be said about the announcement last night by the Reserve Bank is that it was very much an in-thegroove announcement by a central bank.
Mr Hayden-John Sidney will send you another telegram if you talk like that.
Mr HOWARD-For people to start reading it as being anything more than an appropriate adjustment of quantitative gUIdance by the Reserve Bank to the trading banks in Australia is to completely misread the situation. To imply this, as the Leader of the Opposition has done-his interjection reminds me that it will result in another $900m of bank lending being available in the

community-is to misunderstand the situation totally. As the Prime Minister pointed out in answer to an earlier question, it is necessary that none of the settings against which economic decisions are made at the beginning of the year should be regarded as immutable and unchangeable. Equally, I do not think we should panic, take fright, or over-react to two months' figures.
A lot of nonsense has been talked about the figures for private capital inflow into Australia over the last couple of months. I take the opportunity of telling the House that the private capital inflow into Australia for the months of July and August 1981 was 50 per cent greater than for the months of July and August 1980; in other words, $805m versus $545m. We are dealing with a situation where, during those two months, far from there being a deterioration in the volume of private capital inflow into Australia there has been a widening of the current account deficit because of a much greater volume of imports and a lesser volume of exports.
In part, some of those reasons are of a one-off character. For example, in both July and August the import figures were inflated by the importation of a number of Boeing aircraft by one of Australia's domestic airlines, which made a very significant contribution towards bolstering the import figures during those months. Equally, the disastrous strike in central Queensland has had a dramatic effect on coal exports from that State, and there have been other industrial problems. What I put to the House-it is a little away from the honourable gentleman's question, I am prepared to concede, but I think the two matters are related-is that it has been argued that in some way what is nothing more than a technical adjustment to the lending guidance given by the Reserve Bank to our trading banks has in some way been a panic reaction to greatly adverse balance of payments figures.
Private capital inflow is a notoriously volatile item. We made the best estimate at the time the Budget was brought down. For the first two months of this financial year it is 50 per cent better than it was last year. Nobody can swear to this House that it will be precisely what was predicted at Budget time but for anybody to suggest, as the Leader of the Opposition has done, that in some way because of these figures the Budget strategy is .collapsing demonstrates a total misreading of the situation.
STARLAB AND THE SYNTHESIS TELESCOPE
Mr BARRY JONES-I direct my question to the Prime Minister. Is it a fact that Australia is

1380 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Questions Without Notice

considered to be one of the leading nations in the world in radio astronomy? Is it also a fact that the Government has declined to provide any money whatever in the 1981-82 Budget for two vital proj-
ects in radio astronomy-the synthesis telescope at Parkes and the Starlab project, a. joint enterprise of the United States, Canada and Australia? Does the Government realise the enormous economic potential that Starlab will have if it leads, as expected, to the production of new crystalline structures in metal? Does the Government recognise the damage that our refusal to provide any money will do to our international reputation in this important area? Finally, will the Prime Minister reconsider the failure to provide any money for these two projects in the
1981-82 Budget?
Mr THOMSON-The honourable member for Lalor is correct. The Government did not provide any money for the synthesis telescope in this year's Budget. It was a Budget of restraint and the honourable member is well aware of the reasons for that restraint. A submission was made for an expenditure of $140,000 on a feasibility study of Starlab. That funding was not included in the Budget. I am very happy to say that the Australian National University and a French firm, Matra, have come to an agreement to carry out a feasibility study. The Government will look with great interest at the results of that study.

both at ministerial and departmental level. Interdepartmental consultations are well under way and I anticipate-I do not comment with any sense of guarantee to this House-that the Cabinet will be in a position to commence discussions on the report some time towardsthe end of October.
I also anticipate, as the House would well understand, that because of the importance of tQe issue and its complexity there will be several Cabinet meetings before we are in a position to take a final decision. There can be no denying that this will be a very difficult decision for the Government to take. The industry itself is divided and there is very considerable and significant interest by various sections within the Australian community. A number of major interest groups are well publicising their views at this time. I emphasise that the Government is not open to emotional pressures from any particular interest group, whether in support of or opposed to the present shape of the industry and the level of assistance that it receives. Having said that, the Government, of course, is open to sound argument backed by good evidence from whatever source. It is on this and on the Government's assessment of Australia's national interests, having regard to the needs of the industry, that we will take our decision on the level of assistance which should apply to the industry.

MOTOR VEHICLE INDUSTRY
Mr GILES-Can the Minister for Industry and Commerce advise the House when the Government anticipates reaching its decision on the Industries Assistance Commission's report on passenger motor vehicles?
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH-I appreciate fully the importance to the industry and to the community generally of the Government's impending decision on the arrangements which will apply to the passenger motor vehicle industry post-1984. It is, of course, not proper for me to comment at this time, nor indeed at any time before the decision is taken by the Government, because the decision requires Cabinet consideration. Notwithstanding a number of pressures upon me and the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, it has always been the unqualified practice for Ministers not to comment ahead of Cabinet consideration, for good and proper reasons. I certainly do not intend to depart from that practice. The House will be interested to know that extensive consultations have taken place with all sections of the industry representing all the diverse commercial groups which have a quite proper and strong interest in this matter. Those discussions have taken place

SPECIAL TRANSPORT NEEDS GRANTS
Mr MORRIS-My question is directed to the Minister for Transport. I note that he is satisfied that the Victorian Government is making a very valuable contribution to the road programs in that State. So I ask': Why, in these circumstances, has the Government made a special transport needs grant of $70m to Victoria? Will the Minister state the nature of the special transport needs which are evident in that State, apart from the approaching defeat of the Victorian Government? Will he also itemise the specific transport projects on which the $70m is to be expended? Finally, will the Minister now act to provide similar special transport needs grants to Queensland, Tasmania, Western A\lstralia, South Australia, the Northern Territory and in particular New South Wales as that State has increased its road expenditure by 28 per cent in the last four years?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-This matter arose directly out of the last Premiers Conference. I think it needs to be understood that nearly every State had had one and maybe more than one special addition to the semi-government loans programs over the years. For example, New South Wales had had special additions totalling

Questions Without Notice

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1381

$IOOm for the special transport needs-railways needs-of that State. It received $1 OOm or $20m a
year. That amount was provided after the train
disaster in New South Wales to enable that State
to catch up on a lag in the railways and in railway
quality because insufficient funds had been provided for those purposes in earlier years. Victoria
was one State which had never had special ad-
ditions to semi-government loan programs over all the years. Therefore, there was a commitment
of $20m this year for the semi-government
program and $20m next year, making a total of $40m in all. In addition, there was a grant of $35m
this year and next year off the Commonwealth
Budget. This money was provided in general
terms to meet some transport disabilities of the State and of the city of Melbourne. But the funds
were to be used, quite obviously, as was the case with New South Wales, at the discretion of the
State Government.

So far as the real impact of all this is concerned,
what matters on the domestic monetary aggregates, of course, is the surplus of private sector
foreign exchange transactions. As I pointed out in answer to the honourable member for Tangney,
there has been a widening of the current account
deficit because imports have grown at a much fas-
ter rate than exports over the past few months. I
touched briefly upon the reasons in my answer to the honourable member for Tangney. But all of this underlines the need for the Government and
for the Reserve Bank of Australia, given its par-
ticular responsibilities for the conduct of the mon-
etary system, to maintain a flexible attitude and to
be willing to change things such as the quantitative guidance to the Australian trading banks, and
it also puts some kind of obligation on us and
those who follow us not to overreact to what are
proper technical adjustments by the central banking authorities.

FOREIGN CAPITAL INFLOW

ABORIGINES

Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-My question is Mr HAYDEN-I ask a question of the Prime

supplementary to a question just asked of the . Minister. He will recall the report, recently re-

Treasurer. I ask the Treasurer whether he has leased, of the five-member team from the World

seen the balance of payments figures for August Council of Churches which visited Australia at

1981, issued by the Australian Bureau of Statistics the invitation of the Australian Council of

yesterday, and whether he has seen the last paraChurches. I ask whether the Prime Minister

graph of an article in the Australian Bureau of directed his attention in particular to that section

Statistics Catalogue which states:

of the report which states:

A net apparent capital inflow of $360 million, the lowest monthly inflow since December 1980. Contributing to this inflow are public non-monetary enterprise borrowings of $90
million.

Aborigines have become the invisible, unseen and unheard people of Australia. They neither share in the prosperity nor the promise of a free, democratic and affluent nation. It is in
the interests of all the racially oppressed that the plight of the Aboriginal people be known overseas.

I point out that taking into account that $90m, it brings the figure down to $270m. How does the Treasurer reconcile that with what he has just said to the House remembering that I have spoken about the nine months from the beginning of 1981? This refers only to the capital inflow.
Mr HOWARD-With great respect to my right honourable friend, I think it is relatively easy to reconcile that with what I have said to the House. I said a number of things to the House. I said firstly that one ought not to read too much into a month or two's figures, whether those figures are favourable or unfavourable. I do not propose to start panicking over the fact that in July and August of this year private capital inflow has not been as strong as it was in December of last year when it was $27Im. But I repeat to the right honourable gentIemanthat in July of last year private capital inflow was $268m. In August it was $277m. In July of this year it was $426m. In August of this year it was $379m.

In view of the Prime Minister's persistent preaching against the racist policies of other countries, when will his Government implement policies supported by proper levels of finance to do away with the appalling conditions of the Aboriginal people described in this report? Finally, why does the Prime Minister persist with the fiction that his Government's actions in this regard are satisfactory when there has been a cumulative reduction in real spending on Aboriginal programs in the period of his Government of much more than $200m?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I do not believe the report of the World Council of Churches paid due regard to the very real progress that has been made in Australia over recent years. It needs to be understood, as I believe the honourable gentleman understands, that Aboriginals are eligible for all the normal programs that are available to all other citizens in this country. In addition to that, in health, education--

1382 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr Dawkins-Come off it. They do not all live in Toorak.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Fremantle will remain silent.
Mr Hayden-The Prime Minister's behaviour is outrageously provocative and is totally dishonest. There has been a real reduction of more than $200m in six years, so how can he justify such a patently dishonest statement?
Mr SPEAKER-The House will not proceed while that unseemly conduct continues. I ask the Leader of the Opposition not to continue to .interject as he does. I ask him to give leadership to those people behind him in order to maintain the dignity of the Parliament. The honorable members on my left will remain silent.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable gentleman has such synthetic indignation because he knows what I say is correct.
Mr SPEAKER-I ask the right honourable gentleman not to make referen'ce to the interjections of the Leader of the Oppositio/1.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Mr Speaker, I respect your request but there needs to be some degree of temperate behaviour on the part of the Leader of the Opposition.
Mr Dawkins-Why don't you take on Queensland?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Fremantle will remain silent.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Not only are Aboriginals eligible for all the normal programs available to all other Australians but, in addition to that, in the areas of health, welfare, education, Aboriginal advancement 'and Aboriginal enterprises the taxpayers of this country have supported massive sums to provide special programs for the Aboriginal people.
Mr Dawkins-They are reducing sums. You have cut them.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-That needs to be understood.
Mr SPEAKER-I warn the honourable member for Fremantle to remain silent.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Let me give one example of that. There has been a substantial increase in the number of Aboriginals in training under the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs programs from nearly 1,300 people at the end of May 1977 to approaching 3,000 people in May 1981. There are special employment programs, special programs designed to encourage private businesses and Government departments to employ more people. Of course the

honourable gentleman believes that any problem can be solved merely by spending more money. He does not realise--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The right honourable gentleman will resume his seat. I indicate to honourable members on the Opposition benches that the fundamental principle of a parliament is that people can be heard and can speak. If the Parliament, by its own members who will not obey the Standing Orders, prevents any honourable member from being heard and putting his point of view, then it is my responsibility to take action. The behaviour of the House at present is very bad, and I will not stand for it.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, with respect, the problem is caused by the provocativeness of the Prime Minister. It is one thing to be heard and it is another thing to be misrepresented.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will remain seated and silent. The fact is that this is Question Time and all honourable members will be called as they stand in accordance with the orders and the practice of the House. It is not the practice of the House for a whole array of voices to challenge everything that is said as it is said. Whether it be correct or false, it must be said and it can be then answered in debate at the appropriate timeand not by continual interjection.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker--
Mr SPEAKER-Does the Leader of the Opposition have a point of order?
Suspension of Standing Orders Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (2.42)-No. You have called me, Mr Speaker. In those circumstances, I move:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the Leader of the Opposition from moving:
That this House deplores the patently dishonest claims of the Prime Minister in relation to his Government's neglect of Aboriginal welfare needs.
I have no choice but to take this course of action. The procedures of this'. House are loaded very heavily against the Op~osition. Question Time has now become high farce.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) put:
That the Leader of the Opposition be not further heard.
A division having been called and the bells being rung-
Mr Charles Jones-Mr Speaker, I have a point of order.

Questions Without Notice

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1383

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. The bells are ringing. If he wishes to take a point of order he will do so with his head covered.

Mr Charles Jones-Mr Speaker, in taking my point of order 1 draw your attention to your comment to members of the Opposition only in the last couple of minutes that the principle of a parliament is that people can be heard. 1 draw your attention to the motion: 'That the Leader of the Opposition be not further heard'. Where is your ruling? Where is your interpretation of a parliament?

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman well knows that he is not comparing two likes. 1 hardly feel like giving an explanation, but I will in case it is misunderstood by others who may be listening to the broadcast. 1 spoke about allowing honourable members to be heard and not to be drowned out by continual interjection. The motion moved by the Leader of the House is in accordance with the Standing Orders.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

65

Noes

41

Majority

24

AYES
Adermann. A. E. Anthony. J. D. Buurne. M. E. Birney. R. J. Bcudlield.J. M. Braithwt.lite. R. A.
Brown. N. A. Bungey. M. H. Burr. M. A. Cadman. A. G. CJOlcron. Donald Cilmcron. Ewen Cameron, Ian Carllon,J.J. Chapman. H. G. P. Coleman, W.P. Connolly. D. M. Cowan. D. B. Dean. A.G. Drummond, P. H.
Fire. w. C.
Fisher. P. S. (Teller) FTiJ~er. Malcolm Giles. G. O-H. Good luck. B. J. Groom.R.l. Hall. Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks. N.J. Hodges. J. C. Hodgman. W. M. Howard,l. W.
Hunt. R. J. D.

Hyde.J. M. Jarman. A. W.
Jull. D. F. Killen.D.J. Lloyd. D. Lusher. S. A. Lynch. Sir Phillip MacKenzie, A. J. McLean. R. M. McMahon, Sir William
McVeigh. D. T. Macphee. I. M. Millar. P. C. Moore.J. C. Newman. K. E. Nix.on,P.l. O-Keere. F. L. Porter,J. R. Rocher. A. C. Ruddock. P. M. Sainsbury. M. E. (Teller) Shack. P. D. Shipton. R. F. Sinclair. I. McC. Spender.J. M. Street. A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, C. W. Viner.R.1. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Beazley, K. C. Blewell, N. Brown, John Brown. Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cunningham. B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Fry. K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Hayden, W. G. Holding. A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller)

Jacobi, R.
Jenkins. H. A. Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Kelly,R.J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.e. Klugman, R. E.
McMahon. Les (Teller) Mildren, J. B. Milton,P.
Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountrord, J. G. SCOll. J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Wallis, L. G. West,S.J. Willis,R.

PAIRS

Falconer, P. D. Edwards, H. R. Bourchier, J. W. Robinson. Ian MacKellar, M. J. R. Dobie, J. D. M.

Young,M.J.
Cohen,B. Johnson, les Mcleay, Leo Keating, P. J. Bowen, lionel

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr SPEAKER-Is there a seconder to the motion?

Mr DAWKINS (Fremantle) (2.48)-1 second the motion. The Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) is a first class hypocrite on this issue, He is recognised as being so around the world,

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:

The honourable member for Fremantle be not further heard.

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will resume his seat.

Mr DAWKINS-He is displaying great piety abroad and great humbug at home and that is the question that--

Mr SPEAKER-I name the honourable member for Fremantle, The honourable member for Fremantle will resume his seat.

Mr DAWKINS-Mr Speaker, if 1 could have your indulgence for a moment--

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member will resume his seat. The motion has been put that the honourable member for Fremantle be not further heard. I will deal with that matter forthwith.

Question put.

The House divided,

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

65

Noes

41

Armiwge, J. L.

NOES

Hurrord, C. J.

Majority

24

1384 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Questions Without Notice

AYES
Adermann. A. E. Anlhon)"J. D. B.wme. M. E. Birney. R. J. Bradlield. J. M. Braithwaite. R. A. Brown. N. A. Bungey. M. H. Burr. M. A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Cariton.J.J. Chapman. H. G. P. Coleman. W. P. Connolly. D. M. Cowan. D. B. Dean. A.G. Drummond. P. H. Fife. W.e. Fisher. P. S. (Teller) Fraser, Malcolm Giles.G.O-H. Good luck. B. J. Groom. R.J. Hall. Steele Harris. G. McD. Hicks, N. J. Hodges. J. e. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt. R. J. D.

Hyde.J. M. Jarman, A. W.
Jull. D. F. Kilien.D.J. Lloyd. B. Lusher. S. A. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon. Sir William McVeigh. D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar, P.e.
Moore,J.e. Newman, K. E. Nixon. P. J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock. A. S. Porter,J. R. Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Slreel, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Thomson, D. S. Tuckey, e. W. Viner,R.1. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. e.

NOES
Armiwge. J. L. Beazley. K. e. Bleweu. N. Brown, John Brown. Roberl Campbell.G. Cass.M.H. Charles. D. E. Child.J. Cunningham. B. T. Darling. E. E. Dawkins,l.S. DulTy.M.J. Everingham. D. N. Free. R. V. Fry. K. L. Hawke. R. J. L. Hayden. W. G. Holding. A. e. Howe. B. L. Humphreys. B. e. (Teller)

Hurford,e.J. Jacobi. R. Jenkins, H. A. Jones, Barry Jones, Charles
Kelly, R.J. Kenl, L. Kerin. J. C. Klugman, R. E. McMahon,Les (Teller)
Mildren, J. B. Milton, P. Morris,P.F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. Scoll, J:L. Theophanous, A. C. Wallis, L.G. West,S.J. Willis,R.

PAIRS

Falconer. P. D. Edwards. H. R. Bourchier.J. W. Robinson. Ian MacKellar. M. J. R. Dobie. J. D. M.

Young, M.J. Cohen. B. Johnson. Les McLeay, Leo Kealing, P. J. Bowen, Lionel

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Mr Barry Jones-Mr Speaker, may I address you briefly, with your indulgence, on the question of the honourable member for Fremantle?

Mr Speaker-Yes, I will permit that.

Mr Barry Jones-Mr Speaker, I ask that the honourable member for Fremantle be given an opportunity to apologise to the House, There was such a degree of noise that I, who was sitting next

to the honourable member, could not hear your direction to him to withdraw. I think, in the circumstances, there was a sufficient level of noise as perhaps to warrant the opportunity being given to the honourable member to consider his position and to apologise.
Mr SPEAKER-I must point out to the House that unless there is a set of rules which are obeyed-the Standing Orders-then this House will just degenerate into an unruly place that does not deserve the title of Parliament. I, therefore, will enforce the Standing Orders as they are. I instructed the honourable member for Fremantle to resume his seat. Notwithstanding that, he continued to speak. If he tenders an apology and I think it is in sufficient terms then I will reconsider,
Mr Dawkins-Mr Speaker, I am happy to apologise because I absolutely did not hear you tell me to resume my seat. I was getting a lot of encouragement from behind me and a lot of opposition from honourable members opposite. I honestly did not hear you ask me to sit down. I apologise to the Chair.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-Mr Speaker, I regard that as totally inadequate.
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Honourable members on my left will remain silent.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-It is not only a question of ail apology to the Chair; it is also a question of--
Opposition members interjecting-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The right honourable gentleman will resume his seat. Honourable members on my left will remain silent. I cannot hear.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-It is not only a question of an apology to the Chair, but it is also a question of withdrawal of everything that the honourable member said which was false and which.was total humbug. The whole thing was synthetically contrived by the Leader of the Opposition. Mr Speaker, I think your decision should be upheld by this House.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Fremantle was named because he refused to resume his seat when asked to do so. In fact, while he continued to spt:ak he said a number of things which were not parliamentary. The honourable gentleman has the opportunity to withdraw them. I call on the honourable member for Fremantle to withdraw.
Mr Dawkins-I withdraw.

Questions Without Notice

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1385

Mr Hayden-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. If the honourable member for Fremantle is required to withdraw his comment so too must the Prime Minister be required to withdraw his comment because he" used exactly the same terminology~'humbug'. At least one of the exchanges was justified. We will not go into that. The Prime Minister ought to be required to conform to your consistent demand.
Mr SPEAKER-I will certainly require the right honourable gentleman to comply with those standards. I did not hear the right honourable gentleman say anything that required withdrawal. If the honourable member for Fremantle or the person to whom the remark was directed had drawn my attention to it at the time. I would have dealt with it then. ] cannot now go back to identify whether words were used.
Mr Dawkins-I think the point that my leader was raising was that in the course of the Prime Minister's taking offence just a few moments ago he referred to me as a humbug. I certainly take offence at that and ask that it be withdrawn.
Mr SPEAKER-My understanding of what the right honourable gentleman said was that he was repeating words which the honourable member for Fremantle used. I did not hear the Prime Minister use unparliamentary expressions. I want to deal with this matter and allow the Parliament to resume its normal activities. The Prime Minister was answering a question. I will proceed with that matter.
Mr Dawkins-I raise a point of order, Mr Speaker. The Prime Minister took offence, apparently, at one of the words I used. For a start, I used the word 'hypocrite'. Maybe he takes offence at that. He is entitled to take offence at that if he likes.
Mr SPEAKER-That has been withdrawn.
Mr Dawkins-Maybe he took offence because I called him a first class hypocrite.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is now arguing and he is undoing the apology.
Mr Dawkins-I have already apologised for that. I have already withdrawn. But the Prime Minister cannot get up, glare at US and call us humbugs-he referred to me specifically-and get away with it. I demand that you ask him to withdraw. He cannot call me a humbug.
Mr SPEAKER-I did not hear the right honourable gentleman use that term. If the right honourable gentleman did use that term I call upon him to withdraw.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-Perhaps the House should know what I did say and that was that the

whole action between the Leader of the Opposition and the honourable member was contrived, it was synthetic, it was an act of humbuggery.
Mr Hftyden-With respect--
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will resume his seat. The words used by the right honourable gentleman may be offensive but they are not unparliamentary.
Mr Hayden-Mr Speaker, can you then explain why, no matter how justified the honourable member for Fremantle may have been in describing the Prime Minister as a humbug-that is indisputable-the term is unparliamentary?
Mr SPEAKER-The honoura ble gentleman--
Mr Hayden-Wait a minute, I want to remind you of a ruling of yours in an earlier session. How is the Prime Minister's reference to our behaviour as humbuggery acceptable in view of your ruling in an earlier session that the general description of a group or the whole side of a House with a term such as that was as unparliamentary as if it had been directed against a particular individual? Mr Speaker, you may recall that I have raised this matter with you in the past in that you have applied that rule when the general description has been used by this side of the House but not when it has been used by the other side of the House. I have asked that the two rule books that you use be amalgamated so that there is consistency on both sides of the House.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is now reflecting on me. I can only assure the honourable gentleman that my aim is to be impartial. My aim is at all times to interpret the rules consistently. I think the right honourable gentleman said that a tactic was synthetic, et cetera. That was not directed at any particular group but to the tactic.
Mr Hayden-It was to both the honourable member for Fremantle and me.
Mr SPEAKER-I think we should get to the point where we resume the proceedings of the Parliament. The Prime Minister will resume the answer.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The Leader of the Opposition was never interested in the answer; he was interested only in argument. I ask that further questions be placed on the Notice Paper.
Mr SPEAKER-The House has some business to dispose of. Before further questions are placed on the Notice Paper we will deal with the motion fot the suspension of Standing Orders.

1386 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Questions Without Notice

Question put:

That the motion (Mr Hayden's) be agreed to.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

41

Noes

65

Majority

24

AYES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley. K. C. Bkwcu. N. Brown.John Brown. Roben Camphell. G. Cass.M.H. Charlc:-., D. E. Child.J. Cunningham. B. T. Darlmg. E. E. Dawkins. J. S. Dully. M.J. Evermgham. D. N. Free. R. V. hy.K.L Hawke. R. J. L Hayden, W. G. Holding. A. C. Howe. B. L Humphreys. B. C. (Teller)

Hurford. C. J. Jacobi. R. Jenkins. H. A. Jones. Barry Jones. Charles Kelly.R.J. Kenl. L. Kerin.J.e. Klugman. R. E. McMahon. Les (Teller) M ildrcn, J. B. Milton. P. Morris. P. F. Morrison. W. L. Mountford. J. G Scott. J. L. Thl!ophallous. A. e. Wallis.LG. We~l. S. J. Willis. R.

NOES
Adermann, A. E. AnLhony,J. D. Baurlll:, M. E. Birney, R.J. Bradlield.J. M. Braithwaite. R. A. Brown. N. A. Bunge)" M. H. Burr.l'vl. A. Cadnwn. A. G. Cameron. DOllald Cameron. Ewen Ctllneron. Ian Carhon. J. J. Chapman. H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. 1\-1. Cowan. D. B. Dean. A.G. Drummond. P. H.
Fire. W. c.
risher, P. S. (Teller) Giles.G.O'H. Goodlud. B. J. Groom, R. J. Iiali. Steele Harris. G. i\-kD. Hicks.N.J. Hodges. J. C. Hodgman. W. M. Howard. J. W. Hunt. R. J. D. Hyde.J. M.

Ji.lrman. A. W. Jull, D. F. Klllcn.D.J. Lioyd. B. Lusher. S. A. LYlll.:h. Sir Phillip MacKenzie. A. J. McLean. R. M. McMahon. Sir William McVeigh. D. T. Macphee. I. M.
Millar.P.e Moore.J.e. Newman. K. E. Nixon. P. J.
O'Keefe. F. L. Peacock. A. S.
Porler. J. R.
Rocher. A. e. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury. r..,'t. E. (Teller) Shack. P. D. Shipton. R. F. Sinclair. I. McC. Spender. J. M. Slreet. A. A. Tambling. G. E. J. Thomson. D. S.
Tuckey. e. W.
Viner.R.1. White, P. N. D. Wilson. I. B. C.

Young. M. J. Cohen. B. Johnson. Les l\-kLeay. Leo
Kealing. P. J. Bowen. Lionel

PAIRS

Falconer. P. D. Edwards. H. R. Bourchier. J. W. Hobinsoll. Ian MacKellar, M. J. R. Dobie. J. D. M.

Question so resolved in the negative.

MINISTERIAL ARRANGEMENTS
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House)-On behalf of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) I inform the House that the. Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar) left Australia earlier today to attend a regional meeting of the World Health Organisation in Korea and to participate in discussions with medical officials in China, Japan, Hong Kong and the Philippines. In his absence, the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs (Senator Peter Baume) is acting as Minister for Health. The Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) will represent the Minister for Health in this chamber until Mr MacKellar returns to Australia on 5 October.

INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS INQUIRY

Mr SPEAKER-The Minister for Industrial Relations has indicated to me that he wishes my indulgence on a matter,

Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations)-Mr Speaker, yesterday the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) asked me for some information regarding consultations with the States on the national inquiry into wage determination and industrial relations. I have provided him with that information by letter today. I seek leave to incorporate the letter in Hansard. I have spoken to the honourable member and he has agreed to its incorporation.

Leave granted.

The document read as follows-

Dear Mr Hawke,

I refer to the Question without Notice you asked me yesterday concerning steps I had taken to have consultations with the States on the National Inquiry into Wage Determination
and Industrial Relations.

Formal consultations have been held with the Slates at the
Premiers' Conferences on 4 May, 20 June and 13 Augusl, 1981.

Further formal consultation look place al the Special Meet-
ing of the Conference of Commonwealth and State Labour Ministers on 5 August, 1981.

Revised Terms of Reference will be discussed al the forthcoming Conference of the Commonwealth and Slate
Labour Ministers in Darwin thi~ Friday.

There has also been correspondence belween myself and all of the State Labour Ministers as well as discussions bet ween the Department of Industrial Relations and Slate Depart-
ments at the official level.

Mr R. Hawke, A.a., M.P., Member for Wills, Parliament House, CANBERRA, ACT 2600

Yours sincerely, R.l. VINER

Private Capital Inflow

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1387

AUSTRALIAN HONEY BOARD
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-For the information of honourable members. I present the interim annual report for 1980-81 of the Australian Honey Board.
AUSTRALIAN EGG BOARD
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-For the information of honourable members. I present the interim annual report for 1980-81 of the Australian Egg Board.
NATIONAL DEBT COMMISSION
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)- Pursuant to section 18 of the National Debt Sinking Fund Act 1966 I present the 58th annual report of the National Debt Commission for the year ended 30 June 1981.
PRICES JUSTIFICATION TRIBUNAL
Mr MOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-Pursuant to section 232 of the Commonwealth Functions (Statutes Review) Act 1981, I present a report on operations of the Prices Justification Tribunal for the period commencing I July 1980 to 26 June 1981.
TRADE PRACTICES COMMISSION
MrMOORE (Ryan-Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs)-Pursuant to section 171 of the Trade Practices Act 1974, I present the Trade Practices Commission annual report 1980-81.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY SURVEYORS BOARD
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Australian Capital Territory Surveyors Board annual report 1980-81, prepared in accordance with section 13A of the Surveyors Ordinance 1967.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
Membership
Mr SPEAKER-I have received advice from the Acting Opposition Whip of alterations in the nomination of members to Estimates Committees A, Band F as follows:
Estimates Committee A-Membership: Members of Estimates Committee A to consider the proposed expenditure for-
Department of Foreign Affairs-Mr Morrison in substitution for Mr Bqwen, discharged.
Estimates Committee B-Membership: Members of Estimates Committee B to consider the proposed expenditure for-
Department of Veterans' Affairs-- Dr Everin-gham in substitution for Mr L. B. McLeay, discharged.

Estimates Committee F-Membership: Members of Estimates Committee F to consider the proposed expenditure for-
Department of National Development and Energy--Mr West in substitution for Mr Keating, discharged.
PRIVATE CAPITAL INFLOW
Discussion of Matter of Public Importance
Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:
The serious implications of the Government's increasing reliance on large scale private capital inflow.
I call upon those members who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.
More than the number ofmembln required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (3.16)- Throughout most of the post-war era Australia has relied on private capital inflow to supplement its domestic capital and to balance its balance of payments. That development has had serious implications for the level of foreign ownership and control of our industry and resources which has inexorably increased throughout this period. But recently we entered a quite new phase, one in which the level of private capital inflow has increased vastly and which carries with it not only intensified foreign ownership and control implications but also considerable implications for budgetary and monetary policy and for exchange rate policy. As these macro-economic levers are adjusted to accommodate the new high levels of capital inflow, considerable structural changes are being foisted on our economy. Because of the highly volatile nature of capital inflow, a much greater degree of imprecision, uncertainty and variability pertains to economic policy than would otherwise be the case.
Recently we have seen a dramatic increase in private capital inflow. Prior to last financial year the level was never over $2,000m. Last year, however, it increased to a staggering $6.5 billion. This year the Budget estimate is for it to be even higher. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) said the day after the Budget, in answer to a question in the House, that the Budget was framed on the expected inflow of capital of $6 billion to $7 billion. However, last week, in answer to a question at the Estimates committee hearings for the Department of the Tteasury, he agreed that the Budget estimate for capital inflow is $7.8 billion. This is a stupendous amount-another $1.3 billion over what was actually incurred last year

1388 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Private Capital Inflow

and four times the level of two years ago, which figure was itself the highest level ever in our history.
Why has this enormous increase occurred? Obviously iUs related, at least in part, to the upsurge in resource development. But the extent to which this is so is not at all clear. The fact is that the Government does not know what a lot of this
capital inflow is for. There are simply no ngures available to tell us exactly what it is being used for. The day after the Budget the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) said that he had been advised by the Reserve Bank of Australia that the inflow was related substantially to resource development but that the Bank was not exactly' .sure to what degree and that he had asked the bank to get him more information. The Treasurer has also
said since then, presumably responding to rising public concern, that he has asked the Reserve Bank and the Treasury to find out where foreign investment in Australia is actually going.
What an incredible situation this is. We let the foreign investment in first and then we try to find out what it was for and where it all went. One would have thought that its intended use would have been a relevant consideration in deciding whether to allow it here in the first place. It is also relevant in this regard to recall that this Government has abolished that section of the Australian Bureau of Statistics which monitored the degree of foreign ownership of Australian industries, so we do not know any more what extent foreign ownership and control of our various industries has reached. Thus, this Government has taken a massive leap in the dark. It has encouraged an enormous increase in private capital inflow without knowing where it is going, what it it being used for, to what degree it is being used for speculative activity rather than productive use and to what extent it is resulting in loss of Australian ownership and control of our various industries.
This also has significant budgetary and monetary implications. Capital inflow, particularly large scale capital inflow, clearly affects our budgetary and monetary strategy because to the extent that it exceeds the private current account deficit on the balance of payments it adds to the money supply. Last year the effect of capital inflow on the money supply was enormous. It accounted for $2.8 billion of our growth in M3, which was a 45 per cent growth in that measure of the money supply. That of course is an extraordinarily high proportion, far higher than any previous year in our history. This year the Budget estimate is that it will add the same money amount as last year, that is $2.8 billion, to the money supply and because of expected budgeted lower growth in the

money supply it will add about the same percentage to the money supply as last year, that is, a little under half the total growth in the money supply.
Because of this large impact on the money
supply from this private capital inflow the Government then has to take action to offset that impact on the money supply. Last year the Government reduced the Budget domestic deficit by around $1 billiona,nd turned it into a small surplus and so took money out of the economy that way. It also restricted credit growth somewhat. But despite this, money supply growth blew out because of the much larger than expected private
capital inflow. This year the Budget strategy was the same, that is, to increase the Budget domestic surplus of $1 billion so as to take more money out of the economy and to keep a tight hold on domestic credit growth as an offset to the money supply increase from large private capital inflow.
So what this policy of last year and of this year amounts to is increased taxes on Australian taxpayers and a reduction in government expenditure on their behalf with credit more difficult for them to obtain so as to offset the money supply increase coming from increased capital inflow. That is the essence of the policy. Australians are thereby paying a real cost for this massive uncontrolled inflow in the form of increased taxes, reduced government expenditure on essential programs and more limited and costly access to credit. All this so that this mammoth private capital inflow for purposes unknown can enter the country. It is truly quite an astonishing policy. It is also a dangerous policy because it builds the Government's economic strategy around a highly volatile and unreliable factor. If capital inflow falls well below its expected level it clearly creates great monetary problems because, being a major element in the expected money supply growth, .if the capital inflow falls short of the expected level then there is a shortfall in the money supply growth. Given that the Government's money supply target is estimated by some of the banks to be difficult to reach even if capital inflow occurs at the level expected, that is the $7.8 billion, then a shortfall would creaty real problems. This is exactly what now seems 11kely to occur.
Indications from the first two months' figures for this financial year are that the balance of payments current account deficit will be substantially higher than that estimated in the Budget and that the level of private capital inflow will be well below the estimated level in the Budget. In July and August the balance of payments on current account deficit averaged $750m a month com-
pared with theBudget estimate of $S60m a

Private Capital Inflow

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1389

month. Private capital inflow averaged $400m a month compared with a Budget estimated average of $650m a month. So in those two months, both the capital inflow and the current account deficit were running well below, far below, the budgeted levels. Of course this may not continue for the whole of the financial year. That is the essence of what the Treasurer has been saying in Question lime. But certainly for the first two months of the year the indications are that both capital inflow and the current account deficit are running in quite different ways from that which was estimated in the Budget, with resultant severe implications, if that continues, with regard to both the balance of payments exchange rate and the money supply. As a result of these developments money supply growth for the capital inflow has been way below expectations. In the month of July M3 grew by less than half the 10 per cent minimum target level. It is likely to be similar or even less in August. We do not have the figures yet. Hence the Reserve Bank yesterday moved to increase the trading bank limit on advances from 10 per cent to 12 per cent, which is a step towards offsetting the shortfall in money supply growth from the diminished capital inflow.
Certainly, further such action can be taken by the monetary authorities but undoubtedly, if current trends continue, there will have to be a complete reversal of the Budget policy, a policy that, on the face of what has happened in the first two months, is already clearly tottering. If we need a reversal of Budget strategy we will need tax cuts or we will need increases in government expenditures, or both, to ensure that there is not a substantial credit squeeze with rising interest rates resulting from this key element of the Budget's economic strategy, that is, the impact on the money supply of private capital inflow actually being realised.
Indeed, given the inevitability of lags in adjusting to the capital inflow impact on the money supply, it is highly likely, if current trends continue, that a tight credit situation with pressure for high interest rates will arise anyway. This is because the lag in government response, whether it be through the monetary policy or through the budgetary policy, is likely to mean that there will be a deterioration in the impact on the money supply through the diminution in capital inflow, arid particularly so if there is a dramatic shortfall in capital inflow. The fact that it is so volatile also makes it likely that such a lag will occur because the authority is not sure that a change in policy will be confounded by a sudden rapid rise in capital inflow and will tend to hesitate before it takes the appropriate offsetting action.

What all this shows is the acute danger of building a Budget strategy around the policy of accommodation to whatever level of capital foreign investors like to bring in. That is what we are doing. We are saying: 'We should not try to do anything to upset the inflow of foreign capital. If foreign investors want to bring $8 billion here this year, so be it. We will have to take all the offsetting actions which are necessary to ensure that this does not blow the economy sky high in one way or the other, and we have to change all of our tax strategies, our exchange rate strategies and so on to accommodate that inflow'. What an incredible kind of policy that is. Rather, in our opinion, we
should be seeking to control the capital inflow so that what comes in accords with what is in the best interests of consistent economic policy and does not impose severe costs on the people of the
nation.
These capital inflow factors also impinge on the exchange rate. A high level of capital inflow clearly has an effect on the exchange rate by building up reserves and so encouraging the appreciation of the exchange rate. This is what happened last year. The enormous rise in capital inflow provided a basis on which appreciation of the exchange rate could occur without any reduction in reserves. The appreciation of exchange rate last year was almost 10 per cent, and that has clear implications for both exporting and import competing industries. It reduces returns to export rural and mining industries, it increases the costs for export secondary industries-it makes it more difficult for them to export-and it reduces the cost of imports, thereby intensifying competition for import competing industries. The effect of all that, of course is to worsen our balance of payments.
The substantial appreciation of the Australian dollar last year, made possible by the large private capital inflow, thus has helped to bring about the deterioration in the balance of payments current account to which the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) drew attention a couple of days ago, pointing out that it in fact is much worse than we originally thought it would be, given the Budget figures. Now we find that the large capital inflow is slowing down so that with the adverse balance of payments current account which the revaluations have helped to bring about we now have
quite an adverse balance of payments.
We see little publicity but the fact is-a very important fact it is-that in the first two months of this year our international reserves fell by $1,OOOm, a fall of $1 billion in two months. This was partly because of devaluation of our gold assets. That accounted for $400m. The other

1390 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Private Capital Inflow

$600m loss in our reserves was caused by the deterioration in our balance of payments. As a'fesuit of these developments, appreciation of the Australian dollar has come to an end, at least for the time being .and for the foreseeable future. The trade weighted index of the Australian dollar is now at the same level as at the end of July and it has come down 0.5 per cent since mid-August. If the balance of payments current account and capital inflow levels continue as at present there will be a heavy loss of reserves, and a substantial revaluation is certain to have to occur, thus introducing a further element of inconsistency and changeability into government economic:policy. This exchange rate experience once again demonstrates the absurdity of allowing highievels of uncontrolled capital inflow to occur with consequent adjustments being made necessary to the rest of the economy.
The lesson of this whole episode is clearly that reliance by governments on large scale capital inflow is dangerous and unwise. It imposes considerable costs on the populace, whose living standards are reduced to accommodate it. It causes damaging structural changes to our exporting and importing competing interests, it introduces a high degree of variability and uncertainty into economic policy, and it allows an even greater proportion of our industry and resources to be owned and controlled by foreigners. What is clearly needed is a policy by which we control the level of foreign capital inflow. We should not accommodate the whole of the economy to whatever level of capital private investors seek to bring into this country. We must ensure that private capital inflow is used for the benefit of the nation. We should know exactly where it is going. We should not bring it in and then try to find out what is happening to it and make all the various adjustments that have to be made to accommodate the volatile nature of this private capital inflow. The lesson of the last year and a half is absolutely clear. If we continue in this way great damage will be brought to this nation by the Government's policies of uncontrolled capital inflow.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired. .
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong Treasurer) (3.33)-1 wish to take issue with the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) in regard to his. very last sentence and say that the lesson, if anything, of the last 18 months is that without the volume of private capital inflow this country experienced we would not have had the economic growth which this country experienced over that

period. The most singular feature of the honourable member's speech was the total absence of any explanation as to where the investment for the economic growth that, presumably, he and his party support would be found unless this country continues to attract a sufficient volume of overseas capital. The fact is that this country does not have enough domestic savings to generate the investment capital to fund development and to fund everything that Australians want to do.
We can keep foreign capital out if we want to. That is our option. It is an option that is clearly available to us and it is an option that clearly would be embraced by members of the Australian Labor Party if the honourable member for GelIibrand had his way. But the cost of keeping foreign capital out of Australia is that we would have to settle for a lower level of economic growth. We would have to settle for fewer jobs and for lower living standards. If that proposition was not demonstrated to be true and if it is not accepted on coming from the lips of the spokesmen for the Government, I invite honourable members just to contemplate what the honourable member for Gellibrand has just said. He devoted 15 minutes to bewailing the Government's policies and to criticising our reliance on private capital inflow from overseas but not a minute was spent telling the House where we would get the investment capital to provide all the activity. Where would Mr Wran get all that capital to fund all that economic development that he is so happy to talk about in the State of New South Wales? Where would governments anywhere around Australia get that capital?
Of course, a certain amount of money is available from domestic sources, but it cannot be denied that the domestic savings base in Australia is not sufficient to support the degree of development that has occurred and is in prospect of occurring in this country. That is not to say that policies ought not to be changed to encourage Australian investors to put more money into risk ventures. I for my part, as is the Government generally, am in favour of moving in that direction. I made that point plain in 'the Budget Speech. We would like to see what the report of the Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System has to say about it. I put it very strongly that even with that occurring and even with greater incentives for the small investor to share the ownership of resource development in Australia we will still need generous amounts of overseas capital. We can choose to.reject that; we can c!1oose to pull down the shutters; we can retreat into our xenophobia, indifference and

Private Capital Inflow

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1391

indecision as far as resource development is concerned. That is out option. We can do that if we want to, but there will be a cost. I do not mind the Australian Labour Party and others in the com-
munity pointing out that that is an option for Australia, but I entreat them to point out the costs of that option. I entreat them to acknowledge that the cost of that option is slower development, lesser economic growth, fewer jobs and lower living standards. If we are to have a sensible debate on this issue, I think we have to recognise these facts.
Another remarkable thing about the speech of the honourable member for Gellibrand was that I had very great difficulty, until the concluding part of it, in really establishing whether he thought it was a good thing or a bad thing that there might not be the same volume of private capital inflow in the currt<nt financial year as was estimated at the time the Budget was brought down. This debate gives me an opportunity of going over some of the issues on this matter that arose during Question Time. The fact is that private capital inflow during July and August of this financial year has not been as high as it was during the concluding months of the last financial year. Of course, if we multiply by 12 or by 6, as the honourable member for Gellibrand has done, we do not get the figure that he and I agree, I think, was the effect of what was contained in the Budget Speech. But I remind him, as I reminded the House at Question Time, that private capital inflow for July and August is significantly above-about 46 per cent or 48 per cent abovewhat it was in July and August of the past financial year.
Of course, I make the obvious comment that one ought not to rely too heavily on two months figures to try to predict what the outcome for 12
months is going to be. Trying to predict private capital inflow is a notoriously difficult thing to do. I can remember responding less than two years ago to matters of public importance brought forward by the honourable member for Gellibrand about the volume of official borrowings by Australia to supplement our reserves. I can remember the honourable member for Gellibrand saying then that the strategy of trying to create a climate favourable for private capital inflow into Australia was not going to work. He was saying then that our economic strategy was in total tatters, and that we would have to go on borrowing and borrowing, month after month, and year after year on official account to supplement our reserves. Of course, that did not prove to be the case either. We witnessed last year and the year before, but particularly last year, a very significant return

to the historic reliance of this country on private capital inflow to finance a very large current account deficit. That was the situation that prevailed through the 1960s. It was the situation that prevailed until overseas investment confidence in this country collapsed in the first half of the 1970s. It is a policy to which this Government has worked and to which our policies have been directed in the 5-4years that it has been in office. We recognise the reality that even with an improved climate for domestic savings and greater incentives for the small investor, it will still be necessary to attract large amounts of overseas investment.
I, for one, do not feel embarrassed about the fact that this country has attracted large amounts of foreign investment. I, for one, do not believe we
have the luxury of picking and choosing to quite the extent the honourable member for Gellibrand thinks. We have always been very happy to take foreign investment when we could not get Australian companies to take the risk. We were happy in the 1940s to take foreign investment to start a motor manufacturing industry in this country. We have been happy to have foreign investment to start other industries in this country. We ought to recognise the contribution that foreign investment has made, not only to economic development more generally, but also to the creation of jobs for Australians and the enormous economic benefits all round for the Australian community.
This does not mean that the Government adopts a 'tickle-my-tummy' attitude towards foreign investment. The truth is that from the time the foreign investment policy was laid down in 1976 we have stuck to it. We have insisted that the 50 per cent equity guideline be adhered to as far as new resource projects are concerned. If I have come under any criticism over the last 18 months on the administration of foreign investment policy, and in particular regarding individual decisions, it has been criticism from people in governments around Australia to the effect that I have taken too hard a line in fighting for a share of Australian equity in resource projects. Of course, I, and the Government generally, make no apology for that. I believe the objectives and the implementation of our foreign investment policy strike a very sensible balance between the need to
have an attractive investment climate in this country and at the same time to ensure that Australians have a fair share of the action, particularly in resource projects.
The honourable member for Gellibrand wandered into the areas of the management of the exchange rate and the lending guidance of the Reserve Bank. I take the opportunity of repeating

1392 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Private Capital Inflow

again that the announcement made by the Reserve Bank last night that the growth in outstandings of the major trading banks has been lifted, as far as its guidance is concerned, from 10 per cent to 12 per cent does not in any way represent, as the honourable member for Gellibrand and others seem to think, some kind of dramatic reaction to what has occurred. It represents a sensible fine tuning of the situation by the Reserve Bank. It is the role of a central bank in our system to react flexibly to changing circumstances, and I think it would be a very odd and deficient central bank were it not prepared, in the face of changing monetary conditions, to effect some change in the lending guidance that is given to trading banks throughout Australia.
The talk of the honourable member for Gellibrand about a credit squeeze and the unavailability of credit is unfortunately all too familiar. When we have high volume private capital inflow there are threats of credit squeezes. When that situation changes, according to the measurement of the Opposition, one thing which does not change is the threat of a possible credit squeeze. Every year that I have been Treasurer we have had from the Opposition prophesies of doom and credit squeezes. Every single year we
have that same talk from the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) and from his colleagues about our management of the monetary situation. But somehow or other it has not occurred in the time we have been in government. Somehow or other what the honourable member for Gellibrand said on this subject had a rather hollow ring, as did some of the remarks of his leader at Question Time and more generally.
It is true that the private capital inflow for the first part of this financial year is lower than we had anticipated. Nonetheless, it is significantly higher than in the same period last year. Our
export performance for the first two months of this year has been more subdued, as the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) pointed out the other night. Some of that unfortunately has been due to the effects of strikes. Some of the very significant rise in imports, as I pointed out at Question Time, has been due to essentially one-off effects of the importation of a number of very large items, particularly in the transport area. Indeed, in the month of August deliveries of aircraft were valued at $131m which made a very significantly abnormal contribution to the import figures for that month. Of course, the extent to which expectations of private capital inflow and the surplus of private sector foreign exchange transactions made at the time of the Budget are realised remains to be seen as the year goes by.

What the honourable gentleman failed to appreciate in his remarks was that the management of the exchange rate, the volume of private capital inflow and the volume of imports are all critically interrelated. We cannot just address one, as he seemed to want to do, and forget about the consequences of that elsewhere. Obviously if we are to have a high volume of private capital inflow we have to adopt an appropriate exchange rate policy, otherwise we will have significant inflationary consequences. We are now having a high volume of private capital inflow in this country because we need the money to support resource and other development which, I understand in its quieter moments, the Australian Labor Party says it supports. The Australia Labor Party certainly would regard itself as being in the vanguard of those in the community who support greater economic growth and the greater provision of jobs.
But if we believe in development and in economic growth we have to accept that we need the money to fund that development and that growth. If we do not have a large enough volume of domestic savings to provide it we have to take it from overseas or we cannot have economic growth and development. We cannot have it all ways. We cannot have high economic growth, higher living standards, low private capital inflow, totally insulated domestic industries, and an undervalued exchange rate. If we try to have all of those things something will give and there will be a crunch before very long. I think the great deficiency of the contribution of the honourable member for Gellibrand in this debate was an all too great willingness on his part to believe that one could defy those laws of gravity and have all of those things at once.
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (3.47)-1t is with pleasure that I second the motion moved by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis). Let us be blunt about this Government's foreign investment policies and, in particular, those of the Treasurer (Mr Howard). The Treasurer's view seems to me to be in complete contrast to that of the Foreign Investment Review Board which believes, to some degree, in the control of foreign investors and the levels of equity. In the Treasurer's answers to repeated questions he has shown himself to be opposed to any limitations on foreign investment. It is an open slather approach. I will repeat some of the questions I asked him last night. Firstly, is it estimated that there will be an inflow of foreign capital into Australia of between $6 billion and $7 billion this year? The answer is yes. The Treasurer said so in the Budget Papers. If so, will a high proportion of this sum be speculative

Private Capital Inflow

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1393

capital over which the Government will have little control and no measure of its cumulative effect once it is within Australia? The answer is yes. I will qualify that later. The Treasurer does not know. But the answer is that it will be speculative. The Treasurer does not know what it will do. Secondly, has the Government deliberately abandoned the regular compilation of all statistics in this field, including the periodic surveys that played an important role in monitoring the levels of foreign ownership and control in Australia? The answer is yes. That is where the deficiency lies. Thirdly, is any consistent collection of data being undertaken relating to foreign ownership and control within the many sectors of the Australian economy? The answer is no. Fourthly, has his attention been drawn to the concern of the Minister for Agriculture (Mr Nixon) over the high level of foreign ownership of rural holdings in Australia? I trust that his attention has been drawn to this concern. Finally, is he able to say whether there is a very high level of foreign ownership of capital city property development throughout Australia? If so, is he able to say what degree of foreign ownership is the result of the high level of speculative capital over the last three years? The answer is yes. It is the result of a deficiency on the part of this Government.
Let us look at the effect of foreign investment on the rest of the economy. Does the Treasurer concede, for instance, that there was a huge increase in the value of borrowings by foreign controlled corporations from 1977-78 to 1978-79? If these figures are related to the total level of savings in the economy it is seen that Australian borrowings by foreign controlled corporations rose dramatically from 1.4 per cent in 1977-78 to 18.8 per cent in 1978-79 and 20 per cent in 1979-80. In fairness, these figures indicate the degree to which foreign investors are squeezing out domestic investors, home builders, and the like. The result has been a fall in consumer credit. The Treasurer agrees with that. In real terms, lending has fallen by about a quarter over the past four years, for instance, for the purchase of motor vehicles. Also, the number of loans for the purchase of new dwellings has fallen over the last four years by almost 6,000. An article in the Australian Financial Review headed 'Chinese property investors come in from the cold' states:
In this financial year almost $63 million worth of acquisitions have been revealed.
This figure, however, does not include commitments behind the investments, which are almost four times greater.
Amounts excluded are:
Close to $250 million in redevelopment and renovation costs.

An article in the Melbourne Age newspaper of 20 August headed 'PM acts on foreign land spree' states:
FIRB figures show that last year 114 properties, worth more than $70 million, were approved for purchase by the board. Authorities in several States believe the real level of foreign ownership could be higher, and growing as the strengthening Australian dollar attracts speculative investment from West Germany, other European countries and the Arab States.
A report in the National Times states:
Between April 1976 and December 1980, these investors spent almost $200 million acquiring approximately 10 million hectares of Australian rural land. But these figures account only for land purchases approved by the Treasury's Foreign Investment Review Board . . . during that period.
In recent months, concern has been expressed in political circles that foreigners have also bought considerable tracts of rural land through dummy Australian companies which do not have to seek approval for land purchase from the FIR B.
It has been estimated that more rural land has been bought up in the last six months than in the whole of the preceding 12 months. No wonder people in the rural areas are becoming concerned at this high level of penetration in rural holdings. We must compile statistics that reintroduce, together with the periodic surveys that we used to undertake, an adequate basis upon which to assess the level of foreign ownership and control in this country.
I turn now to some policy issues-I trust that they are different from the policies of the Treasurer-which at least are constructive. We ought to follow the path that most European nations, Japan and other Asian countries now follow. We should develop our corporations with minimal dependence on foreign equity. We must use our strength as a major supplier of raw materials to strike a better bargain for foreign investment proposals. We must insist on technology transfer to Australian control as the price for the exploitation of our resources. We must insist on further downstream processing, and research and development, within Australia. But we must have a government with the forethought and understanding, and the will to make the decisions. Why does the Treasurer not make those the criteria for the Foreign Investment Review Board for the entry of foreign capital into this country? They ought to be a must.
The Treasurer went so far as to say that we ought to acknowledge the three Australian parties involved in the negotiation of foreign investment proposals, namely, the Federal Government, the State governments and local companies. Regrettably, often they do not work together and are readily played off against one another by foreign corporations. In other words, Australia gains the

1394 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Private Capital Inflow

lowest common multiple in any foreign investment. What makes the situation worse is that Federal and State governments not only readily acquiesce to foreign investment packages but also they are unconcerned about the long term implications. A classic example was the recent outburst by the Minister for Lands in Queensland because of the Foreign Investment Review Board's rejection of an application for foreign takeover of some of the most prestigious rural land in Queensland.
Mr Howard-North Queensland.
Mr JACOBI-In north Queensland.
Mr Howard-My decision, that.
Mr JACOBI-I am not questioning that.
Mr Howard-I am glad to see you appreciate our policy.
Mr JACOBI-I do. It just confirms the point that there is a problem. What we have to facewhat the Treasurer fails to face-is simply that the world-wide economic slowdown has once more brought the eyes of foreign investors to look avidly at new resource opportunities in Australia where attractions, presently unparalleled in the world, stand out. The situation was different five to six years ago. We have enormous low cost mineral deposits awaiting development, low cost energy available for mineral processing and the support, offering from State governments, for infrastructure needs. We are wide open to be exploited. The deficiency is that we do not have the guidelines or the criteria to close the gap.
I will briefly raise to more points. Within Australia the amount of exploitation and mining being done by foreign government owned organisations is rising at a rapid rate. It is marvellous to see headlines in glowing terms when Japanese, British or French government agencies get involved in Australian mining projects. Let us contrast this with the attitude of the Treasurer, who gets very emotional when the Opposition asks the Government to take a stand or responsible decisions in the mining sector in Australia. Quite frankly, it is a hypocritical approach. We have seen it with the uranium deposit in Queensland. The Chairman of Energy Resources of Australia bragged about the bargain price that he got for the Government's share in the Ranger deposit. It was an outrage! Why does the Government get upset about those sorts of things? In every other country in the world, particularly in Western countries, and now Canada, the Government has found that it has an obligation--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Mr HYDE (Moore) (3.56)-The honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) spoke of the problems of foreign ownership and the monetary and exchange rate implications of high levels of private capital inflow. I note that he does not seem to be worried about the effects of public sector capital inflow. For that reason I will confine my remarks to private sector capital inflow. It was not clear to me whether he was most worried about the fact that capital inflow was high or
about the fact that perhaps it would not be as high in the coming 12 months. At different stages in his speech he seemed to emphasise different points. It should be remembered that Australia has been a net capital importer in almost every year since its discovery. If it were not for capital inflow
Australia would still be a land of gum trees, boomerangs and spears. Capital inflow has enabled the development of the nation to this date. In the long run there is clearly a benefit from foreign investment; there is a benefit to Australia from giving people in Australia more capital and more tools to work with. That is what capital investment amounts to. It gives Australians more resources to earn more wealth for themselves. As I have said,
Australia always has been dependent upon that inflow.
The flow of money into the country must be matched by the flow of real goods. The term 'bal-
ance of payments' is not an accidental term. Payments must balance. A suplus on capital account must necessarily be balanced by a deficit on current account. Whether on trade account or invisibles, it must be matched. There is no point in building up reserves overseas. The only purpose of those reserves is to import things. Incidentally, people who still talk of the benefits of a resources boom but who, at the same time, set up barriers to stop imports, are talking nonsense. We cannot refuse to import goods and have the benefits of a resources boom. Inherently it is not on. The benefits from the resources boom will flow to us from things that we export, that build up our balance of payments and allow us to import goods and services that we will use and that will increase our standard of living.
The last two months' tJgures might indicate a lower rate of capital inflow than would be the average for the whole 12-month period. They are 50 per cent higher than they were for the same two months last year. However, any two months' figures for something as volatile as capital inflow tells us almost nothing. Those two months were affected by major items' in the trade account, namely the purchase of Boeing aircraft for domestic airlines and by a reduction in exports-also on the trade account-affected by a strike in

Private Capital Inflow

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1395

Queensland. It is inevitable that one month's figures will not tell us very much about 12 months' figures. I think people who are trying to predict a l2-month outcome from them are really whistling in the wind.
Let us assume that that was the condition for the whole 12 months and that we did not get the level of capital inflow that we had hoped we would because that level of capital inflow would have enabled Australia to command greater resources. It would be far from the disruptive tragedy the honourable member for Gellibrand suggested. If private exchange transactions do not have the monetary effects that we anticipate, then we can take official action to bring about a money supply outcome that is desired. The Australian Wheat Board can borrow its $2,400m odddepending on the size of the harvest-from the Australian capital markets or it can borrow from the rural credits department of the Reserve Bank. What it does makes a vast difference to the money supply. It can borrow overseas. Semi-government authorities can borrow overseas or they can borrow domestically. The Commonwealth can redeem some debfand thus offset the heavy borrowings of the States and the semi-government authorities. All of those courses of action are available to keep money supply on track. They if necessary will be used. The data come in quickly enough so that they can be used. As far as the management of the money supply is concerned, capital flow need not be disruptive. Certainly, as the member for Gellibrand notes, if we have a smaller inflow of capital from overseas, whether on official or private account, it will have exchange rate implications. If the exchange rate is lowered or caused to rise less rapidly, that fact will improve the competitive position of Australia's exporting industries and its import competing industries. So in part the so-called problem is self-adjusting. There is also an immediate benefit to a section of the Australian community that in part offsets the advantage that the Australian community would have had from the inflow of goods and services that would have matched an inflow of capital.
It is rather foolish to suggest that predictions rather than elements of the Budget determined by the Government are part of government policy. If there is a prediction about an item that is inherently volatile it is foolish to suggest that the Budget strategy is coming apart. It is rather foolish scaremongering. There is no reason why the Budget strategy should come apart. There is powerful little indication at this stage that it will come apart.

Much has been said about the foreign ownership of Australian resources. Australia forms a little more capital per head than the average of the countries in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. What happens in Australia is that capital finds its way largely into the housing market. This must be one of the very best housed nations in the world. To the extent that we have a foreign ownership problem, it is because we are directing our capital into housing. Is the Opposition advocating that we should not channel capital in that direction? Is it saying that we should not have a home savings grant? Is it saying that interest rates for housing loans should be higher? If so, it should say so explicitly. But it ought not attempt to have its cake and eat it. It ought to come down in one camp or the other. I will come down in a camp and say that we should let the market determine interest rates. If it did more of our resources would be available for long term industrial development. That would divert wealth from my generation to my children's generation. I believe that would be a good thing. The Foreign Investment Review Board ensures that people who invest in Australia do not get their investments on the cheap. It is important to ensure that the investment that comes into Australia is of value to Australians.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MilIar)- Order! The discussion is now concluded.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOUSE: CONSTRUCTION AND FITTING-OUT
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House) (4.7) - I move:
(I) That, for the purpose of sub-section 8 (2) of the Parliament House COllstructioll Authority Acl 1979, the House of Representatives authorizes the commencement of work on the following declared stage in the construction of Parliament House, namely, the construction and fitting-out of the building that is to constitute Parliament House, together with~
(a) the construction, on the site of Parliament House, of access roads, parking areas and other facilities to be provided on that site in connection with Parliament House; and
(b) the landscaping of that site.
(2) That a message be sent to the Senate acquainting it of the resolution agreed to by the House of Representatives.
This motion represents the decision by this House to proceed with the construction of the new Parliament House. There has been, or course, some discussion in this House in recent weeks about the proposal. It has not been in any depth but there have been many opportunities for honourable members to look at the construction and fittingout of the Parliament House, to discuss details and to examine the design material that has been on display in the Parliament House, and of course, to meet with the members of the Parliament

1396 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

New Parliament House

House Construction Authority, the Archi.tects and others to determine the extent to which the proposals meet with their own ideas and conform to what they expect to be the requirements of this Parliament which, without doubt, will be meeting the needs of this country for many years to come.
The approval of this motion by the House this afternoon will allow the Parliament House Construction Authority, in fact, to proceed with the construction of the new Parliament House. While a great deal of work has been undertaken in clearing and preparing the site on Capital Hill, until this motion is passed no final approval will have been given for the construction. So this motipn is of tremendous importance. It has quite an historical significance apart from also, it is hoped, attending to the more practical and immediate needs of members of this place, many of whom I know live and work in circumstances which are not suitable for performing the duties that are expected of them in today's environment.
Honourable members will recall that the House did agree, on 20 August last, to a motion which defined the construction and fitting-out of Parliament House to be a declared stage in the terms of the Parliament House Construction Authority Act 1979. Agreement to the motion moved today will allow work to commence on that declared stage. I have mentioned that honourable members have had the opportunity to examine the design material displayed in this building and to study the reports of the Construction Authority and of the Joint Standing Committee on the New Parliament House. I hope that any honourable members who have any specific interest in the proposals have done that. I hope that they have had the opportunity to talk with the architects and others who have a completely up to date knowledge of the proposals as they are now put forward.
Approval for the declared stage will allow the Authority to commence w<;>rk on the foundations, the basements, the plant rooms and the forecourt together with the construction of basic engineering services. I am advised that the Authority will also purchase some major pieces of equipment such as cranes. Currently, the Construction Authority has approval from the Parliament to commence the preparation of the detailed design of the new Parliament House, including specifications and tender documents, and the preparation and excavation of the site. These approvals were given, as I mentioned, in August 1980 following acceptance of the competition winner's design.
The building budget for the project, at current prices, is $303.9m. That is made up of the budget that was approved by Parliament in August 1980

of $220m in May 1978 prices. When inflation is added for the period from May 1978 to June 1981, the figure is augmented by a sum of $76m. Changes requested by the Joint Standing Committee and by the Government involve a further $7.9m, bringing the total amount to $303.9m at June 1981 prices. The project is, therefore, within the budget that was set down. It is hoped that the very excellent work that has been undertaken by the Parliament House Construction Authority, the architects and the builders can proceed so that the present rate of achievement is maintained in the future. Certainly, my advisers tell me that the Authority is determined to maintain the budget. That is an objective that is to be much
commended.
There have been a number of design changes. Mr Speaker, I know that you are very well aware of them. But it might be worth identifying them
for the purposes of consideration by the Parliament. The first change is in the field of accommodation. There have been some increases in the area of the post office and also some increases in office accommodation for senators and members and for other officers of the Parliament. Some additional seating has also been provided for in the Senate gallery. I am told that the estimated cost of those modifications for accommodation is just short of $lm,-$0.9m. Secondly, there has been some modification to the refreshment services area. Increased dining facilities for the public and staff have been provided for. A facility is to be established so that there can be room service for senators and members. Those who live and work in this place know how unsatisfactory it is to see trays and items of food and drink left around the corridors. There is so little scope for such facilities in this Parliament House. Provision has been made for refreshment facilities in senators' and members' suites. The package of those changes in
that area is estimated to cost about $2.75m.
A close examination has been made of security
in the building by the security advisers to the Government and to you, Mr Speaker. As a result, there has been some relocation of high risk areas, such as parking and uqloading facilities, from under the building. Indee.d, it is tragic that those changes are necessary for' security reasons. When one looks at the world around us it is understandable. Although we have been extraordinarily fortunate in this country to date, I think we would be hiding our heads in the sand if we did not take the advice of those who give advice in this area. Consequently, it has been necessary to relocate some of those facilities. Communications and other facilities for the management of national emergencies 'have also been re-examined. A

New Parliament'House

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1397

number of additional security control points have been provided at all building entrances and intersections of different circulation routes. The estimated cost of those changes amounts to some $5.25m.
At the same time, there have been some savings. There has been a cost offset by the raising of the base of the building and by the removal of what has been identified as the notional defence shelter. As a 'result, there is a saving of about $lm. The budget, therefore, takes account of those factors.
There are some non-building items which are still to be approved but which need to be identified at this time so that there is a recognition that there will be an added cost for those items. They include furniture, broadcasting and, telephone equipment, security equipment, art works, et cetera. The figure that has been given to me for those is about an additional $82m. Those items have not been included in the budget to date. Of course, a lot will depend on what exact facilities are required, what can be utilised frQm this place and to what degree new equipment necessitates changes that are not presently sufficiently identified to make it possible to cost them accurately. If honourable members are looking at the total cost of the package, however, they should realise that these non-building items will certainly be essential for the operation of the Parliament and will have to be added to the budget cost.
The schematic design is the basis for approval of the declared stage. It represents a year's work by the architect who, with other consultants, has spent an enormous amount of effort and time on that stage. I believe that he and those with him deserve to be complimented on the work that has been done. Certainly, the schematic design has now been examined very closely by the Construction Authority, members of this place, all user departments, and the Joint Standing Committee, of course. It has been on display in the House of Representatives billiard room since 18 August 1981. If any honourable member has not had the opportunity to have a look at it it is still on display there. The completion of the developed design is scheduled for May 1982. This will, of course, then be available for examination by honourable members and user departments. Ultimately it will go to the Joint Standing Committee for approval.
This year the Budget allocation for the Authority is $26.3m. This comprises $14m for construction work and $12.3m for ongoing design work, site excavation and the administration cOsts of the Parliament I-;lbuse Constfucti6n Authority.

This was the total amount sought by the Authority for the 1981-82 financial year. In terms of funding and the work that has been undertaken, there is no reason why the schedule that has been set-it is hoped that the building will be available for occupation and opening in the bicentenary year-can be achieved.
The figures given to me concerning progress on the site might be of interest to honourable members. I am told that currently some 850,000 cubic. metres of soil and rock of a total of approximately 1,000,050 cubic metres have been excavated. The bulk of the rock and soil has been redistributed over the site to create a level building platform. Those who know the old C?pital Hill will have noted with some amazement how this has certainly changed the physical nature of that hill. One wonders whether, with the new building on it, it will ever be quite the same again. Of course, it will not be. I believe that this concept of a parliament house will add very significantly to the focal point of this national capital and I believe, like so many others before me, it will very fittingly serve the democratic needs of this country for many years to come.
Only a relatively small amount of the rock and soil that has been excavatedhas been removed from the site and used as infill on other projects; mucb of it, as I have explained, is being redistributed to create a level building platform for the new Parliament House. I am advised that the Construction Authority is ready to let tenders for work in the forecourt area and that this will be advertised immediately this House and the Parliament has approved the project to the declared stage. The motion is, therefore, one of very considerable significance.
I thank you, Mr Speaker, the members of the Joint Standing Committee and other members of this place who have worked to try to ensure that the target dates are met and the designed framework is set on sche.dule. I believe the work has been such that honourable members will find the place far more suitable than this place to their requirements in the future and that it will be comparable with areas used by others in the community for conducting business or for pursuing their professions. When one looks at the enormous increase in the responsbilities that lie on members of parliament, the demands that are being placed on them and the degree to which there is a necessity for a constant contact with a wide range of diverse groups, from whateveI: side of the House we might come, I am sure that it is essential that the facilities are adequate. I believe that this motion will ensure that our objective of

1398 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

New Parliament House

achieving that by the bicentenary year is advanced more than somewhat. I commend the motion to the House.
Mrs KELLY (Canberra) (4.19)-I rise to support this motion. I do so because I am a member of the Joint Parliamentary Committee on the new Parliament House which is, in fact, responsible for overseeing the building of this project. I do so also because I am a member of the working party which has to approve all the changes and give direction to the Parliament House Construction Authority in the construction of this important building. I have a vested interest in this project also because, in fact, it is located in my electorate and provides a very important employment base for the Canberra electorate and for the Australian Capital Territory generally. I am very pleased to see that, in fact, we will keep to the building schedule and that the building will be finished in time for the bicentenary in 1988. The members of the Joint Parliamentary Committee are very concerned to see that that does happen because we believe that that is quite significant. We believe that this building is one that Australia and the national capital can be proud of. We want to see it completed in time for the bicentenary celebrations.
The second aspect which I think is quite significant and again is important is that we are keeping within the budget which has been approved by this Parliament. This is very hard to do when one is looking at the building of such a major project. However, I am very pleased that we are well within the estimates set by the Parliament. As I understand it, we are within about 2.7 per cent of that budget estimate. I think that is quite an achievement. This will be a building that we will all be proud of. I am very pleased to support this motion and to be part of the construction of such a great building.
Mr LLOYD (Murray) (4.21)-As another member of the Joint Parliamentary Committee on the new Parliament House I also commend this motion which seeks to authorise the construction on the new and permanent Parliament House. I wish to make a few comments on this matter. I would also like to commend you, sir, as Speaker and Joint Chairman of that Joint Parliamentary Committee, for the work you have done, for the initiative that you have shown for the development of the plan of the building and the refinement of the details. I commend also the way in which everybody has worked together and the fact that we have this matter before us at the present time. We have before us for final parliamentary approval the refined detailed design for

the construction of ,the building. All of the planning has been revised in a detailed form as to the allocation of the space that will be available to user groups according to functional relationships. As, the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) mentioned, even the cost has been kept wit~in the overall limits. That is, I think, quite an achievement these days.
In spite of the original excellent design and planning I think the revised version of the building is an improvement. To my knowledge all of the user groups have expressed their satisfaction with what is being provided for them. Part of the refined planning process which I believe needs commendation is the fact that three 'groups-the architects, the Parliament House Construction Authority and the Joint Parliamentary Committee-have all worke9 together to achieve the improvement in the development of the building and the presentation that we have before us to.day. Knowing a little of what has happened with some other attempts at this type of activity by.different divided authorities, if you like, in relatIOn to the construction of a major public building, I believe we have had a remarkable degree of co-operation and co-ordination.
I commend also the way in which the design has been. made available to the public generally, the media, members of parliament-the ultimate users-and those in Parliament House who will also be using the new building in the future. There has been very adequate opportunity for everybody with any interest in the ,new Parliament House to be able to see what is being provided. There have been one or two ill-informed criticisms by one or two members of parliament and one or two sections of the media. I hope that they have taken the opportunity to investigate what is being provided and that from now on we will have the ~nanimous support of the media, members of parliament and the public of this country for what is a very.important building. I look forward, as do the prevIOus speaker, the honourable member for Canberra, and other members of parliament, to the construction of this building. I believe that aesthetically, architecturally, symbolically and from a parliamentary ~nd an historical point of view-it will be the ct;ntrepiece for our bicentenary celebrations in 1988-it is a very important building and one which is very worthwhile for this country.
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory) (4.24)-1 join briefly in supporting the motion moved by the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) and to add to the remarks of the honourable member for Canberra (Mrs Kelly) and the honourable member for Murray

New Parliament House

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1399

(Mr Lloyd). I am, under the Parliament House Construction Authority Act 1979, the delegated Minister. This responsibility has been one of the most interesting facets of my work as Minister for the Capital Territory since receiving my commission on 3 November last year. It has brought
me into contact with the Parliament House Construction Authority and, of course, with the Joint Standing Committee on the New Parliament
House which until recently was chaired jointly by yourself, Mr Speaker, and the former President of the Senate, Sir Condor Laucke, and is now
chaired by yourself and the new President of the Senate, Senator Harold Young.
Mr Speaker, I place on record my very deep and personal gratitude to you and Sir Condor, and I hope the new President, Senator Young, in his capacity as the incoming joint chairman, for the way in which you have made my job so much easier in the workings of the Joint Standing Committee. I should also say that it has been a very great honour in my life to work with a person of
the calibre of Sir Bernard Callinan, the Chairman of the Parliament House Construction Authority, with all members of the Authority, the Executive Officer, Mr Gordon Peatey, and the architects, Mr Irwin Mitchell, Mr Richard Thorp and Mr Aldo Giurgola and their associates, in what has been a most fascinating and interesting activity in the performance of my ministerial duties. More importantly, I echo the words of the honourable member for Canberra and the honourable member for Murray. We are building what will be the finest building constructed in Australia to co-
incide with our 1988 bicentenary. It is not merely a symbol of the strength of this great nation; it will provide precincts in which the instrument of democracy, the Parliament, will work not just into this century or into the next, but for many more years to come. Notwithstanding the occasional political flak that comes from one's involvement in this project, I feel pride that I have been fortunate enough to be directly involved since my appointment to the Ministry. I strongly support the motion.
Mr SPEAKER-Unusually, I would like to say a few words from the chair in relation to this matter. I am very pleased to see the progress, and I think honourable members on both sides of the House who have contributed so much to the putting together of the functional requirements of the Parliament are to be congratulated. I think the Executive was wise to take the decision to go
ahead at this stage, for the building will represent a very obvious and important symbol of nationhood. It is the sort of thing which has the effect of binding the States in the Federation into

a nation. I hope that in the course of the centuries every Australian will have the chance of visiting the Parliament to see it in its symbolism and to share the honour and pride of being an Australian. It is worth recalling at this time that this building was built for the purpose of serving as a parliament house for 50 years. That 50 years has now passed. It is worth remembering that this parliament house was designed by a committee. It is also worth remembering that, over the course of that 50 years, nationhood as a concept has grown immensely.
The amount of work that is done in this chamber and around the building has grown immensely. In this building at this hour there are likely to be 1,500 people. Throughout the course of the year that number ebbs and flows, depending on whether the House is sitting. Quite clearly, this building is inadequate to provide suitable working conditions for everybody in the building. Therefore, it must be replaced, and the concept of the members of parliament and the Executive of 50 years ago is now coming to fulfilment.
It is also extremely important to realise that the House is being built for good and valid reasons and without any sense of serving the interests of members and senators. The truth is that the great majority of the present members and senators will not sit in that new Parliament, or at least not sit for very long. I notice the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin)-we know he is a very young and vigorous man-contesting that by shaking his head. Of course, he is the sort of man who will be there, he hopes. His opponents would contest that. Whoever looks around the House now will realise that the effort being put in by honourable members is not for their own benefit, but for the benefit of others and of the nation.
The work of the architects is really outstanding. The concept has a classicism about it in the true sense because it has a simplicity that is put together into a classical form. I think we will be very proud of it when it is completed. To the builders and those members of the staff of the Parliament House Construction Authority and to the members of the parliamentary staff who have contributed to it, I thank them now for what they are about to do and for what they have done. On 26 January 1988 the members of parliament of the day will thank them for what they have done and for the job they have completed. I only hope that nobody here will regard what I have said as in any wayan invitation to them not to be present on 26 January 1988, whether as members, Ministers or just as spectators. I certainly hope to be there myself in some form, and I hope that we can all celebrate together.

1400 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

Question resolved in the affirmative.
MEAT EXPORT (PENALTIES) BILL 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 10 September, on motion by Mr Nixon:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Mr Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House has a general debate covering this Bill, the Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Bill, the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Bill and the Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Bill as they are associated measures? Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.
Mr SPEAKER-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (4.33)-The Opposition does not oppose these Bills. If I can go through them quickly, the first Bill I will be talking about is the Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Bill, which refers to contravention of licence conditions. Previously the penalty was $2,000. The penalty is now to be $100,000 or five years' imprisonment, or $5,000 or one year's imprisonment for matters that can be settled in minor courts. All of these Bills, of course, relate to the last two months of what has been commonly known as the horse meat scandal. I guess there will be quite a bit of discussion about that matter yet, but at least this is a fair indication of the strength with which the Government feels on this matter. These are very large penalties, and if they had been in force before perhaps some of the actions that have taken place would not have occurred. In all fairness, no one would really have thought that anyone would be so irresponsible as to prejudice Australia's meat trade by doing what obviously has been done.
I will be speaking mainly about the first three Bills. The fourth Bill, the Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Bi,!l will be dealt with by my colleague the honourable member for Parramatta (Mr John Brown). The second Bill I will be speaking about is the Meat Export (Penalties) Bill. This is really a separate Bill because at present the matters to which this Bill refers in terms of penalties are covered entirely by regulations. The penalty. there, with respect to the regulations, is $100. In the regulations themselves

the penalties have been raised to $1,000. Regulations 33A, 58 and sub-regulation 59 (1) relate to the misuse of inspection stamps, alteration of descriptions and tags, or making false or misleading statements. Again, the penalty will now be $100,000 or five years. I point out here, as I did recently in a censure motion, that this matter was flagged by the report of the Kelly Committee of Inquiry to Examine Commonwealth and State Meat Inspection Systems. The report was delivered in January 1980, and on page 41, it states:
It was observed that at several works visited, works management held the interstate branding stamps. The stamp was applied by an employee and the works merely paid the Fee. In other words, no re-inspection occurred. We were also told that, in many iF not all cases, the 'Australia Approved' stamp was provided by works management, and iF a new stamp was required, the inspectors obtained it From management. This practice should cease.
It is a great pity that the Government did not act on that recommendation. The regulations as they presently stand resulted in one fine being imposed on the company, W. Pope and Co. Pty Ltd. If the Government had realised then that penalties should be much higher perhaps it would have increased them at that time, but that did not occur. I recently put a question on notice stating that after 18 months investigation this firm was fined $100 yet in 1980 it received an export development grant of over $10,000. I do not know whether that grant was for initiative or incentive! It is ironic the way different government Acts actually work.
The third Bill I refer to is the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Bill which, as the name indicates, refers directly to a penalty for trade misdescription of meat. The penalty was $200. In keeping with the other penalties, it will be increased to $100,000 and/or five years gaol. These are very heavy penalties. The Opposition agrees with the Government levying such penalties because the extent of the crime is massive. We are overjoyed that the price of meat has not slumped to any large degree. The Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) answered a question without notice yesterday to that effect. There will
ot be many long term ramifications in this matter
that are immeasurable for which we can never really account. Trade wiil be hurt and prices will drop. We hope that they will not drop by much and that the measures being taken will ensure the trade. The industry is valued at over $3.5 billion. It has a trade of over $800m per annum to the United States.
There have been many calls for retrospective penalties to deal with the.irresponsible people, the criminals, who have prejudiced this trarle. I wouid'

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1401

like those penalties to be made retrospective if we could actually get the charges to stick in that way but I doubt that the courts would uphold any move for retrospectivity in the criminal law. I point out that the people who will be eventually
caught as a result of the investigations under way, apart from the one person who has been arrested in connection with this matter, can be charged under the Trade Practices Act as it exists. It has maximum penalties of up to $50,000. The Government could also use the common law charges related to conspiracy to defraud and, therefore, exact some penalty that fits the crime. It is a very great crime indeed.
In the past two months of allegation and counter-allegation the media had a field day on this issue. Some of the stories caused me a lot of concern because they were unconfirmed. Even so,
there was a lot of substance to them. In the light of what has gone on over the past two months these Bills can still be shown to be only fiddling with the edges of far wider problems in the Australian meat industry. The Minister has decided to set up a royal commission. We back that decision. We
called for a royal commission a few weeks ago. We are not certain in our own minds, however, that a royal commission or any sort of inquiry will recommend what could not have been achieved by the effective exercise of power by various Ministers and departments and the proper support by relevant law enforcing authorities. The problem is not all with the Minister for Primary Industry who is at the table. It involves Commonwealth and State Ministers for agriculture and Commonwealth-State relations. It is a great pity that we have to have a royal commission to look into the industry due mainly to the Minister not taking enough action and the complexities of the system. One of the reasons the Minister was reticent to act at first is that the system to a large degree has relied on honour. When people are dishonourable honour systems break down completely. It is like a gentleman's club; the moment there are not gentlemen it is in a lot of trouble.
The role of the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation has been criticised, I think in many cases unjustly. The Corporation's role is clearly set out. It grants licences under very strict requirements. The Australian Meat and Livestock CorpO.ration has been asking the industry for a long time to be allowed to enter works. It has to allocate the licences and, by and large, it has responsibility for meat from the ship on. I do not know what will come out of the inquiry but I hope that the royal commission recommends that the AMLC be allowed to enter works or have some

alternative. We hope that a single meat inspection service will come out of the inquiry. As I said in the debate on the censure motion that the Opposition moved in this House, the Minister has bungled on this issue. In all fairness, I can understand his initial reticence. No one would have thought that there was widespread scandal and fraud in the industry but as it developed it became
clear that very drastic action had to be taken. I am not saying this because of hindsight and I do not think it is very clever to say it but at the outset of the allegations or after a week or so when the Minister realised how widespread they were the meat inspectors, State departments of agriculture, meat producers and the AMLC itself should have been called together for a conference to see how quickly the existing loopholes could be plugged. It is very easy to go through the chain to see where all the loopholes are. That is a simple exercise.
I do not think that the security of beef will ever be guaranteed to the extent that the security of money is when it is transferred from a bank to a firm in a payroll but there are obvious loopholes which have to be closed. The process by and large
is that once stock arrives at an export abattoir for slaughter a veterinarian from the Department of Primary Industry conducts an ante-mortem, checking every animal for signs of disease and fitness for slaughter. Immediately each animal is slaughtered, the Department of Primary Industry inspectors begin their post-mortem inspections at all points along the slaughter chain from the knocking box to the final wash. Carcasses may be either stored in chillers and boned at the killing establishment or sent to independent secondary works for storage and boning. In the latter case carcasses must be accompanied by a DPI export transfer certificate. A certificate is also required if bone(,i out meat is to be put into cold storage at a location away from the boning works. DPI inspectors supervise the boning, packaging and sealing of meat into cartons which are stamped according to the Department's regulations. The cold storage of processed meat is also supervised by DPI personnel. The transport of carcasses or processed
meat must be accompanied by DPI export transfer certificates. Packaged meat in cartons is generally loaded into containers and DPI sealed at cold stores. This technically classifies it as being onboard for shipping. If meat is not transported to the dockside in containers, again a DPI certificate
and DPI supervision are required for the loading of the cartons.
To me this sequence of movements clearly indicates that the system is most vulnerable to exploi~
tation by criminal acts between the abattoir and secondary boning works, the boning room and the

1402 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

cold store and the cold store and the whaff. Most industry sectors believe the role played by the DPI is more than satisfactory, the number of inspectors involved being dependent on the volume of throughput and the availability of staff. If there are anomalies in any consignments DPI inspectors are bound not to accept them and to return them to their point of dispatch, Theoretically, the strict application of DPI check and recheck procedures leaves no room for malpractice but, as one meat processing company official recently put it, even in the best systems there are loopholes. Discussions with the AMLC have pointed out that export meat can be handled by three or four different cold stores before export. To fill a container about 600 cartons are required.' These could come from a number of locations. They could travel to Melbourne for shipment from Brisbane or Sydney. It would be easy to change cartons in transit. Whole cartons could be removed and replaced with others or cartons containing a different product could be added. Alternatively, empty cartons could be trucked along with packaged meat ready to accommodate a substitute at a predetermined location along the transit route. The people involved in shipment might know what had happened but they could plead ignorance and they would be telling the truth.
A further possibility for exploitation exists in the falsification of travel and product description documents. I think it was Protean Enterprises Pty Ltd, which leases the Profreeze boning room, which released a 10 point statement a couple of weeks ago to absolve itself of blame. It said that if horse meat had been put in cartons labelled 'Profreeze' it would have been done illegally off Protean premises and therefore out of its control. It said it was impossible for an outside company to prepare horse meat in a Profreeze boning room at Protean. Clearly, labels can be printed and meat replaced once a consignment leaves the works.
Eventually those sorts of loopholes in the chain were plugged by the Minister and there was a statement to that effect. But the thing which happened which alarmed the Opposition most was that it was virtually the United States Department of Agriculture which once again set the standards for our abattoirs in Australia for the new procedures to guarantee meat from Australia. It. did so by and large with respect to the species testing procedures which our meat now has to undergo. The Minister set up a royal commission. He announced measures to tighten up the loopholes which I have enumerated already. There will be a system of carton seals which will cost $1 m. We do not know quite what stage the royal commission is at and the regulations, which have

been tightened up, so far have not been notified by way of circulation to members in the usual way, but the Minister's announcement probably covers that point. The Minister also has announced some $6m for the species testing procedures. But I think these procedures will cost the industry more money. As the Minister said at the Estimates committee hearing for the Department of Primary Industry, it is probable that there will be payment back through the industry of the 50 per cent which already is involved in inspection charges.
It can be said that the royal commission would not have been necessary if the Government had acted quickly but there was disastrous publicity and some of it, as I have said already, was misleading. I think there was a fair amount of evidence of administrative timidity and a lack of political will, not just at the Commonwealth level but also at the State level. We have a bit of a problem here in that if there had not been any publicity people would have had all justification in saying that there was a coverup. So there are two arguments: Keep quiet and try to save the export industy or risk people's health and the guaranteeing of the trade. It is a conflict between keeping quiet or exposing a situation. I guess governments are always slow to act and in this case it was a very big problem. Again, I cannot blame the Minister for Primary Industry entirely. There was a massive problem in getting the State governments to agree. In the Kelly report to which I referred earlier, Mr Kelly says in the Epilogue:
Since the circulation of the draft report it has been made quite clear that, at departmental level, Victoria, New South Wales and Queensland will not accept any of these solutions. We are not so certain where Western Australia stands. We know that this Committee cannot persuade the State departments; this must be left to their political masters, pushed we hope and expect, by the meat industry in general and the producers in particular, all of whom agree at least on one thing, namely that they do not want to continue as at present. Yet that is what will happen if some heads are not knocked together.
Even as recently as two or three months ago, the industry still had not a,greed. The Meat Council had a different position from the Cattlemen's Union, and the State Ministers, as the Minister said at the Estimates. committee hearings yesterday, have been intransigent. There have beensome allegations by State Ministers that the Minister for Primary Industry was being a bit cavalier about funding. But regardless of where the truth of some of those things lies, it is quite certain that this is a terribly difficult system to achieve. The industry and the producers must put pressure on their State Ministers to get a single meat inspection system. The fact, for example, that the requirements of the United States Department of

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1403

Agriculture on species testing obliges the Commonwealth to go along simply means that the Commonwealth Government has to have control of the inspection system. It is quite certain that the Commonwealth is in the position where it must guarantee exports and therefore it should be the body that carries out the meat inspection. For some time the Government has not been attuned to the requests and the needs of the beef and meat industries. I will not go through the arguments with respect to the problems of the abattoirs and the live sheep industry. The Government has had to bailout one company to the extent of $750,000 and that company has gone bankrupt. Protean is in the market trying to get it-and there are other allegations about that company. But it is absolutely essential that the domestic market also is looked at. I recently put out a statement saying that it would be criminally irresponsible if the States did not go along with the Minister's plea to co-operate with the royal commission because it is quite evident that there should be equally high penalties for breaches in respect of domestic mislabelling. Just to give the House an idea of what is alleged to have been happening in Queensland, I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard a copy of a speech by Mr Tom Burns, the honourable member for Lytton, in the Queensland Parliament.
Leave granted.
The speech read as follows-
I was going to continue in that vein but this morning the Leader of the Opposition took a very responsible stand on the meat processing problem. He asked the Premier whether, if he gave him a list of places in Queensland that were processing kangaroo meat-or horse or donkey or buffalo meat-and not dyeing it as is required under one section of the regulations, he would do anything about it. The Premier did everything but say'Yes'.
This morning I visited the Watson cold stores in my electorate, where I saw 2,580 plasic bags of undyed roo meat. It is there now. It is there for every honourable member to see. There is no dye in it at all. There are 172 cartons of branded roo meat and 2,580 bags of undyed roo meat in that cold store now. The bags have been recycled. Some bags previously contained a substance called nitrophil, which is associated with ammonium nitrate.
Let us see what happens to the meat. It comes into cold stores after being killed in State-Government-controlled slaughterhouses in country areas. Honourable members may know of the little slaughterhouses that kill up to 50 a week. Do they know what happens there? Government inspectors do not inspect the cattle when they are killed. When a fellow kills them he keeps the heart, the offal and other internal pieces that are necessary for inspection. He puts them away. The Government inspector in his regular trip around comes, maybe, two or three days later, by which time the carcasses have been eaten by the local community. That is the system the Government operates on. If the inspector comes only once a week or once a fortnight, horses, donkeys or kangaroos could be killed in that slaughterhouse and the Government would not know. If the meat is sneaked into Brisbane after 4

p.m. when the Commonwealth inspector is off duty, as long as it is addressed interstate for pet food it can go anywhere. Tomorrow it could be in anyone of the meat shops in this city, and there is no way that it could be checked out.
One of the great problems is the lack of single inspection; the weakness is the dual system that this Government is trying to prop up. Do honourable members know what was done as a test of the dual inspection system across the borders? A box full of ice-no meat at all-was packed and sent to New South Wales, down to Victoria, over to South Australia and on to Western Australia and then all the way back. It came back covered in re-inspection stamps and bills for the inspection-but it didn't have any meat in it! How could they have inspected it? How could they have charged for those meat inspections when the ice did the trip? When it came back it had so many inspection stamps on it that the name of the people it was sent to could hardly be read.
I will give a few of the names I collected when I was out at Watsons cold stores this morning. I mentioned them to the Leader of the Opposition and he took a very responsible attitude by saying to Joh, 'I'll give them to you privately if you will have a look at it.' All we wanted was to know where this undyed meat ended up. We are accusing no one! A mob called Lohn Gordon (or 'Cordon')-I,960 bags of unmarked roo meat from Charleville. The Minister for Tourism, National Parks, Sport and The Arts called out this morning, 'It's all dyed.' This is not dyed. I took my camera with me. I have photographs of it. It is not Watsons' fault. They just run a cold store. They just store whatever anyone brings there. They cannot be blamed.
There is a manipulation of the system brought about by lack of complete control after inspection. Each Tuesday night 20 t of roo meat, much of it undyed, goes out of the TNT depot in this State to Victoria. Every Friday night another 20 t goes out of the Buranda area to Victoria-some dyed and some undyed. How do we know where it goes? After it leaves here there is no inspection to see that it has arrived at pet-food places. Once it goes off to the alleged address of an interstate pet-food company, it could be delivered anywhere. Honourable members can go over to Anderson's old boning room at Riverside in Curtin Avenue, Hamilton; and see them boning kangaroos and other animals. This morning, C. F. Thomas Pty Ltd, a former Queensland primary products company, had two lots-221 bags and 390 bags-of undyed roo meat. A group called Tatiara had 90 undyed bags and 172 cartons branded 'roo meat'. They were the only ones I found that were branded as roo meat. I repeat that two 20 t consignments of roo meat leave this city each week to go off to the South.
I wondered why the Premier this morning would not take those names and say, 'Lt>t's go and have a look and see who they are selling it to.' Let him send someone over there now. The meat inspectors and the management of the cold stores will co-operate. They have nothing to hide.
Mr McKechnie interjected.
Mr BURNS: The honourable member for kangaroo killers is not worried about the beef industry.
Every time. I interjected on the Premier this morning he said, 'I am going to protect the export trade.' He did not say anything about the people of this city who eat meat or the rest of the people of Australia who make up the domestic market. Not once did that come up. We want to protect that trade, too, because a lot of meatworkers' jobs will go down the drain if this Government does not do something about its own inspection service. The Ministers should do something about it themselves.
Even though the local laws provide that the meat should be denatured and covered with a dye, in Toowoomba, refrigerated trucks are used to pick up roos and donkeys that have recently been gutted. Their carcasses are taken direct

1404 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

from Queensland to Victoria. State meat inspectors know about this, yet nothing has been done about it. At St George, roos are gutted and thrown back into the back of trucks. I am told that the carcasses contain so many worms that they could wriggle off the trucks. There is no refrigeration at all. Half of them have not been dyed by the time they reach the cold store. That could mean that half of them are going to be eaten by human beings. If they were only going to be used for pet food, why wouldn't they be denatured? Why wouldn't they be dyed?
Mr KERIN-I thank the House and the Minister. In that speech Mr Burns made some very serious allegations indeed. I will read just one of them to the House. He said:
Let us see what happens to the meat. It comes into cold stores after being killed in State-Government-controlled slaughterhouses in country areas . . . Do they know what happens there? Government inspectors do not inspect the cattle when they are killed. When a fellow kills them he keeps the heart, the offal and other internal pieces that are necessary for inspection. He puts them away. The Government inspector in his regular trip around comes, maybe, two or three days later, by which time the carcasses have been eaten by the local community.
So, so much for the Queensland inspection system which the Premier of Queensland was recently defending. The point really is not that the public cannot eat kangaroo or horse or goat-I think I have eaten all three-but that it should know what it is eating and that it is safe to eat what it is eating. Senator Mulvihill recently asked a question about the extent of kangaroo meat exports for the 1980-81 financial year. He was told that 1,944,187 kilograms of kangaroo meat, fresh, chilled or frozen, suitable for human consumption and with a value of nearly $3.5m was exported. It is absolutely essential that we know that meat we are eating locally is fit for human consumption.
There is every chance, I think, that the export substitution, and particularly the horse meat substitution, eventually will be narrowed down to one group of operators with links to a few firms and individuals, and not much more. I really still have no evidence, despite the widespread allegations, that it does not go beyond one group of operators. I guess the basis for my putting forward that hunch is the economics of the whole thing. Last Thursday or Friday we heard the latest allegation; that some meat for domestic consumption in Victoria was found to be boxes full of stones and grass and all the rubbish. Surely to God anyone buying meat domestically is not going to accept that sort of stuff and actually pay money for it. It is all right killing horses in the Northern Territory and exporting them through Melbourne, but it must cost a heck of a lot of money to put them through that way. Local horse, if it is good horse, probably costs as much as beef in any case. So I just cannot see that we will get a heck of a lot of evidence for the economics of widespread

rackets in the export trade. We certainly need to find out about it. I think we can say that in the export of meat there has always been a situation whereby, when there has been a squeeze, people have fallen short of their orders and they have done a bit of substitution. But probably there has been a substitution of other cuts, if substituton at all, of meat fit for human consumption. The domestic matter is another thing altogether. I think it is absolutely essential that the States co-operate and that we catch up with the breaches here; otherwise people in Australia will have no confidence in Australian meat. There is no way that the Opposition wants that situation to prevail.
Similarly, I do not think that the Common"-' wealth meat inspectors, apart from maybe a fewi i individuals, will be found to be to blame. The system I outlined a while ago indicates to me that where the Department of Primary Industry inspectors have been exercising a role, it is quite probable that in every instance they have been carrying out their duties 100 per cent. It has been when they were not with the meat or the times when meat was being transferred that substitution occurred. The procedures for inspection by Department of Primary Industry meat inspectors are very rigorous indeed. The inspectors are very well trained. They themselves, of course, have been pushing for a single meat inspection a.uthority. They want that so that can they can get uniform inspection standards. I must say that when they protest against some procedures they are told they are engaging in industrial disruption. If they carry out their duties to the letter of the regulation-for example, checking out when Commonwealth meat inspectors ask them to lift lids and check whether it is the meat they say it is-they have been accused of industrial disruption. I do not want any of those allegations booted around. In all cases, to my knowledge and from what I have been assured, the Commonwealth meat inspection service has been doing a good job and has been enforcing rigorous meat inspection standards.
Until we can get a single meat inspection authority or delegate authority to the States so that there is only one meat inspection service following the same standards we ,will have trouble with this industry. Until we can get uniform State health laws or national consumer standards we will have problems with this industry. My colleague the honourable member for Parramatta has referred on several occasions to the recent case of salmonella in which one lad died. It could have been caused by the processor getting hold of some meat that he did not know about. Tibaldi was given a completely clean bill of health, and yet he may

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1405

inadvertently have got some meat from one of affected only for a very short time. What was of

these crook operators. We also need to have uniparticular interest to me as a Victorian-it was

form State laws covering meat for non-human Victoria where the 33 boning rooms were closed

consumption again. The whole pet food business down and where the centre of the scandal was

is wide open to abuse.. If State governments close supposed to be-was that in following a 'Stock

their borders to pet food from other States beand Land' graph each week on the price for chop-

cause they do no co-operate all sorts of problems per cows, and I have a particular interest in

will be caused for the legitimate pet food trade. I always following the price for chopper cows--

think the States have to adopt uniform laws with respect to pet food; otherwise pet food will be sub-

Mr Nixon-A vested interest.

stituted in the domestic trade somewhere.

Mr LLOYD-One should declare it, perhaps.

When all these inquiries are over we will find that the domestic ramifications of breaches of regulations and of what has been going on will be far wider than what has occurred with respect to the export of meat-the matter we are talking about now. As I said at the outset, the Opposition does not oppose these measures; we commend them to the House. We think it is a pity they were not in operation before. Whilst we do not ask for retrospectivity, we ask that the Government look at the Trade Practices Act or at the common law with respect to conspiracy so that people who subsequently are in court as a result of investigations now under way get the full penalty that
the law can exact rather than these stupid fines that we are now amending-fines of $100 or up to $2,000 which nowhere near fit the crime, which has been one of great magnitude.

The price improved for that class of cattle all through that time. Had there been a loss of confidence we could have lost our export market and the price could have collapsed. The Minister's statement to the House last week detailed for the .benefit of members of parliament what had happened and what was to happen. Through this legislation the Government is taking the action foreshadowed in the Minister's statement. Destructible seals are now to be introduced at an annual cost of about $lm to prevent any future lid swapping. One abuse in the past has been the use of a lid or seal which does not accurately describe the contents of a box. We are now to have random species testing at a cost of about $5m for the capital equipment. There will be far greater control
over stamps, meat movements, storage, sealed transport, et cetera.

Mr LLOYD (Murray) (4.57)-The first important point about the Meat Export (Penalties) Bill and cognate Bills is that they confirm the action taken by the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon), his Department and the Government to repair the damage to our meat exports and our international reputation by the isolated criminal and negligent action of one or two export operators. Secondly, because of the prompt action of the Minister and his Department, the United States, our major export market, and in particular

The question of more clearly defining ownership of meat through the various processes is still being considered. This is not an easy matter in an industry involving many different operators and operations. Security bonds are also being looked at. I have been asked by one or two other members to request the Minister to ensure that the cost of the bond is not so high as to make it impossible for a medium or a smaller operator to continue. If this happened the industry would be left to the big meat companies.

the United States Department of Agriculture, The Minister, I believe, should be commended

retained its confidence in the integrity of the Minfor the prompt discussions he had with represen-

ister and the meat export industry. It did so in the tatives of the industry. A special meeting was

following way: It accepted the assurances given by called in Melbourne, I think, last Wednesday or

the Minister and the action he was to take. My Thursday. It was followed by a special meeting of

understanding is that at this point all Australian the Australian Agricultural Council and the an-

meat, including Victorian meat, has now been renouncement of a royal commission. These meet-

leased in the United States.

ings, I think, have highlighted the related but very

Mr Nixon-All bar that from two works.

important issues. They are issues which in time, after investigations by the royal commission, will

Mr LLOYD-Obviously that excludes meat become the dominant ones. They include the kill-

from the two works which are in question. Meat ing of stock under State supervision, or sometimes

may be exported again if it has been through the no supervision at all, for domestic use, and

new system of species testing, et cetera. The third whether it would help during the coming inquiry

point I make is the price to the producer in and this difficult period if we had a single national

Australia was not really affected during all the uniform meat inspection system. I believe that

publicity about meat substitution, or it was with both the Agricultural Council meetings and

1406 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

the royal commission the focus is now on the States. The States for the first time have been forced to look at their own systems of inspection, their own control, or lack of control, of kangaroo and horse slaughter and their very patchy system of controls when it comes to game meat, pet food and knackeries. They have been forced to look at the differing arrangements between the States. The States were very critical of how the Federal penalties had lagged behind inflation. One of the major points about the legislation is that it lifts the penalties to $100,000. But when the States criticised us they had even lower penalties for similar forms of abuse.
In the domestic industry, in Victoria within the last two weeks an abuse of the type discovered in the handling of export meat attracted a fine of only $100. I hope that the Victorian Government and all other State governments are really looking urgently at their lack of procedures in inspection, licensing standards and imposing penalties, and will bring their procedures up to date. After all they were so critical of us. The introduction of this legislation has shown how promptly the Federal Government 'flas acted. I believe that it is being shown that far more domestic meat, which is completely outside the control of the Government but completely within the control of the various States, is being adulterated on a scale unheard of at the export level. That perhaps explains why the States are so reluctant to give the full support to our royal commission that they should. I understand, and I would be pleased to be corrected by the Minister if I am wrong, that only one StateVictoria-has so far given its full support for the royal commission to look into all the necessary aspects of the domestic meat industry in Australia as well as the export meat industry.
It is one thing for a State to say that it will agree to the royal commission; it is another thing for it to say that it will give the necessary co-operation so that that royal commission can investigate that section of the meat industry controlled by it. How absurd were some of the statements of the States. They said that they would do something themselves to control their own exports, or that their own exports were fine because of their own standards, but they have no say at all in the export standards of this country-they are completely the responsibility of the Commonwealth-and, if they tried to export; their word would not be ac~ cepted because it is the word of the Australian Government, through the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation, the Bureau of Animal Health and so on, that is necessary for any inter- ''ltional trading of our meat to take place.

Another point the States have to realise, if they are sincere about doing their best to guarantee that there will never be a repetition of this problem at the export level, is that the only way to guarantee that there is no possibility of the substitution of that type of meat, which was domestic originally, into the export system is for them to put in order their own houses, because obviously there cannot be a problem at the export level if there is no adulterated meat at the domestic level. I plead with the States-in fact I challenge them-to participate fully so that there can be a frank, open and complete royal commission, because we have a tremendous opportunity to clean up the industry for many years to come. Are the States frightened to reveal, through the royal commission, that their standards for domestic meat killing are lower than the export standards or that, in the case of certain types of pet food or knackeries, there is no standard at all so that there is greater substitution of meat at that level because there are no uniform standards between the States? Are they frightened to have a full and frank investigation of their own backyards rather than continually pointing the finger at the Commonwealth? I appeal to them to participate fully and not in a half-hearted manner, as is the case with all States except Victoria at present.
I want to comment now on the royal commission itself. The Minister and the Government have been criticised for not initiating a royal commission at an earlier date. This shows the ignorance of those who are critical of the very delicate international situation in relation to our meat which existed in the early days. Had the Minister or the Government established a royal commission before the United States Department of Agriculture agreed to the assurance of a new procedure so that meat could flow again, it is very likely that pressures within the United States would have prevented the United States Government opening its doors again to Australian meat or allowing meat that was then blocked in the United States from being released onto the market until such time as the royal commission had concluded; and we all know how long royal commissions take before they are finalised. What a tragedy that would have been. So I believe some of the Opposition spokesmen and some of the farmers organisations were rather naive in their calls at that time for a royal commission.
I would say that there are two reasons for establishing a royal commission. One is so that justice can appear to the public generally to be done as well as it is being done. I believe this legislation provides the machinery for justice to be done and for all allegations to be aired. The second reason

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1407

for establishing a royal commission is to highlight, I hope, the relationship between the domestic market and the export market and to recommend better procedures between the two systems and at the State level so that the meat industry will be stronger in the future. Although the meat inspection argument is not a central part of all this, I hope that out of it will come a single federal meat inspection authority, because I believe that is what the industry generally wants and needs.
Let us look quickly at some of the allegations. The meat industry has a long history of allegations, because it is that sort of industry. These allegations were made when Labor was in power and, I am sure, before Labor was in power, just as they have been made since. Most members who represent rural electorates have heard plenty of these allegations, but when it comes to the point of our saying, 'Give me enough information so that I can take it further and have it investigated either by the Minister through the Department or by the police', it is a different matter altogether. That has always been the problem, not only with allegations about the meat industry but also with allegations about other industries.
When we look at the allegations made by the Australasian Meat Industry Employees Union we can see how absurd they were. On the one hand, the union was saying that employment opportunities for its members were declining because of the shortfall of livestock and cattle numbers in this country. Yet its own wild allegations were actually putting at risk the employment of its members because of the reaction they were having on overseas markets. I hope that the union representatives follow through with their allegations so that we can see what substance there is in them. If there have been things wrong with the industry, surely the meat processors would have known of them just as much as the union people knew of them. Rather than making their criticisms now, where was the substantiated information that would have allowed action to be taken earlier? It is one thing for these people, who obviously must have been in the know to a certain extent, to make allegations against everybody else once something happens, but if they did know anything about this matter they should have given solid evidence earlier and avoided the situation of which they were partly the cause.
I go on to the Cattlemen's Union of Australia. If anything has created a scare overseas and put at risk the interests of the members of the Cattlemen's Union-that is, part of the Queensland cattle industry; the killing season is in progress at present-it must have been some of the wild allegations by members of the

Cattlemen's Union. The only justification for some of the things that they were saying seems to be that they like being in front of a television camera. What about the meat inspectors? They support very strongly a single meat inspection system. One has to accept that part of their argument is very sound, but one result of that might be to give them a stronger association. Meat inspectors over the years have been the subject of many allegations concerning free meat and downgrading unless certain things were done. I hope that they respond fully and clean up their sector of the industry for the future.
One other aspect I hope the royal commission will look at is a rumour current in Victoria that somebody in the United States tipped off some of these people in July ahead of the official confirmation to the Australian Government and the Minister on about 11 August. I hope also.that the Commissioner of the Australian Federal Police, Sir Colin Woods, following the comments he made, will make sure that the Federal Police completely clears itself of any suspicion and that, through some very clever police work, will make sure that all those involved in the present scandal are apprehended. Now is the big opportunity for all those people, those different groups, involved in allegations and counter-allegations to put up or shut up for all time. In supporting the legislation, I commend the Minister and the Government for their prompt action which has retained our export industry and the international integrity of the meat industry.
Mr JOHN BROWN (Parramatta) (5.14)-I rise on behalf of the Opposition to support the fourth Bill in this package of Bills-the Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Bill 1981. I note in passing that the penalty has been increased from a fine of $1,000, with a potential fine of three times the value of the goods exported under the old rules, to one of $100,000 or imprisonment for a period not. exceeding five years, or both. We applaud the Government for making this decision, albeit a little belatedly. Also in passing, I reiterate the comments by the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) that we would have preferred to see some retrospectivity introduced in this new legislation. Obviously the Government has some sort of philosophical objection to retrospectivity and that will not be the case.
The reason that we are pleased to see this increase in penalties is that we-perhaps better than the Government-realise the extent, the size, and the absolute immorality of the crimes that have been committed in the last few weeks by probably only a few people against a very major

1408 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

Australian industry. I do not know whether the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon)-who is engaged in an earnest conversation at the moment-has yet come to realise the extent of this industry and the threat it now faces in America. I have noted that in the last few days the Minister has been very optimistic about the sales of Australian meat in America. I sincerely hope that he is proved to be correct. Whether the sales will improve is a matter for time. Understanding the absolute fetish that American people have about food hygiene and the standards of inspection, I hope that they will react against the attitudes of certain people within America. I mentioned in the House last week that it is quite sad when people such as Johnny Carson tell jokes about Australian meat on the major American television show, and makes a laughing stock of us. We read reports in the newspapers of hamburger stores with signs on the front saying: 'We do not sell Australian beef'. I sincerely hope that this sort of ridicule of Australia's trading reputation will soon be forgotten and that the Americans will go back to eating Australian meat. But whether they will do so is another proposition.
The extent of the crime of course, relates not only to the value of the industry in terms of dollars but also to all of those people who are affected by this sort of turn down. The honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd) has mentioned some of them. The slaughtermen in Australia are now in an awfully difficult situation. Something like 9,000 or 10,000 of them are out of work at present because of climatic conditions, a shortage of cattle and so on. It would be a real disaster if the American export market did not pick up and we found more people out of work. Of course the National Country Party supportersthe graziers-are also looking straight down the barrel of a gun. If we do not get back the market in America God knows what they will do with their cattle.
Mr Nixon-Keep politics out of it.
Mr JOHN BROWN-That is right. We must keep politics out of it. We certainly cannot absorb all that meat on the local market. Last Thursday in this House-I do not know whether my comments have been brought to the attention of the Minister-I spoke rather disparagingly of the management of the meat industry by the Department of Primary Industry. I suggested that meat was actually secondary to the primary industry of livestock raising. It is my earnest belief that the quicker the control of the meat industry is taken away from the Department of Primary Industry, and perhaps put into the Department of Trade and Resources where there are people skilled in

the sale of commodites, the better. I listed the large litany of collapsing co-operative meat ventures in which farmers have engaged themselves over the last few years, not to mention, of course, the co-operative, Farmers' and Graziers Direct Meat Supply Pty Ltd in Melbourne. I note that another $750,000 has been allocated in the present Budget to try to bail that lot out. It really indicates what bad businessmen farmers are. They are brilliant at raising their cattle and they are brilliant as farmers but when it comes to the hard world of commerce and turning stock into dollars they are not much good at it. I really believe that the quicker the meat industry as such-as an export industry particularly-is taken away from the Department of Primary Industry and given to some other department, the better, with all due respect to the present Minister.
I have mentioned in the House two or three times in the few years that I have been here-I am going back three years-the problems of the dual inspection service. I note that the Government has a predilection for not having a centralised body, for instance, in the area of companies law and securities. It is all in favour of a co-operative system. I am in favour of that also. We must have a higher standard of meat inspection in Australia apart from the present export inspection service which is of very high quality. I have been dealing with the inspectors and staff in the Department of Primary Industry's inspection service in a commercial sense for some 30 years and I have great respect for them. But the New South Wales Department of Agriculture's inspection standards certainly are the best of all of the State services in Australia. I would like to see the New South Wales standards for local meat inspection made the norm and all other States made to fall into line. It should be administered by-I do not care by whom-a Commonwealth department on a co-operative basis. But we must develop a standard system. We only have to go across the border to South Australia to see what happens there. One
can throw a block and tackle over a tree, kill a
bullock there, sell it in a butcher's shop and nobody cares. That meat cap. be transported to New South Wales. Although v,.;e have built a high wall of protection for the people of New South Wales, with our consumer protection laws and our meat inspection service, it is still possible for such meat to escape the net, to come into New South Wales, esc,\pe reinspection and be sold. The honourable member for Murray spoke about unsubstantiated statements and unsubstantiated charges. I agree that there have been quite a number of those from all sorts of 'authorities' over the last few weeks.

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1409

I would like to paint a little scenario at which the royal commission might want to look. I know of two or three instances that have been reported to the Commonwealth Police and the Department of Primary Industry in the last few weeks. I wonder what has happened about them. If I could paint a picture of what a little trio of people have been up to the matter might fall into place like the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle. A company called Edmund Souery, a Philippines-based company, has a Melbourne head office and a Northern Territory connection, with killing facilities in Alice Springs, Tennant Creek and Point Stuart. It is a matter of fact that members of the Australasian Meat Industry Employees Union have been working for Edmund Souery, shooting up to 10 or 12 brumbies, buffaloes or wild horses at a time in the paddocks in the Northern Territory. They come back later, skin the hindquarters out-because that is all that is needed-bone the hindquarters, and put the meat into plastic bags which are later transported to a cold store in Brisbane, ostensibly for pet meat. Another gentleman called Gerald Egan, a bankrupt, runs an operation in Darwin called North Meat Cold Stores. I know that approximately 20 days ago the AMIEU reported to the Commonwealth Police that if an inspection were made of the meat in his cold stores, not only in Darwin but also in Port Hedland, there was good reason to believe that meat that was labelled 'beef' was, in fact, buffalo, donkey, wild horse, or whatever. As far as I know no action has been taken to inspect that meat.
Mr Nixon-The police have been advised of the matter.
Mr JOHN BROWN-But as far as I know nothing has been done to inspect the meat. I am sure that a species inspection would prove that what I say is correct. I fear that in the intervening period that meat will be shipped off to the States where, of course, it will be discovered through species inspections carried out by United States officials. My other fear is that in the intervening period, since the report was made and no action was taken, that meat has been taken from those cold stores and put somewhere else. It is a matter of fact also that 20 tonnes of what is ostensibly pet food has been shipped to Melbourne in Victoria every Friday night in refrigerated vans with no reinspection in Melbourne. As I understand the story, there have been a few bags of dyed pet meat at the back of the trucks because Queensland specifies that pet food must be dyed. But pet food originating in Queensland and shipped somewhere else does not necessarily need to be dyed.

Last week I asked the Minister a question about the discovery of horse meat in cartons in Melbourne, some of it carrying the methyl violet dye that is used on pet food. At first the Minister denied it quite innocently; later he had the decency to correct his answer in the House. I appreciated his doing so. This indicates that pet food that has been coming from various places has been getting into Victoria. God only knows where it has gone from there. Mr Deputy Speaker, you would be aware that a gentleman called Hammond was apprehended last week in Victoria. I will not mention the specific charges that he is under but I think a proper examination would indicate that there is a direct tie-up between the three people I have mentioned-Egan, Souery and Hammond. While Souery will deny that he ever had any connection with Hammond I am sure that at one stage he was second in charge of the Souery operation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! At this stage perhaps I should draw the honourable member's attention to the sub judice rules and request him to exercise caution in his remarks.
Mr JOHN BROWN-I will not pursue that line. Something at which the royal commission should look is the connection between those three gentlemen and the incidence of this meat turning up in Melbourne. It indicates exactly the weakness of which I was speaking earlier. There is no uniform inspection service in Australia and there certainly are no uniform health arrangements to protect people from adulterated food, which was the subject of a discussion of a matter of public importance in this House last week. Today, quite sadly, I noted something when the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs (Mr Moore) tabled the annual report of the Trade Practices Commission. If anybody bothers to look at the back of the report they will see a 10 page appendix by a retiring commissioner. That appendix is a minority report which condemns the Government very badly for its successful attempt to take all of the protection for consumers out of the Trade Practices Act. I think that is a matter for some regret. The fact that the protection which existed under the Trade Practices Act has now been removed really highlights and magnifies the problem of the lack of protection of people's health by this Government.
The Government's organisation and administration of the export meat industry over the years has been quite delinquent. We do not have a proper standard of inspection, despite the good efforts of the Commonwealth inspection service. There is an absolute need for bonded stores where

1410 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

export meat can be kept under bond before it is shipped. It is necessary to close down all the small boning operations where export meat is allowed to be boned without being subject to the inspection that applies in the bigger ones. Small operators should be made to bone in one area where the meat is properly inspected. The quicker those small inspection boning rooms around the country are closed down the better. I hope that that will be one of the recommendations of the royal commission. Also, there is a need for self-lidding boxes. I am pleased to note that the Minister is looking at that matter, as well as the provision of seals that cannot be removed without proper inspection.
We support the Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Bill. I think it is wrongly named; it should be called the 'unlawful exportation of inedible food amendment Bill'. We applaud the fact that, although belatedly, at least the Government has undertaken to increase the penalties. Although in the last few weeks enormous damage has been done to the meat industry by a very few people, the bulk of people in the meat industry, whom I have known for 30 years, are decent and honourable. It is a pity that the reputation of the whole meat industry, which has enjoyed great respect amongst the Australian community and around the world, has been sullied by just a few people. I hope that they are brought to justice. I also hope that the Government will think very seriously about making these penalties retrospective so that proper penalties can be extracted for the huge damage they have done to this industry.
Mr PORTER (Barker) (S.28)-Like other members who have spoken in this debate-and I am sure that others who have not spoken share my view-I am disgusted that people could have the gall to export kangaroo meat or horse meat from this country and fraudulently pretend that it was beef. As if that was not bad enough in itself, to do it in the course of our international trade with one of our greatest trading partners, indeed, one of our greatest allies, is an affront to every right thinking Australian. As soon as this racket was uncovered this Government, through the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon), took action. I shall deal with that action in a moment.
I think the matter ought first be put into perspective. The size of the problem is all important. Meat bearing the markings of two of Australia's 400 licensed export establishments has been found to have been adulterated. Both of those establishments are based in Melbourne. Their total exports to the United States so far this year have amounted to some 632 tonnes or 0.39 per cent of

total Australian shipments to the United States over the same period, which amount to 161,000 tonnes. Those figures are one reason for the logical and reasonable approach which has been taken by this Government rather then the hysterical approach which some people have advocated. Perhaps that latter approach was suggested more for political purposes than really to assist the producers and exporters of this country. Clearly, if some of the actions which were demanded of the Government had been taken in the initial stages of this scandal there would still be hundreds of people out of work and probably an enormous amount of meat still tied up in the United States. I believe the Minister acted properly.
For the record I will recite the events as they occurred which led to the introduction of this legislation which increases the penalties applicable to people who fraudulently export meat, pretending that meat to be of one type, beef-in this case when it is not. On 11 August this year the Australian Bureau of Animal Health first received advice from the United States Department of Agriculture that horse meat was suspected to be in a carton of boneless beef bearing the markings 140C which I understand is an Australian meat export establishment in Richmond, Melbourne which trades under the name of Profreeze. On the next day, 12 August, the movement of all export meat from Profreeze was terminated. Seven other boning rooms in the same complex were also placed under strict surveillance and thorough checks were made on their product before it was released for export. On 13 August we were advised that the laboratory tests in the United States proved the meat to be horse meat. Immediately the 140C works were deregisteredo This meant that that company could no longer export meat anywhere in the world. The Australian Federal Police were asked to investi- . gate the matter.
A number of other steps were also taken. Some 1,809 cartons of meat in Victoria bearing the 140C markings, which, if they contained beef, would have had the value of around $100,000, were seized and impdunded for testing. Spot checks were introduced ;in all States. Extra meat inspection surveillance was provided at independent boning rooms and cold stores. Ship loading security was increased. Checking of health certificates and all documentation was intensified. Over the next few days-that was still in August, only a few days after the scandal first became known to the Australian Government-a new system was devised for security seals to be placed on cartons. That is estimated to cost about $1 m

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1411

this financial year. I am advised that the first delivery of those seals was expected on 8 September. An urgent review of the relevant laws was also undertaken at that time. As a result of that review we are now debating these Bills. Quite frankly, when honourable members think about it, it has taken less than a month to get a review under way, and to get legislation drafted, introduced and debated in this House. It must be one of the shortest time frames in which legislation has been initiated and presented to this House. At the same time a thorough police investigation was undertaken and a special task force was set up within the Bureau of Animal Health to co-ordinate a nationwide sampling and species testing program. Following investigations, on 1 September the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation suspended the export licence of Samsons Meat Co (Vic) Pty Ltd, a company registered in Victoria. Investigations into other companies are continuing.
On 4 September the United States Department of Agriculture confirmed that horse meat had been found in a consignment of meat from establishment 622. I am advised that that is Jason Meats Pty Ltd, Abbotsford, Melbourne. That establishment was immediately deregistered and the Australian Federal Police advised. All cartons bearing the label 622 were seized and tested. Because of that development the Minister took special action in regard to Victoria. He suspended the export operations of 27 independent boning rooms in that State. On 7 September the Minister strengthened the controls by extending the suspension to include independent boning rooms in Victoria that were associated with an abattoir complex. This move involved six boning rooms. The suspension became effective from midnight on 7 September. It will remain in force until the boning rooms can demonstrate adequate security measures and satisfactory species testing programs. I understand that some of those boning rooms have done that already.
New controls are also being implemented whereby export meat will be stored in specially secured and approved cold stores under new inventory control measures. Owners of registered export establishments will be responsible for all activities conducted on their premises. Meat transport vehicles and containers will be sealed to add to the security of the packed product during transport from a boning room to an approved se. cure cold store or ship site. Other measures such as one piece packing containers to make relidding impossible are also under consideration. Further testing procedures, including ongoing sampling systems, are also under consideration. These new

measures are estimated to cost some $6m in this financial year.
Finally, on 8 September, as the Parliament knows, it was announced that there would be a royal commission of inquiry into the meat racket covering, amongst other things, the allegations of malpractice.
That record is not a record of inaction, as has been suggested by our opponents and by others outside this House. It is a record of decisive action taken by the Minister, not in an hysterical framework, but rather by a controlled regulation of the export industry step by step as required.
The four Bills which we are debating cognately increase the penalties in relation to the unlawful exportation of meat. They substantially increase the penalties which are applicable. I think we all agree that it would have been better if those penalties had been increased some time ago. Perhaps one lesson we have learnt out of this is that all of our penalties, not just in this instance, ought to be subject to review.
One thing that concerns me is the call by both Opposition members who have spoken in this debate for retrospective legislation in this case. Whilst I am appalled that this meat substitution racket has taken place, whilst it could have threatened our future meat sales and whilst every member of the Australian community, I am sure, agrees that it was a disastrous situation for the meat industry, the Government has made, I believe, the right decision in not implementing these new penalties retrospectively. The honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) said that he would like the legislation to be applied retrospectively 'if it would stick'-I think they are the words he used. That attitude is contrary to the natural justice. I believe it is unworthy of any honourable member of parliament to suggest that in this place. That is the case not only for retrospective legislation generally but especially in relation to retrospectivity for criminal laws. I think all honourable members know that people are expected to know the law. One cannot know the law or be expected to know the law if it is changed after the event. Whilst I appreciate the view of almost all Australians that people involved in the meat racket ought to be dealt with severely, that does not provide the basis for us to set a precedent in enacting retrospective legislation in the criminal field. Such an attitude rather reminds me of a lynch gang.
Mr Kerin-A Phil Lynch gang.
Mr PORTER-No, I am not referring to the Minister for Industry and Commerce. But one

1412 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

knows that a lynch gang, incensed by some misdeed, takes the law into its own hands and imposes a penalty on a person who mayor may not be the actual culprit. I, therefore, welcome the Government's decision to impose new penalties from the date of the announcement rather than retrospectively.
Finally, I refer to the meat inspection services generally. For some time, the Federal Government has been endeavouring to resolve a problem of dual inspection of meat. This Government has been acutely aware of the cost to the Federal and State governments, producers and the meat exporters of dual inspections. To clarify the point, as I understand it, presently in some States such as Queensland, export meat is inspected by the Commonwealth meat inspectors and, in some cases, at the same time or at about the same time, it is inspected by State inspectors. Recently the Government implemented an inquiry into this dual inspection service. The report of that inquiry became known as the Kelly report. That report waS presented to Parliament in February 1980. Since that time the Government has been trying to overcome the stupidity of the dual meat inspection. South Australia agreed some years ago to allow the Federal meat inspectors to do the job. The Northern Territory and, more recently, Tasmania have agreed to do likewise. I believe that it is farcical that producers, exporters and the public in New South Wales, Victoria, Queensland and Western Australia have to bear the cost of dual inspection when South Australia, the Northern Territory and Tasmania have apparently seen the light. It is high time that the Commonwealth's initiatives to reduce costs to the people in Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria and Western Australia were taken up by those States. The producers, in particular, have been paying too much for too long. People in those States ought to be asking their State governments why they have to pay for these wasteful dual inspections.
Dual inspections are a disgrace. They are costing beef producers money. They have enough costs to bear now without these wasteful and farcical charges. I support the Minister in his attempts to obtain the agreement of the reluctant States to overcome this stupidity. I support these Bills, as, I believe, does the Opposition because they increase penalties to ensure that the meat scandal is not repeated in Australia in the future.
Dr EVERINGHAM (Capricornia) (5.45)-1 refer briefly to the remarks of a couple of the speakers from the Government side. The honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd) and the honourable member for Barker (Mr Porter)

stressed that the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) acted promptly. I will not make a great issue of this because, after all, we on this side of the House were not pursuing with great vigour and concentration the allegations that were made in 1978 by Senator Primmer, nor were we pursuing the uneasiness that was expressed in February 1980 in the report of the Committee of Inquiry to Examine Commonwealth and State Meat Inspection Systems chaired by Mr Bert Kelly. Nevertheless, I just wonder whether if the Minister and perhaps some of his senior officers had been a little more on the ball they would not have taken alarm a little earlier. I guess they were reasonably prompt considering that the initiative came from a report from the American authorities. However, it was only after the Australian Labor Party Opposition and the Australian Democrats had indicated their intention of requiring a full inquiry that the Minister climbed down from his first reaction which was that it was not necessary. I must say that the cattle interests that I have spoken to in my electorate, which is the cattle export centre of Australia, have not been at all impressed with the promptness of that response. It is true that when the commission of investigation is holding its hearings those who have made hysterical or exaggerated claims will have to put up or shut up. That is as it should be. Let us not say that it was hysterical to call for that investigation in the first place.
I will enlarge a little on the matter of the Kelly Committee. It is well laid out in the Sydney Bulletin of 22 September that this Committee, appointed by the Government, was chaired by Mr Bert Kelly, a one time Liberal member of the House of Representatives and Minister but better known these days under his economist pseudonym as The Modest Farmer'. The Kelly Committee was set up to examine inspection systems and to report to the Minister for Primary Industry. In the Bulletin of 4 August 1981, referring to an answer the Minister for Primary Industry gave in the Parliament when asked about the Kelly report, Mr Kelly wrote: 'I don't think he always catches on as quickly as he could'. I do not think Mr Kelly was being hysterical. Page 41 of the Kelly report states inter ~lia:
. . . at several works visited, works management held the interstate branding stamps. The stamp was applied by an employee and the works merely paid the (inspection) fee.
There was no re-inspection. The committee was told also that the 'Australian Approved' stamp was provided by works management and that if a new stamp was required the inspectors obtained it from management. The Committee said that this practice should cease. I think that there has been

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1413

more than enough notice of that obviously glaring anomaly in what is supposed to be an inspection system. I am not blaming the inspectors. I believe that was an alarm bell which should have been responded to by the Department of Primary Industry and, if he had read it, by the Minister. The Committee's report on page 66 states:
There is one aspect of the meat industry which should be tackled with firm resolution . . . and that is the problem of some managers trying to buy the co-operation of inspectors by giving them meat at ridiculously low prices, or of counternancing excessive overtime claims, or of meat inspectors demanding cheap meat backed by the implied threat of slowing the killing chain or forcing higher offal or other condemnations . . . legislation should include heavy punishment for administrative, VOs (veterinary officers), meat inspectors and management who try to obtain improper advantages . . . in this manner.
The Committee said that that practice had been too common and that it must be stopped. Again that is an alarm bell that should have raised the attention of the Minister or those whose responsibility it was under his jurisdiction to analyse the recommendations of that report. The Committee was set up, as I said, to examine inspection systems. It would not have been established if the Government did not have some uneasiness about the system. I have heard uneasiness expressed by inspectors and others in meat works who were not able to give me enough specifics to work on. Again I acknowledge that perhaps this was an inhibiting factor in getting earlier action. The Kelly Committee said that it had neither the authority not the resources to prove what came to its notice. The Department in response has tried, with rather negative results as the previous speakers have said, to get a single federal authority for meat inspection. I think it is true that we should allocate most of the blame to the States for that failure so far.
I refer particularly to the recent outcry by the Queensland Premier who is an instant expert on anything. He was going to set up a Queensland export system. He has climbed down slightly from this. He eventually agreed fo the investigation which he had been very vocal In opposing in all sections of the Queensland media. When I say that the Queensland Premier is an instant expert on anything I am thinking of such things as the Hovarth atomic engine and the Brych vaccine which he is unable to produce, although I have offered $1,000 for a charity if he does. He is an instant authority on Aboriginal anthropology, although he goes counter to every anthropologist in his approach to the existence of Aboriginal culture. I am afraid that the Premier is very much a one man band in Queensland and he dominates any of the more rational Ministers that he may chance, inadvertently, to allow into his Cabinet.

Mr Kerin-He is pretty rational for a Country Party bloke.
Dr EVERINGHAM-That is as it may be. One of the Liberal Party medicos in Parliament offered to certify him on one occasion and I offered to sign the second certificate if necessary. The Tasmanian Liberal Party senator, Senator Peter Rae, when chairing another inquiry into an area which is the responsibility of the Primary Industry Department, referred to a fairly leisurely approach by the Department to what he called an undesirable, if not illegal, practice. He did that in very modest terms, I think.
It is gratifying to see these meat Bills coming forward. The Opposition supports the strengthening of penalties. I do not accept the misgivings of the honourable member for Barker about retrospectivity in criminal law being a sort of lynch law. It is not of that kind at all it is merely a matter of increasing the penalties to something commensurate with the enormity of the crime. I believe that if it is true, as alleged in some reports, that this is a multi-million dollar fraud then retrospectivity is very well justified in the matter of upgrading the monetary penalties. I can agree in principle that increasing greatly gaol penalties may be an unfair sort of retrospectivity. But certainly I do not object to an increase in monetary penalties, which have existed for many years, without taking any account of inflation, the growth of the industry, the value of it and so on.
The meat industry is worth something like $600m in exports to the United States of America alone. The amount fluctuates enormously. It is subject to many problems other than those of assuring standards. It is subject to the enormous unpredictability that arises from the fact that roughly only 6 per cent of the world's production of beef is ever exported from one country to another. Theoretically it needs only a 6 per cent rise in the domestic production in countries that would otherwise be importing for the importation to cease altogether, and this was the major cause of the disastrous beef slump in the early 1970s.
There is a need for the Government to take note of many of these problems and to act a lot more quickly and promptly than it has in the matter of carcass classification, and then to move quickly to the question of consumer classification -classification at the retail level. This can be done, and it would be a major influence in stabilising the home market. Carcass classification is a major step in standardising prices to growers. The Government and the Department have been dilatory in pursuing this very necessary step forward in a rather vital industry. It is about the third of

1414 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

our primary export industries, and primary exports are still the major factor in our balance of payments.
Home consumption inspection is one of the areas where obviously the Federal philosophy of the Government breaks down. The Government has this phobia about centralism to such an extent that whenever one talks about standardising something on a national scale it has uneasy feelings. Objections are raised in the States and in this Federal Parliament that something called States' rights are being undermined, as though the States were more important than the functions they are supposed to perform and the people they are supposed to serve. It is obvious and clear that there are reasons for having a Federal Government, and a lot of those reasons were known as long ago as the time when our Constitution was formulated. One of those functions is the control of international trade. How in the name of fortune it can make sense to turn back the clock to the days when this continent was occupied by six se1fgoverning dominions of the British Parliament is beyond me.
It is true that in some cases the States, because they are closer to the communities and have more detailed contact, are more appropriate levels of administration for certain functions. It is true that local governments are necessary and appropriate for other functions. It is also true that we should have regional administrations, something between the levels of State and local government. However, the fact remains that some functions are best performed and standardised and to an extent centralised, certainly in the co-ordination of scientific and technological standardisation, at a national level. Surely this must apply to matters such as quarantine and meat inspection for export. If the inspection has to be done on a nationwide scale in every State and every export meat works, it makes no sense at all to have it duplicated in the same meat works just because some of the production is for domestic consumption. All the speakers have agreed that it is high time we eliminated this wasteful dual inspection system and that Australians. were given the same high standard of inspection for beef as are the consumers in those countries to which we export.
Sitting suspended from 6 to 8 p.m.
Mr MacKENZIE (Calare) (8.0)-1 speak in support of the Meat Export (Penalties) Bill, the Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Bill, the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Bill and the Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Bill which are being debated cognately. I support those Bills

because they represent the culmination of many hard days work on behalf of the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) and other Ministers and departments concerned. There has been a substantial amount of criticism by industry and other people, including much unfounded media criticism of the Minister for Primary Industry and his Department. I will use some of my time tonight to dispel that criticism by going through almost day by day the actions that have been taken and the consequences of those actions.
On 11 August notification was received of a suspicion that there was horse meat in a consignment of boneless beef from Licence No. 140C, Profreeze. This was detected by the United States Department of Agriculture in San Diego. On 12 August, the day following, the movement of export boneless beef from Profreeze was terminated by the Minister. On 13 August, the next day, it was confirmed that the suspicion was correct and that the consignment was adulterated with horse meat. I understand that that was the first case proven although it may not have been the first suspected case. On the very same day that company was deregistered as an exporter and the Australian Federal Police were asked to institute immediate proceedings. On the next day, the 14 August, which I will call day one, the first day after official notification, the Minister took immediate steps to tighten up security for the export of beef. Those steps were outlined in the statement brought down by the Minister on 8 September. They included the seizure of about $100,000 worth of meat in Victoria, the immediate upgrading of spot checks throughout all States, extra meat inspection and surveillance, an increase in ship loading security and an increased checking of health certifications and documentations.
Within the following days further measures were taken. A new system was drawn up for the security sealing of cartons, a system that may well cost up to $lm in the current financial year. The first delivery of those seals was arranged last week. At the same time, an urgent review of relevant laws was instigat~d. Officers of the Department of Primary Industry, the Attorney General's Department and the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs were involved. Police investigations were further intensified and at one stage I believe that upwards of 18 Australian Federal Police officers were involved with support from the Victoria Police and officers from the Trade Practices Commission. This all took place on day three or four after the official notification that meat substitution had occurred.

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1415

It is very difficult for me to accept criticism of the Minister that nothing was done in those early days. Only one relatively small consignment from one of the 400 registered exporters was affected but perhaps there could be some criticism that in the light of what has subsequently happened we did not take the matter as seriously as would be expected. However, I think that was natural. Nevertheless, on day four the Minister had lengthy discussions with the United States Ambassador and the United States Special Trade Representative. On day seven, 20 August, the Trade Practices Commission was called in to investigate the labelling aspect. On 21 August, on day eight, a new development occurred; kangaroo meat was found in cartons in Melbourne. It was on that day that the suggestion of increasing the penalties for unlawful meat export from $1,000 to $100,000 was first mooted. Many people have forgotten that. Perhaps they do not read their newspapers well enough. The rural Press at least reported at that time the suggestion that such increases in penalties should be invoked.
The next day, following the suggestion that kangaroo meat was involved, the Government apparently arranged for the forwarding of kangaroo serum to the United States to assist in its species testing program. Immediately following that the United States insisted that certain species testing programs be instituted. We agreed in principle. On I September Samsons Meat Co. (Victoria) Pty Ltd was deregistered. I also point out that prior to that, on 27 August, the Minister released a reasonably substantial resume of the action taken so far. I have it with me. It consists of four pages of detailed statements. At all stages the Minister has kept the public and the Parliament very well informed as to the actions taken and, to a lesser degree, the actions proposed. Perhaps he has been too open. This has given the media the opportunity to sensationalise the whole issue and, in many cases, to pick up completely unsubstantiated allegations by various people which are very difficult to refute. At one stage I felt that anybody could ring up the media with the wildest sorts of allegations about goanna meat or whatever and it would be immediately run as up-front headline news.
I refer to the record again. On 4 September the United States Department of Agriculture detected horse meat in another consignment, registered No. 622 from Jason Meats Pty Ltd. Immediately, I understand within hours of confirmation of that detection, the company was deregistered and its stocks impounded. On the same day the operations of 27 independent boning rooms in Victoria were suspended. At that stage

there was some criticism that the Minister's actions were too precipitous and severe but the proof of the pudding was that on the following day the United States Department of Agriculture saw fit to release all meat withheld in the United States except that originating from Victoria. That is indicative of the very good relations with the United States as a customer that the Minister and his Department have been able to maintain throughout the whole difficult business. That has been subsequently proven by the United States Department of Agriculture and the United States authorities working in such close co-operation with the Minister and his Department. They have had the greatest confidence in what the Minister has been doing and have taken very quick action following the actions taken in Australia.
On 6 or 7 September an interim report was handed down from the Australian Federal Police. Legislation for increased penalties under various Acts was in the process of being drafted. I imagine that at that stage there was discussion about setting up a royal commission and that approaches were made to find out who might be available to head that royal commission. Again, the United States had to be kept informed about what was going on. I can well imagine that many people in the United States would not even know what a royal commission is. They probably had substantial fears as to what was implied by a royal commission and whether it would assist or even hinder the processes of resolving this difficulty.
On 7 September the Acting Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) notified the Premiers of the Government's intention to set up a royal commission and sought their co-operation in setting up commissions as far as each State was concerned. The following day we had a statement from the Minister. The day after that we had a statement from the Acting Prime Minister setting out the terms of reference for the royal commission. I would point out that when that very comprehensive statement was introduced into this Parliament by the Minister it was exactly 19 working days from the first day on which the original substantiated notification of horse meat adulteration in the United States was received in Australia. I think that really puts to rest any criticism that has been abroad that the Government did not act with sufficient intentiqn, alacrity or determination in this whole business. On the day following the announcement of the terms of reference for the royal commission the United States announced the resumption of meat imports from Australia. That again, to me, only confirms the very good relationships that the Minister and his Department have had with our customers in the United States

1416 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

throughout this whole affair. Indeed, I understand and only two of the 400 operators who are li-

that on 18 September a further meeting of the censed to export.

Standing Committee on Agriculture will discuss The measures that have been introduced are

some of the further regulations that are involved quite adequate; and in many cases some people

in this whole thing.

would say they are too excessive. But I do not be-

Having spent some time going through the chronological record of what has happened in this co-called meat industry scandal, I would like to pay full credit to the Minister for Primary Indus-
try, to his officers, who must have worked very hard and very intensively over that period, to the other Ministers involved and to officers of the Australian Meat and Livestock Corporation and others. I believe that the record shows that they moved very quickly indeed and that they are certainly not guilty of the criticism that has come from many quarters, a lot of that criticism being completely ill-founded. Much of the criticism re-

lieve it is unreasonable to expect that legislation will be strengthened to the extent where in one case under the Meat Export (Penalties) Act the maximum penalty of only $100 is being increased to $100,000 or five years' imprisonment, or both. In the case of summary conviction, again fairly severe penalties have been invoked. There are sec-
tions of the industry which say that these are not severe enough but I do not believe that people, in all serious consideration, would intentionally go out to perpetrate this type of activity knowing that they could well be imprisoned for five years or pay a fine of $100,000 or suffer both.

lated to allegations of malpractice in the industry That raises the question of whether the impo-

which occurred in past years. It is for this very sition of a bond as a condition of licence is a mat-

reason that the Government saw fit to set up a ter that could be considered seriously. Personally,

royal commission-to give the opportunity to I favour the idea. Whether the bond should be set

those people making those allegations to come beat the level of $100,000, which is equivalent to the

fore the royal commissioner and to put those alfine now being imposed under the legislation, or

legations and to prove them. I think it is high time whether it should be higher is a moot point. One

that those people who appear to have prior of the difficulties is that in most States anybody

knowledge and who appear to be so well informed could within reason set up a company for the pur-

on what malpractices have occurred in the induspose of meat packing, meat boning or meat

try are given the opportunity to state their case processing in some way for export. So the equity

publicly. I challenge all those people to come forand the asset ~onsiderations of setting up such a

ward with their allegations within the .consticompany appear to be fairly loose. The argument

tutional and legal framework of a royal comfor a bond may well be to ensure that a company

mission. The royal commission could not be which wishes to come into this industry already

established until such time as the Minister was has a commitment before it that will allow it to

assured that the Australian Federal Police inquiry pay for fines should it be proven guilty of offences.

had sufficient evidence to justify it. It could not be
established until such time as we had been able to inform our customers in the United States and the Administration there as to what was involved in a royal commission. Perhaps we also had to make sure that there was a person of sufficient calibre to head that royal commission. I do not believe that anybody could criticise the appointment of Mr Justice Woodward as the commissioner in this
instance.

I think previous speakers have made a good point in that the upgrading of fine.s in this particular instance could well occur on a more routine and regular basis. At a public meeting in Orange in my electorate last Monday it was pointed out that under New South Wales legislation the maximum penalty for offences such as this as far as the meat inspection service in New South Wales is concerned is of the order of $1,000. So there certainly would appear to be room for a review of the

In no way am I trying to play down the sigfines and penalties in New South Wales. While I

nificance of this great difficulty in the export meat am talking about State affairs, I point out that I

industry. It is a major industry and the United think everybody would agree that it is imperative

States is a very significant customer. But I do be that the various States co-operate with the Com-

lieve that the Minister for Primary Industry in the monwealth to the fullest extent as far as this royal

Commonwealth Government has come in for a commission is concerned. The initial reaction in

high degree of unsubstantiated, ill-informed and some States has been one of non co-operation.

unfounded criticism over this whole affair. I point That has since been watered down to some extent,

out again, without trying in any way to particularly in QueenSland. I can understand that

downgrade the seriousness of this episode, that it various States are not too enthused by the

still involves only a very small proportion of prospect of being put under the spotlight and

Australia's total meat exports to the United States under the scrutiny of a royal commission because,

Meal Export (Penalties) Bill

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1417

whilst they are ready to blame the whole scandal on Victoria, it is quite apparent that a lot of the meat concerned did not originate from Victoria.
The. Minister has notified this Parliament that he will be travelling to the United States shortly and that he will be using that opportunity to explain to our customers in the United States and the authorities there the actions which have been taken, particularly those actions relating to the new regulations for the consignment of export meat. The Minister has announced that an independent consultant will be engaged to ensure that in the short term the actions taken will be sat,)sfactory as far as closing off as many of the loop- ,poles as possible is concerned. I personally believe that the new regulations combined with the penalties will ensure that no further breaches and malpractices will eventuate.
I close on the subject of meat inspection because critics of the Minister and the Government have said that this whole episode has occurred as a result of the dual meat inspection service. That is not correct. In fact there has been no legitimate criticism of the procedures of the Commonwealth meat inspection service in this whole scandal. The regulations and by-laws associated with the handling of meat between certain processing stages prior to export have been faulty. The Commonwealth meat inspection service is an essential component of our export licensing and of our export to the countries that require our meat. It is quite pointless to say, as some Premiers-notably the New South Wales Premier-have, that they will go it on their own. No major importing country will be interested in dealing with meat from New South Wales as against Queensland, Tasmania, or any other State which exports meat. The sensible thing would be for the various States not only to co-operate with the royal commission but also to face the reality that a single meat inspection service is long overdue and in fact will not lead to major unemployment within the industry. The sooner they come to grips with this issue, the better.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (8.21)-1 too support the Meat Export (Penalties) Bill and cognate Bills, which could be described as ones which shut the door after the horse has bolted. They are Bills designed to increase the penalty on people who in the future may break the laws and put the export meat industry at risk, but I am sure that those people who have been guilty will be

quite happy to know that $100 will be the maximum fine that they will face. In fact, the people who have perpetrated meat substitution offences are the ones who will get out of it the lightest, the cheapest and with the most profit. Everybody else involved in the industry will pay. The Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) is shaking his head. Let us refer to some of the points made by the honourable member for Calare (Mr MacKenzie). He gave a history which virtually goes back only to August this year. The honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd) stated that the action taken confirms that the Minister has moved to rectify the problem. I shall refer back a little further. Maybe the meat scandal broke in August but the problem did not originate then. On 7 March 1978 Senator Primmer first raised the problem in the other place. It being a touchy subject at the time, Senator Primmer was responsible enough to say this:
At times I have felt that the matters I intend to raise should not be brought before the Parliament. Indeed, in the short term a certain amount of damage to our meat export industries may be the result of a public discussion of the matters . . .
He w~s rather concerned at that stage that if there was too much public discussion of information he had it could do some damage. He went on to say:
However, if the situation as it now exists continues, I firmly believe that long term damage will be done to a major rural export industry.
How correct he was. He also said:
. . . it is my contention that the present Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Sinclair) has been less than studious in attempting to eradicate illegal practices in the meat export industries.
There is not much doubt from what we know today that the Government, the Department of Primary Industry and that Minister definitely were at fault in not following up what was made public to them. Senator Primmer, although not having a lot of facts at his disposal, felt the matter was important enough for him to raise it in the Parliament. What was the action of the Government? We need to refer to the next day to see whether the Government took any notice. Was it just a speech in the Parliament that nobody took any notice of? Was it a matter of the subject being raised but nobody taking any action on it? No, not so.- The following day in the House a Dorothy Dixer was asked of the then Minister for Primary Industry informing him of the allegations that had been made the night before. The Minister was aware, and the Department was fully aware of what had been going on. In fact, the Minister presented a document, saying that the matter had been looked at since the previous June, which was

1418 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

six or eight months earlier. In the Hansard of 8 March he is reported as stating:
Only one report was made to my Department. It stated that 10 companies-
Ten companies, mind you-
had emerged as suspects in relation to breaching the Exports (Meat) Regulations.
But the companies were not named. The Minister went on to say that he did not propose to answer any of the assertions made in the House, but he did say:
It would seem that there is no basis . . . for Senator Primmer's allegations.
He was referring to advice he had received from the Department at that time; but he said that the Department would be following the matter up. I think if any Minister responsible for such a vital industry had received so many questions in one speech in the Parliament two, three or four things perhaps should have been done. Perhaps Senator Primmer's information should have been checked at its source and perhaps Senator Primmer should have been interviewed by the Federal police or officers of the Department of Primary Industry. But no such thing happened. No documents or letters were sent to Senator Primmer at a later date in regard to the questions he raised. Of course, because there was no action by the responsible Minister and the Department, the matter just died. Perhaps if someone had been astute enough it could have been followed up a little more and we would not have run into the problem we have today. It took the raising of the matter by the United States to bring this Government to the stage of doing something about it. That would not be so bad if the matter had not already been raised and allegations had not been made here. Good questions need to be asked as to why the Department did not follow up the matter. We have heard a lot of praise about the present Minister for Primary Industry and what he has done since 11 August. But many people in this country are very upset at the cost and the losses that have been incurred by people in the industry, from top to bottom, because of the lack of action by the Government.
The honourable member for Murray stated tonight that $lm is to be spent on seals for the export industry and another $5m is to be spent on capital equipment for species testing. From the information we have been able to receive from Department of Primary Industry officials at Estimates committee hearings, that $5m is to be spent on species testing in laboratories around the country. It is not to be spent on capital equipment at all. That is a cost of $5m to the industry or to the community this year. Those who have made

millions of dollars will get away with very small fines. Yet the taxpayers are already up for a $5m expense because of the incompetence of the Government.
Other people have been affected. The honourable member for Murray said that the farmers have not been affected. But what about some of the employees who were stood down? Is there any money available for them from the taxpayers' purse or is it all to be for the industry? No, there have been no announcements at all that any innocent people who have been affected by this scandal, which could have been prevented had action been taken earlier, will have to pay up. The people who have been stood down or lost their jobs in the industry will pay a bigger price than those who have committed the offences. Here we have another section in the community paying and paying very dearly for what happened.
State inspections are another issue that has been raised. The honourable member for Murray said that there are more problems with State inspections than Federal inspections and that there is more adulterated meat at the State level. Surely, with the charge being made in the United States, it is strange that we are now finding that on the domestic market we have similar problemsproblems that have been around for a long time. It has taken the export market to the United States to bring the matter to a head and to get this royal commission going. We know it took a lot of squeezing to get a royal commission out of the Minister. The excuse was that if action had been taken earlier it could have done more damage to the industry; that the United States might have stopped our exports until the end of the royal commission's inquiry. That is a fairly hairy suggestion to make.
I do not know whether the Minister is aware of it, but it has come to my attention, and I hope the Department will follow this matter up, that a lot of meat is now being made available to dog owners and trainers in the country. This meat is very cheap and nobody can compete with the price. I have been informed that one supplier in the Minister's electorate-I will be glad to tell the Minister where I received the information-is reported to be supplyi~g this meat at bedrock prices.
Mr Nixon-Give us the information now.
Mr CUNNINGHAM-I can give the Minister the name of the person who gave me the information and he will inform the Minister exactly who it is. There are no worries about that. If adulterated meat is being fed in other directions, into the pet food area, it is to be hoped that some of the

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1419

species testing can be done in that area. I hope that is being covered because that is where we may find some of the problems in relation to where meat is being disposed of at present. As of now, I believe, only one person has been charged. Surely to goodness the widespread allegations that are around will not bear down on just one cUlprit to be fined $100.
The honourable member for Calare (Mr MacKenzie) said that the Government acted as soon as it was made aware of a definite case. The species testing that has now been put into operation could have been undertaken much earlier than it was. The Committee of Inquiry to Examine Commonwealth and State Meat Inspection Systems-the Kelly report-was highlighted in the Bulletin by Alan Reid, and Mr Kelly said that he did not believe the Minister always caught on as quickly as he could. He does not believe the Minister clearly studied the report on meat inspection systems. These sorts of allegations are very serious. The whole history of what has happened is very serious. It has cost Australia dearly. As I said at the start, the guilty people will now be laughing all the way to the bank because of the profits they have been able to make out of this scandal. We do not know yet whether it has been stopped or cleared up. We will not know, until the royal commission report comes down and more charges are laid, whether everybody is going to be apprehended. But the guilty people must be treating it as a bit of a joke that they can get away with a fine of $100.
I believe there is no reason why these monetary penalties should not be made retrospective to deal properly with the guilty people. If it is good enough for the taxpayer to payout some $5m and if it is good enough for workers to be stood down and to lose their jobs and for people who cannot afford it to lose up to $1,000, there is no reason why the fines could not be made retrospective so that the crooks who have been involved in this matter can be brought to bear and have taken from them some of the money they have made. When they are caught and found guilty they should pay the same price as anybody else in the community looks like paying as a result of this scandal, which should never have occurred. I do not put the full blame onto the Minister for Primary Industry, who is at the table, but I believe the previous Minister was inept in his handling of the information that was given to him in the past. I do not believe enough effort, enough thought or enough money was put into the investigation by the Federal Police. It all comes back to the way

the Federal Government has handled the situation. The community, the industry and everybody will pay the price-except those found guilty. If they are found guilty, they will get away with very small fines.
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry) (8.34)-in reply-I would like to thank those who have made sensible contributions to the debate, of which there have been quite a number tonight. There have also been some quite sensible comments from the other side of the House, and I recognise the sincerity with which some views have been put forward. I think the honourable member for McMillan (Mr Cunningham), who preceded me in the debate, has been reading only part of the Press because he claims that the guilty parties in this case will get away with a fine of $100. Does he not realise that
the person recently arrested was charged under the Crimes Act with offences that carry penalties of up to 10 years imprisonment? He has not been charged with an offence that carries a $100 fine. The offences under the Crimes Act with which he has been charged carry twice the level of punishment that can be imposed under the Bills presently before the House. So there will be no chance of anybody getting away with a fine of $100. The honourable member for McMillan ought to do his homework a little better.
Mr Robert Brown-He has to be convicted yet.
Mr NIXON-Of course he has to be convicted-absolutely. But he is charged under the Crimes Act. He is not charged under the legislation we are dealing with tonight with an offence that carries a $100 fine. That is where the honourable member for McMillan has displayed total ignorance. He also raised the question of Senator Primmer. The worst feature of the Senator Primmer allegations is that Senator Primmer refused to name his source, and he still refuses to name his source. He is prepared to cast wide allegations about people but refuses to name the source of the information so that any investigation that takes place can go to the source of the information. He said publicly that he would not name his source. As a senator in another place he has a responsibility to answer to, but he has failed to do so. Senator Primmer does not come out of this smelling like roses by any means for the part he has played. The honourable member for McMillan referred, as did the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin) and the honourable member for Capricornia (Dr Everingham), to the report of the Committee of Inquiry to Examine Commonwealth and State Meat Inspection Systems~the Kelly report-a copy of which I have brought with me. On page 41 of that report it is stated:

1420 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

It was observed that at several works visited, works management held the interstate branding stamps. The stamp was applied by an employee and the works merely paid the fee. Iii other words, no re-inspection occurred.
That was the first complaint in the Kelly report. The fact is that that has nothing to do with the Department of Primary Industry or the Minister for Primary Industry. It is totally a State matter. The Kelly report was tabled in this Parliament and sent to the States for them to study and to take action on the matters that related to them. So to charge the Department of Primary Industry or the Federal Minister for Primary Industry with lack of action in that case is just simple nonsense and shows a complete lack of understanding by the honourable member for Werriwa, the honourable member for McMillan and the honourable member for Capricornia. The second charge was:
We were also told that, in many if not all cases, the 'Australia Approved' stamp was provided by works management, and iF a new stamp was required, the inspectors obtained it from management. This practice should cease.
It is extraordinary how, with hindsight, everybody is saying how brilliant a deduction that was. In point of fact it is common practice in exporting countries around the world for management to hold the stamp, to control the stamp and to have it replaced in that way. But with some sense of prescience the Kelly Committee was able to see trouble in that, and I give the Committee full marks'for doing so. But that is only one part of the problem. The fact is that the method used by the Australian export industry was approved by the United States Department of Agriculture, the Federal Republic of Germany, the Japanese Government and all the importing countries. Moves were taken, following the publishing of the Kelly report, for the system of control of the stamp to be structurally tightened up. However, that is not where the problem lay either in terms of the whole of the meat scandal. The fact is, as one speaker properly pointed out, that the Commonwealth inspection service was not criticised for, or at fault in, its inspection of the meat. It was during the transfer of the meat from the boning room and the packing room to the cold stores, within the cold stores and during its removal from there to the ship that the substitution took place. It is there that we have been at great pains to tighten the regulations and control so that we can satisfy the importing countries that we have this matter completely under control.
The honourable member for Murray (Mr Lloyd), the honourable member for Barker (Mr Porter) and the honourable member for Calare (MacKenzie) outlined the actions that have been taken since the first announcement on 11 August and, I thought, spoke quite accurately about the

procedures that were necessary to get this matter back in order. I think the honourable member for Calare pointed out that the whole range of actions occurred within 19 days.
Several things were necessary upon discovery of this matter. It was necessary to get in the police and to have them investigate thoroughly as far as they could go. That was essential. It was necessary to get the meat that was locked up in America out of the lock up and back on to the market place. That was done. It was very necessary to get procedures in Australia that would satisfy the importing countries that this event could not occur again. That was a vital necessity for the future of the meat industry. That was also don.e. It was necessary to get procedures for testing ot the meat types in a way that would be approved by the importing countries. That has been done.
The real test of this matter is what price is being obtained for the meat in America today. It is with some pride that I noticed, indeed despite the difficulties we have been through, that the price for lean cow beef in America today is in fact higher than it was prior to 11 August when the first substitution was found. That is the real test. There is no better test than that. I am grateful to the American Administration for its co-operation in the whole of this matter. There was close cooperation, indeed hourly and daily telephone calls on exchanges of information through the period, to ensure that we were on a common track.
I turn now to the royal commission. A great number of allegations have been made. Many of them were hairy and wild; nevertheless, they were made. There has been good media coverage of the allegations over the past two or three weeks. The purpose of the royal commission is to give those who have made the allegations an opportunity to go before the commission to place before it evidence that they believe they have and that they have stated publicly in respect of these allegations. That will be the real test of a great number of people around this country. I will follow with some interest, for example, what Senator Primmer, who has made allegations, does when he has the protection. of the royal commission. He had the protection of the: Parliament but he was not prepared to use it so that proper evidence could be given. Let us see what he does with the royal commission. A number of other people have made allegations and have claimed that they have information and have known about these sorts of things for a long time. I will be interested to see how they handle themselves before the royal commission. One of these days, after the royal commission has finished its inquiries, I will come into

Meat Export (Penalties) Bill

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1421

the Parliament to make another speech on the allegations.
Another matter that has raised a great deal of interest is the prospect of getting a single meat inspection service. The Kelly report sought a single meat inspection service and it then gave us all of the-reasons it would be too hard to get. Maybe it was because of the presentation of the Kelly report that the States had some difficulty in accepting what was written in it. They were critical of the report-they still are critical of it-the substance of it, and some of the comments in it. Nevertheless, ever since the Kelly report was brought down we have battled away with the States in trying to get a single meat inspection service. Fortunately Victoria has agreed to co~ operate in a study to obtain a service in Victoria. If we can get Victoria across the barrier on this matter we might be able to spread the service into other States. The most intransigent States have been Queensland, New South Wales and Western Australia. I think it is on the eastern seaboard that the greatest need for a single meat inspection service can be seen. That is where the major transfers of meat have taken place and where standards of inspection vary-they are almost non-existent in some parts-in respect of pet food and domestic meat supplies. This problem certainly needs to be overcome. Somebody raised the following question here tonight: Why should the people of a State in Australia eat meat from an abattoir with a lesser inspection service than that demanded by importing countries? I think there is a fair bit of validity in that. '
A further point I would like to make is that the royal cOIhmission we have announced affects only export meat. Of course, we do not have the power to look at the domestic meat market unless the States make a reference. I have read in the Press that Victoria has been seeking to widen the terms of reference of the royal commission to look at domestic meat. But the fact is that all Victoria needed to do was to give the royal commission a term of reference. I notice that it has now done that. In fact, it has mirrored our terms of reference so that the royal commissioner can look at export meat and, under similar terms of reference, at domestic meat in Victoria.
Sympathetic noises are coming out of New South Wales but I do not think we have yet had anything concrete from the Premier of New South Wales on the matter. Sympathetic noises are coming out of Queensland about co-operating with the royal commission but I do not know whether we have yet had anything concrete out of Queensland either. But for this meat industry to

be finally cleaned up to the satisfaction of everybody concerned it is necessary and desirable that the other States give a reference to the royal commission so that people can be subpoenaed and information on the whole of the meat industry can be given to the commission. Only in that way will we know at the end of the day that we have a totally satisfactory meat industry throughout Australia.
This has been perhaps the most unfortunate episode to occur to a rural industry in the last 30 or 40 years. I cannot recall anything quite so devastating. The impact has been enormous and the bad publicity that Australia has gained from it has been enormous. Only two meat works out of 400 in the whole of Australia were involved, a miserable percentage of the total meat works, but enormous damage has been wrought on the industry. I only hope, now that we have the new procedures in place, now that the meat is moving again and the royal commissioner is looking at the allegations, we can look forward to Australia reestablishing itself as having one of the best and purest meat industries in the world.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.

Third Reading

Leave granted for third reading to be moved

forthwith.

-

Bill (on motion by Mr Nixon) read a third time.

AUSTRALIAN MEAT AND LIVE-STOCK CORPORATION AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 10 September, on m'otion by Mr Nixon:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Nixon) read a third time.

COMMERCE (TRADE DESCRIPTIONS) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading
Consideration resumed from 10 September, on motion by Mr Nixon:
That the Bill be now read a second time.

1422 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for the third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Nixon) read a third time.
CUSTOMS (UNLAWFUL EXPORTATION OF FOOD) AMENDMENT BILL 1981
Second Reading Consideration resumed from 10 September, on motion by Mr Moore:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Nixon) read a third time.
APPROPRIATION BILL (No.1) 1981-82
Second Reading (Budget Debate) Debate resumed from 15 September, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Upon which Mr Willis had moved by way of amendment:
That all words after 'That' be omitted with a view to substituting the following words:
'whilst not opposing the Bill, the House rejects the budget strategy because:
(1) it deliberately reduces the rate of economic growth;
(2) it increases unemployment;
(3) it adds substantially to the rate of inflation;
(4) it relies on a massive private capital inflow;,
(5) it fails to tackle the reil causes of rising interest rates, and
(6) it increases the burden of taxation to the highest level in our history,
and, in addition, deplores the Government's callous disregard of the millions of Australians living in poverty and its continued attempt to reduce the living standards of the great majority of Australians'.
Mr JACOBI (Hawker) (8.50)-Before the adjournment last evening I dealt with the bankrupt policies of this Government insofar as they affect foreign investment. I dealt with two examples, namely, the diamond and gemstone industries. A fortnight ago I asked the Deputy

Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) about the Govern-
ment's reaction to allegations that Conzinc Riotinto of Australia Ltd was negotiating for the De Beers organisation to gain control of the market-
ing of diamonds from the Argyle project. I further asked the Minister whether he would 'establish an inquiry into the ownership, the conditions of de-
velopment and the proposed marketing contract and the value of the deposit to ensure that development will be conducted in this nation's interests'. I further asked him:

Will he also take immediate steps to ensure that no contractual arrangements are entered into until this inquiry is concluded , , .

Recent finds of diamonds in north-west Australia
indicate one of the largest diamond fields in the world. Recently the Melbourne Age featured
facts which have been concealed by those involved in the process of a complete takeover. The
reply of the Deputy Prime Minister was simply this:

It is basically the organisation's responsibility to its share-
holders to sell its products in a manner which is in the best interests of those shareholders.

I must confess that I do not necessarily disagree

with that, so far as the firm is concerned. But min-

erals are a national responsibility. The Govern-

ment cannot abdicate its responsibility on that

simple market dictum. Strange as it may seem, the

same Deputy Prime Minister insisted on being in

Japan for the renegotiation of iron ore contracts

and the same Deputy Prime Minister insisted on

being in Japan to renegotiate coal contracts. He

claimed that Australia's raw materials should not

be sold short and that the national interest is to be

safeguarded. Why has he turned his back on either

the gem industry or the diamond industry? The

wealth of Australia's gem industry is far beyond

the figures supplied by the Reserve Bank of

Australia. Experts from within the industry esti-

mate the annual export figure to be in excess of

$lOOm, with a potential of $400m. With the dia-

mond area suitably structured in the interests of

this country, gem exports should have a potential

in the vicinity of $1 billion a year. In effect both

industries combined would rival rural industry. I

seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard the

recommendations of the', Inquiry into the gem-

stone industry.

'

Leave granted.

The recommendations read as follows-

12. RECOMMENDATIONS

It is recommended that the following steps be taken to encourage the further processing of gemstones within Australia:

12.1 Tax averaging provisions currently applicable to primary producers be examined with a view of their application to ge,mstone miners.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1423

12.2 The term "processed gemstones" used by the Export Development Grants Board to determine eligibility for the export assistance schemes be carefully defined to include only, "processing to a form ready for mounting in jewellery".
I2.3 The cost of training cutters be eligible for assistance under training schemes such as NEAT or SYETP for the whole period of training.
12.4 Approval and possibly assistance be given to the importing of skilled overseas cutters for limited periods to allow the in-house training of local cutters.
12.5 Technical Colleges and similar institutions be encouraged to set up courses in gemmology and lapidary, which at present is almost solely the function of amateur clubs and societies.
12.6 Gemstone marketing facilities be investigated with a view to encourage the orderly development of the industry by assisting miners to recover high prices for gemstones from increased competition, and by assisting local processors to secure access to rough stone.
12.7 In negotiations for the establishment of a diamond mining industry in Western Australia, Government has regard to the benefits that would arise from the establishment of a diamond processing industry.
12.8 Government grants or subsidies be made available for research int') the improvement of Australian sapphires by heat or other treatment, and into the cutting, polishing and marketing of gemstones. These funds could be made available, on a dollar for dollar basis, for approved projects.
12.9 Investigate the removal of sales tax on the equipment used in processing, and on all gemstones cut and processed in Australia from rough material of Australian origin.
12.10 Consider the provision of short term low interest rate loans for people and firms expanding or entering the gemstone processing industry.,
Mr JACOBI-I thank the House. Although the report 'Australian Gemstone IndustryPotential for Expansion' gave rise to some expectation of action, not one of the recommendations has been implemented. The industry appears doomed because of this Government's failure to act. No matter what this Government might say, and one can easily imagine its response, the fact remains that it would not treat primary industry in the same manner. A month ago the Deputy Prime Minister attended a business luncheon at the Oberoi hotel in Adelaide in my State. During the question period he was asked a question concerning the gem industry. He replied:
If there is any problem in the gem industry it's news to me.
He then promptly sat down. This is typical of the Government's response to the industry's plea for assistance. It is an indictment of his knowledge of the portfolio that he purports to manage.
Mr Hyde-I do not think you are being charitable.
Mr JACOBI-I am not being charitable but at least I am being honest. Surely the fact of setting up a working party with the intention of the eventual submission of a report specifies an urgent requirement within that industry. Surely serious

consideration of the facts concerning the gem industry, its potential-both nationally and internationally-and the effects of our balance of payments must result in grave doubts being cast on the actions of the Government in its recent move to increase sales tax and to increase interest rates, to the extent of forcing people out of their homes, while at the same time ignoring the Australian gem industry and its enormous potential involving up to $1 billion a year. When compared with other countries, most of which must first import the unprocessed gem material from other parts of the world, the Australian situation is unique and is one of extreme envy. This country should not permit the export of rough or unprocessed gem material at the expense of the Australian economy. If the Government is of the opinion that we must sacrifice our national heritage at the expense of the Australian taxpayer, then the exported rough material should be subject to an export tariff. If so, the Australian gem industry certainly must be consulted.
An industry of the magnitude of the gem industry, apart from its economic potential, will provide employment for many people, both in this country and overseas. The mining area would prosper and large expansion would be possible. The specialised areas of processing can be seen as extensive but only as an extension of the present structure. Dealers both in and out of Australia would handle a wide range of products. Manufacturing would double or triple in size. One of the recommendations contained in the report suggests the removal of sales tax on all gemstones cut and processed in Australia from rough material of Australian origin. This matter has been referred to the Treasurer (Mr Howard) but up to this point no reply has been received. Implementation of the recommendation would result in greater assistance to the industry. Sales within the country would increase and what the Treasury lost in sales tax revenue would be more than compensated for in extra direct tax paid by gem companies as a result of increased turnover.
When the report was prepared and published the prospects for the Australian diamond industry were less well established than they are now. But to some extent the report does deal with diamonds. It makes it clear that in other countries which have diamond industries constructive government action has been effective in protecting and promoting this industry. It has not been left in the hands of private interests, foreign multinationals in South Africa or Israel. It makes clear the need for the Commonwealth and Western Australian governments to take action to ensure that diamonds produced from the Argyle

1424 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

deposit in Western Australia are processed in this country and are marketed in this nation's interests. Only in this way will the full benefit of these minerals accrue to our people.
But this Government and the Western Australian Government have done nothing to secure our national interest in this deposit. They seem happy for Australia to be sold out by the Ashton partners. These companies include CRA which has already been given privileged status as an honorary 'Australianising' company, despite its current overseas control. I refer to its naturalisation policy. The Government should immediately impose export controls to prevent the Ashton partners from selling out Australia's interests. It should then investigate ways of developing a diamond cutting industry in this country. It should examine marketing arrangements to see how Argyle diamonds can be marketed to maximise the return to Australia. Surely the Minister and the Government have had more than sufficient time to act on the recommendations of the report as they affect the gem industry in this country if, in the nation's interest, we are to preserve both industries.
Mr ADERMANN (Fisher) (8.59)-I rise to support the philosophy and the thrust of the Budget, although I have some suggestions for the Government which I will reveal later. I believe the Budget builds on the very sound economic base established by the responsible reconstruction and management of the Fraser-Anthony Government. That is why I have been very disappointed in the quality of the debate that has come from the Opposition benches. There has been nothing constructive; it has all been critical. There has been no remorse. Nothing has been learnt from the disaster of three years of Labor government. It talks about coming back into government. That would be as disastrous as giving an arsonist a box of matches and a can of kerosene.
The Budget is directed at removing some of the upward pressure on interest rates by achieving a commendable domestic surplus which, with other decisions, ensures that Government borrowings at all levels, which necessarily co-exist where deficits have to be financed, can be reduced. The Budget maintains the urgent and necessary curbs on the inflationary pressures which we cannot ignore. It provides a base which, I hope, can well provide
the Government with a greater capacity to look at and to relieve some of the disincentives, inequities and anomalies in our income tax laws. It evidences a very constructive concern for the problems associated with unemployment and a firm resolve to combat unemployment and consolidate the environment which allows the private sector

increasingly to provide more and !)lore jobs and employment opportunities. Those aims and purposes summarise the thrust of the Budget. It is the course which I believe we must maintain.
However, there are some matters in which I have experienced some disappointment. I will persist in bringing them to the Government's notice. I concede that in the International Year of Disabled Persons some very worthwhile concessions and assistance have been given to very many disabled people in very many areas. But, particularly, in this year of the disabled there is a glaring area in which remedial action has been very seriously neglected. Indeed, I hoped that in this Budget that might have been specifically redressed because it is one of the disadvantages and discriminations experienced by one section of the disabled. Unfortunately, all I have had to this date are pious statements and not much action. I refer to letters that I have written to many Ministers, to questions which I have placed on the Notice Paper but which have attracted very disappointing answers and to a speech that I have made in this House in the grievance debate. Sometimes I wonder whether speeches made in this place by back benchers serve any greater purpose that just to fill up Hansard or sometimes a space in the member's electorate newspaper. Whether government or busy Ministers ever take much cognisance of them is a debatable point. Certainly, the Press gallery is always, as we see it tonight, virtually deserted. Tonight one solitary soul there is watching the proceedings. I hope that grievance debates, adjournment debates and those sorts of debates do not just become an opportunity for members to let off a bit of steam without anybody taking them very seriously.
I refer to those matters again because I have raised them. Despite all of that, deaf people, who surely must constitute a big section of the disabled people are still being prevented, because of the prohibitive cost, from purchasing a visual printout television attachment. Why? Because the Government still imposes a savage sales tax on those attachments even when medical certificates of profound deafness. can be produced. I had hoped that something might be done in this Budget rather than increasing the sales tax level. So deaf people are denied print-outs of news, public information, police warnings, weather alerts, et cetera, because the attachments to make this possible are so expensive. The Government, in this year of the handicapped, seems still to be interested only in the miniscule sales tax receipts it can harvest and not in alleviating the sorry disadvantage of the deaf. That, to me, is unforgivable. I have said that before in this House.

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1425

Neither has the Government, despite my pleas, in any way done anything to incorporate in its departments, police stations or ambulance stations, one single porta printa, the deaf print-out telephone, so that deaf people can obtain help and assistance by telephone. Neither has Telecom Australia been at all helpful in seeing that such telephones can be made available on a reasonable rental basis for the deaf. So in the year of the disabled a wonderful new telephone which could open the world to the deaf and be a lifeline for them but which costs so much that they cannot afford it-and they cannot rent it-does not evoke any positive response from Telecom or the Government. I say this sadly because Australia compares very unfavourably with other countries such as the United States of America in this matter. There are tens of thousands of deaf people in Australia who are desperately in need of some consideration. Yet we seem to be content to
ensure that they remain imprisoned behind the walls of isolation, silence and loneliness. This Budget does not contain either joy or hope for them. I care little about whether I hurt or offend by making these statements because I want more than pious platitudes about aid to this section of the disabled. All the pleas that I have made in this House have been rejected or ignored. I suppose that I have to keep hammering away and hope that at some time some action will emerge in this field.
I wish to deal with another matter in which a very severe handicap is still being imposed on a disadvantaged section of the community. I turn to the sales tax. Certainly, sales tax is a talking point in this Budget debate. With all of the disadvantages of remoteness, the disadvantages of every-
thing costing more because of transport and service costs, the disadvantage of less than adequate communication and still totally inadequate television and media availability, how we can persist in levying sales tax on freight and service costs on top of the city wholesale cost of goods to people in country areas just cannot be in any way excused or condoned. That is an unforgivable penalty to country people. Sales tax on the freight component of costs has no justifiable basis either in justice or in logic. Yet the honourable member for Dawson (Mr Braithwaite)-he spoke about this
the other night-and the honourable members for Kennedy (Mr Katter), Maranoa (Mr Ian Cameron), Leichhardt (Mr Thomson), Wide Bay (Mr Millar) and I and, I suspect, in earlier days the honourable member for Darling Downs (Mr McVeigh) have pointed out that injustice and have asked for its removal for so long without even a glimmer of response that it seems that we

are just whistling in the wind. We country representatives are resilient fellows. The Government can be assured that although we support fully the thrust and intent of the Budget we will nevertheless continue to belt its ear to endeavour to achieve justice for people in remote areas away from capital cities.
I turn to the Department of Administrative Services. I would like the Minister for Administrative Services (Mr Newman) to take some notice of another matter that I raise. I point out to the Government and to the Minister the completely unsatisfactory and unfair situation pertaining to Queensland federal electorates. In 1977 an amendment was made to the Commonwealth Electoral Act which I felt then, and still feel, was most inequitable and discriminatory to nonmetropolitan electors. That amendment provided that instead of an allowance in the permissible variation of 20 per cent from the ascertained quota, an allowance of 10 per cent would apply. But to make it worse, the actual practical application of that amendment gave even greater cause for concern. That variation, little as it was, was provided by the Parliament to give some adequ~te representation to people in large electorates wIth distant and separate areas of population, often separated by large distances of very sparse population. When a redistribution was undertaken in Queensland in 1977 the quota was determined at 65,877. That should have allowed the huge electorates of Kennedy, .Maranoa, Leichhardt and perhaps Dawson and Wide Bay, in particular, under the words and intent of the Act passed by the Parliament to vary below that figure by up to 6 587 electors. I ask leave to incorporate in Hansard.a table that was compiled by the Australian Electoral Office which shows, in fact, the electoral enrolments of the electorates at that time, 1 November 1977. I have cleared this incorporation with the Opposition.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

ATTACHMENT 'B'-ENROLMENT STATISTICS AS AT I NOVEMBER 1977

Division

Net enrolment

Bowman Brisbane Capricornia Darling Downs Dawson Fadden Fisher Griffith Herbert Kennedy Leichhardt

66,476 67,606 64,579 66,477 65,377 66,628 65,835 67,472 66,098 59,077 62,886

1426 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No. J)

Division
Lilley McPherson Maranoa Moreton Oxley Petrie Ryan Wide Bay
Total

Net enrolment
66,828 67,319 64,120 65,039 69,234 68,134 66,468 66,083
1,251,736

Mr ADERMANN-That table shows clearly that the intent of that provision by the Parliament was not followed. I also ask leave to include in Hansard a table from the report of the Distribution Commissioners to the Governor-General which illustrates how very little recourse was had to the provision in the Act for an allowance of even up to 10 per cent above or below the quota to provide some reasonable equity and consideration to electors in large electorates.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-

Part II
THE ESTIMATED ENROLMENT, PERCENTAGE DEVIATION FROM THE QUOTA AND AREA OF EACH PROPOSED DIVISION

Number Proposed division

Percentage

Number of above or below

electors

the quota

Area in square
kilometres

I

Bowman

2

Brisban~

3

Capricornia

4

Darling Downs

5

Dawson

6

Fadden

7

Fisher

8

Griffith

9

Herbert

10

Kennedy

II

Leichhardt

12

Lilley

13

McPherson

14

Maranoa

15

Moreton

16

Oxley

17

Petrie

18

Ryan

19

Wide Bay

66,045
68,380
63,536 65,746
65,020 65,894 65,411
67,842 64,663 62,151
63,585
68,102 66,359
64,679 66,136 68,243
67,049
67,677 65,141

+0.25
+3.80 - 3.55 -0.20
-1.30
+0.03 -0.71
+2.98 -1.84 -5.66 - 3.48
+3.38 +0.73 - 1.82
+0.39
+3.59 + 1.78
+2.73 -1.12

600
50 25,000 8,350
67,850 4,320 7,150
260
8,400 663,150 406,650
125 1,500
517,400
60 2,575
140
270 14,150

Total

1,251,659

1,728,000

Mr ADERMANN-The tolerance in the electonite of Kennedy, as we can see, was minus 5.66 per cent; in Maranoa, less than 2 per cent; in Dawson, 1.3 per cent and so on. So much for the 10 per cent allowable variation from quota. That section was inserted in the Act with deliberate intent and purpose. When we study this table can anyone honestly claim that that intent and purpose was either considered or applied appropriately? Only one electorate exceeded 5 per cent. No other electorate came within cooee of even 5 per cent, let alone 10 per cent.
Another intent of the Act is that there should be consideration of future growth trends and community of interests. I will illustrate how, in Queensland, it is extremely difficult or impossible to understand how those precepts were considered by referring to my own electorate of Fisher. The Sunshine Coast area, certainly an

identifiable unit with absolutely homogeneous interests, was split in two, some remaining in the electorate of Fisher and some being placed in the electorate of Wide Bay. So much for the consideration of community of interest. That caused distress and bewilderment to the residents of the Sunshine Coast. But in a further decision which seems to defy all understanding the northern outer metropolitan area of Brisbane was combined with a large portiqn of the Sunshine Coast in the electorate of Fisher. The Sunshine Coast is possibly the fastest growing area in Australia. The new outer metropolitan area is also an area of very rapid expansion and growth. Predictably, by placing those two rapid growth areas in the one electorate there was a complete departure from the principle of consideration of future growth on electoral enrolments.
As anyone could have predicted, enrolments in

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1427

Fisher have increased from 65,835 to nearly 90,000. It is the electorate in Australia with the heaviest enrolment. Both the Sunshine Coast and the North Pine subdivision were very greatly disadvantaged by that decision, which ensured that their combined growth made enrolment numbers almost unmanageable. It makes me seriously wonder what consideration is given to the expressions and wishes of this Parliament and what is the purpose of legislation if its intent is so very clearly departed from in practice when those boundaries are drawn.
That brings me to the situation now existing in Queensland. The State average, which would suffice as the notional quota which would now appertain, has grown to 72,331. I ask leave to incorporate in Hansard a table compiled by the Australian Electoral Office showing details of enrolments in Queensland electorates at 31 July 1981 and the deviation from the State average, together with the areas of those electorates.
Leave granted.
The table read as follows-
Attachment A
ENROLMENT STATISTICS AS AT 31 JULY 1981

Division

Percent deviation
Net from State enrolment average

Area
(Km' approx.)

Bowman Brisbane Capricornia Darling Downs Dawson
Fadden Fisher Griffith Herbert Kennedy Leichhardt Lilley McPherson Maranoa Moreton Oxley Petrie Ryan Wide Bay

78,325 66,138 68,632 69,748 72,422 87,686 88,174 62,744 71,451 62,202 69,092 65,116 87,368 65,764 64,893 76,115 75,385 71,585 71,445

8.29 -8.56 -5.11 -3.57
0.13 21.23 21.90 -13.25 -1.22 -14.00 -4.48 -9.97 20.79 -9.08 -10.28
5.23 4.22
-1.03 -1.22

600 50
25,000 8,350
67,850
4,320 7,150
260 8,400 663,150 406,650
125 1,500 517;400
60 2,575
140 270 14,150

State total State average

1,374,285 72,331

1,728,000

Mr ADERMANN-It will be seen that the
electorates of Fisher, Fadden and McPherson were then above that average by 21.9 per cent,
21.23 per cent and 20.79 per cent respectively,
and the difference is even greater now. How such
a situation can be regarded as fair to the electors and to the members representing those massive
populations completely escapes me. In addition,

the table shows that the numbers of electors in the electorates of Griffith, Kennedy and Moretontwo city electorates and one country electorateare 13.25 per cent, 14 per cent and 10.28 per cent below the State average. No less than six of Queensland's 19 electorates vary from the notional quota by greater than 10 per cent and three of them vary by greater than 20 per cent. Thus 30.6 per cent of Queensland's electorates vary by greater than 10 per cent despite what the Act says, 15.3 per cent of them being greater than 20 per cent in variation from the notional quota. All of this has occurred within 4 years, so I do not think I am being unkind, uncharitable or illogical in condemning that redistribution as in virtually every sense unsatisfactory and in contravention of the intent of the Parliament and the Act.
Section 25 (2) (b) of the Act provides that a redistribution of any State into divisions may-I concede that the word is 'may' and not 'must'-be made whenever in one-fourth or 25 per cent of the divisions of the State the number of electors differs from a quota ascertained in accordance with this part to a greater extent than one-tenth more or one-tenth less. I believe the Government will be completely remiss and culpable if it does not now act under that section of the Act. Over 30 per cent of divisions are in that range-three electorates being more than 20 per cent at variance, two being more than 13 per cent and another more than 10 per cent. It is no excuse for the Government to indicate that the Act provides for no absolute compulsion. If this Government inserted that provision in the Act-presumably it meant it to have the intent that it announced the Act would have-then it cannot for any reason now dismiss the situation and let it become worse and worse as it most assuredly will.
When the electorates of Fisher, Fadden and McPherson are much of the time experiencing new enrolments at the rate of 1,000 or even up to 1,500 a month the situation must be quickly and properly rectified. Before the next election, whenever that will be-soon or late-almost certainly at least one additional electorate, namely Lilley, and perhaps one country and up to two city electorates might also vary from the quota by more than 10 per cent. With all the respect and deference that I can muster I cannot see how any responsible government can sit back and allow that situation to develop, nor can I see how the Government can responsibly allow the situation already in existence to continue. The culpability of the Government would be increased if it let that pass because in a most unwise and, I believe, inequitable decision it altered the variation from

1428 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

20 per cent to 10 per cent. I believe very strongly it ought to revert to 20 per cent.
Having established the 10 per cent differential, the Government now ignores the alarming discrepancies in Queensland. I repeat that 30.6 per cent of Queensland electorates are demonstrably more than 10 per .cent out of kilter with the quota. It cannot have it both ways: Either 20 per cent is the fair and reasonable variation figure or, if it is to be 10 per cent, the boundaries of the electorates should be drawn to comply with that; otherwise the section of the Act which spells out the very definite intent of the Parliament-that is, when 25 per cent of divisions are in this category the proper course is to redistribute-becomes just an exercise in semantics and nonsense. If the Government had no such intent in the legislation it ought not to have written the words into the Act because that could be interpreted as a deception.
Furthermore, it should make clear to any distribution commissioners that the percentage of variation from the quota allowed should be used to provide equity and fairness to remote and disadvantaged electors. If it does not, if that section is ignored, the Act becomes a nonsense and is pointless. It is pointless putting any figure into the Act, whether it is 20 per cent, 10 per cent or any other figure, if nobody will take any notice of it. Community of interest has to be stressed to the commissioners as being more than a vague, meaningless string of words. There has to be an insistence by the Government that that principle is observed in the consideration of electoral boundaries.
I believe the Government is duty bound to undertake now a redistribution in the Federal electorates of Queensland because the situation is demonstrably worse and more inequitable and unfair than it was before the last redistribution. It is a situation where it is unreasonable and unfair to electors to be in the situation where enrolments are approaching 90,000 and still rapidly growing and a busy member is expected to try to service such a huge number of electors. It is certainly a recipe for more heart attacks, collapses and ulcers for members who with one office and two staff members are trying to do their level best to represent the causes and aspirations of so many constituents. There is no moral or fair justification for the Government to refuse to rectify that situation because the Act provides for a clear intent. It uses the word 'may'. Even though it does not use the word 'must' the intent is there; it was inserted in the Act.
I would like to know that the matters I have raised tonight will not just pass unnoticed as pages in Hansard. I hope too, that the contributions of

many back bench members in this debate and other debates, some of them excellently thoughtful and constructive, somehow make somdmpact somewhere on the Government and on the Parliament. I believe the matters I have raised tonight are important. I repeat that I fully support the thrust and the purpose of the Budget. I will most certainly continue to support the very sound economic management which has kept inflation and interest rates lower than in almost every other country and which has resulted in a very sig-
nificant expansion in the number of jobs and job opportunities, which again compares most favourably in the world scene. I do not commend the Government, however, in the matters of disappointment I have raised. I believe they cannot be swept under the carpet because they represent injustices that must be redressed. Each of tliem, I believe-the Government ought to note themimpinges on the credibility of the Government, and they are by no means insignificant.
Mr MORRIS (Shortland) (9.19)-This Budget does nothing for Australia's future despite all the enforced hardship and sacrifice of almost six years of Fraserism. Rather, there will be more inflation, higher interest rates, less economic growth, reduced access to health services, no hope for the unemployed and ever-increasing taxes. In short, it continues a savage attack of successive Fraser governments on the general living standards of Australian families. It is a completely inappropriate Budget for the prevailing social and economic conditions in Australia. Let me quote the words used by Mr Eric Risstrom of the Australian Taxpayers Association, a man of impeccable objectivity and credibility, to describe this Government's 1981-82 Budget. Mr Risstrom said that the Budget was the worst he had ~een in 34 years. He said that there was no relief for average wage earners while indirect taxes would rise by $892m. He said the Budget indicated an inflation rate of 13.5 per cent for 1981-82. The Sydney Morning Herald in its editorial of 29 August 1981 said that the Budget, which further strands and penalises those on social services and low incomes, has been seen as indicating the Government's continued lack of a human face.-
This Budget forces th~ poor, the unemployed, the weak, small and medium sized businesses, and small farmers to compete for limited resources, for sparse Government assistance, if any, against high interest rates and the limited credit left after the powerful, substantially overseas-controlled mineral companies have taken their fill. The rich and powerful are feather-bedded while ordinary Australians are denied access to health care and sustenance, forced to pay extortionate interest

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1429

rates on their home loans, and pilloried when they are unable to secure employment.
Let us look briefly at the management of transport responsibilities under this Government. The National Country Party has always sought to monopolise the Federal transport portfolio in order to control transport of primary exports and the allocation of road funds, yet rarely has it demonstrated qualities of national leadership, leaving that task to its unfortunate colleagues in the Liberal Party. Whilst at least the Liberals are forced to address national questions, the National Country Party crudely supports a few powerful sectional interests, with utter disregard for the wider criteria of the national perspective or, indeed, ordinary country people. It goes through the motions of government, but the reality is that the National Country Party has established pork barrelling as a major mode of resource allocation.
Both coalition partners are inextricably linked to sectional interests. The National Country Party's professed concern with small and medium farming interests is as mythological as the Government's notion of private enterprise, which may have had some truth in the past but is now pure ideology aimed at masking the reality of its objectives. The fact is that the National Country Party is switching its allegiances from agricultural exporters to mineral exporters and organising the transport system for their benefit. Road, rail, shipping and port infrastructure and services are being used to subsidise bulk mineral exports. Customers are being forced to cross-subsidise giant mining companies, which face widely fluctuating world prices. In the Government's jargon, the reality of making room for private enterprise to grow in the transport area is the abrogation of national responsibilities by this Government, not just in budgetary appropriation but also in the organisation of transport, leaving the field open to a very small number of giant transport conglomerates to organise transport for their sectional ends.
This Government has deliberately created a vacuum into which large concerns which own or control assets in all transport modes-road, rail, shipping, air and ports-are able to create their own de facto national transport policies. Transport has been handed on a platter to an imperfect market. The system is unco-ordinated, inefficient, wasteful of fuel, and largely organised for the benefit of suppliers of services and a few major customers. Road grants already announced amount to $685m for 1981-82, an increase of 9.1 per cent on 1980-81. I hope the Government and those opposite do not have the audacitYio suggest that this maintains real levels of funding: as they promised for the period from 1977-78 to 1980-81,

because real grants fell over that period, even using the Government's inappropriate cost indices. The levels of increases in funding of 7.2 per cent for 1982-83 and 6 per cent for 1983-84 and 1984-85 will reduce the level of federally funded road works.
The Government's index, the Bureau of Transport Economics road construction price index, lacks accuracy. Almost every other road construction cost index has risen more than this index. The BTE index rose 139.5 per cent between 1968-69 and 1978-79 while that of the New South Wales Department of Main Roads rose 198 per cent over the same period. Until the BTE index is revised, the Government is using the implicit price deflator of gross fixed capital expenditure on private non-dwelling construction to measure road costs, an index which does not even include bitumen prices. Because these indices are national indices they take no account of the differential cost pressures suffered by different levels or localities of government. Clearly, the Government is using contrived statistics to mask the fact that its commitment to road users is falling while road users are forced to pay outrageous costs for fuel, half of which goes to the Treasury in Canberra.
In 1974-75 the Commonwealth funded 32.2 per cent of total road expenditure. By 1978-79, the years or Fraserism, its share had fallen to 27.3 per cent, and the decline continues. In Victoria some councils have been forced to rip up sealed roads because they cannot afford to carry out essential maintenance work. The onus of maintaining the roads network is being pushed onto State and local governments, and if they abrogate their enforced increased responsibilities, as the Commonwealth has done, the road network will deteriorate even further. In New South Wales the Government's expenditure on road funding has risen 24 per cent in real terms over the past four years compared to an 8 per cent cut in Federal road expenditure. One sure result is that State and local government charges will have to rise to fund the areas the Commonwealth has rejected. There is ample evidence to show that the cost to the community of a deteriorating road network far exceeds the cost of road unkeep. The Government is turning its back on an excellent social investment which could save many lives and avoid many tragic road casualties. So if people need good roads to get to work, to health services, or for recreation, this Government has ignored them. Manufacturers or truckies who need good roads to make a profit or a decent income have also been ignored by the Government. As to the

1430 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

farmer who needs good rural roads to sell his produce, his mythical benefactor, the National Country Party, has turned its back on him too. Let me quote from 'Farm Focus: The 80's', which was published by the National Federation in January 1981. It stated:
The importance of an efficient road system to the cost of transporting farm produce is obvious. Considerable upgrading is necessary if the road system is to meet the needs of the 80's satisfactorily .
It continues:
There needs to be substantial increases in Budget appropriations for rural roads during the 80's.
So much for the National Country Party's pretended concern for country interests. For those who do not happen to be among the thousands of small and medium sized domestic manufacturing companies or farmers or just ordinary Australians, but are among the few powerful mining or vested interests, the story is different. They will benefit under this Government's policies.
The problem for this Government in reducing Federal expenditure on roads and capital works is that it has reduced opportunities for the major private sector companies dependent on those works. To assist these companies the Government has now abolished the long-standing discretionary power of the States to determine which national road construction projects are offered to private contractors through tendering procedures. Its objective is to divert road construction works away from public road authorities to the large private concerns which strongly support the Liberal and National Country parties. There is no evidence whatsoever, as the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) admits, that private contractors, who get at least 50 per cent of the work anyway, can build roads cheaper or better than public road authorities such as the departments of main roads in the various States.
On Monday I met a deputation of New South Wales Department of Main Roads employees who were deeply concerned at the prospect of losing their jobs because of this Government's sell-out to sectional interests, the Australian Federation of Construction Contractors. They presented me with a petition, which I will be handing to the Minister for Transport later this week, signed by 211 employees with service ranging up to 35 years with the Department of Main Roads. It outlines their protest at the Fraser Government's ill-considered, ill-conceived action in seeking to divert road works away from the Department of Main Roads to private companies. Let me quote briefly from the petition presented to me by Mr Wal Drane of Blacksmiths in my

electorate on behalf of his fellow employees in the Hunter region. It states:
As employees of the Department of Main Roads we . . . wish to express our extreme concern and discontent over recent developments concerning Federal Government funding of works on National Roads.
Many of us are long serving employees who have made a career with the Department and now find our jobs threatened by your Government's action. Others amongst us are new employees and now find ourselves unable to face the future with any certainty.

It will not be possible under the new legislation to have stable employment whether employed by the Department or by private enterprise.
Many of us are to an age where stable re-employment will be hard to find.
Those employed by the Department in small towns will not be able to find re-employment in their home town.

Long serving employees stand to lose substantial retirement, and long service benefit if forced to seek alternative
employment.

There is the impact on ordinary Australians, loyal

Public Service employees who have given their

lives to a particular industry and are now being

discarded by this Government in the interests of a

political pay-off. I repeat that there is no evidence

to justify the Government's action. It is simply a

case of a political pay-off to its wealthy sup-

porters, an abuse of its public responsibilities. We

see no sin in using public money to employ public

labour, to employ Australians, where it is socially

necessary and useful. The Government's strategy

is to use public money to feather-bed private con-

struction firms in a blatant political pay-off. We

note from the Budget documents that in a further

repudiation of clear election promises made in

1975,1977 and 1980 the Government has also ter-

minated specific purpose grants to the States for

urban public transport from June of this year and

for transport planning and research. This is in a

period when the fuel efficiency and equity of pub-

lic transport and urban rail transport should be di-

rectly encouraged. However, as I pointed out this

afternoon, if it is a government of the same colour,

such as the Victorian Government-which is

floundering and facing" defeat in the coming

election-a $70m pork barrelling exercise over

the next two years is available to that government.

Such is the so-called special transport needs grant

being made to the Victorian Government. In

short, it is an outright attempt to bribe Victorian

electors with Federal funds at the expense of the

remaining States.

'

We note also that important expenditure that would save lives, such as that on road safety promotion and research, has been slashed by 27.6 per

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1431

cent in real terms on last year's figure following the abolition last year of the Labor Government's highly successful Minor Improvements Traffic and Engineering Road Satety Program. From a transport view, the main point to make about this Budget is that it does nothing to create an energy efficient national transport system geared to serve consumers, not suppliers. It creates space for multi-modal giant corporations to organise the transport system, as we have seen with the airlines, so as to maximise benefits for themselves and a few powerful customers. By intracorporate pricing they can encourage use of the services that will yield maximum profits and avoid tax by shipping profits abroad irrespective of the social costs or the national criteria involved.
I make brief mention of the shambles that has now developed in the provision of essential services to the aviation industry. Because of previous inadequate financial provisions for aviation services and unrealistic staff ceilings imposed by the Prime Minister on the Department of Transport, safety levels in air services have been seriously endangered. Brisbane Airport is now being closed down three hours early each day because not enough air traffic controllers are available to operate the airport. Those air traffic controllers in employment are being required to work excessive overtime to maintain services at other airports. There is no doubt that Brisbane Airport is only the first airport to be closed down daily because of staff shortages. The responsibility for this costly, disruptive and ludicrous situation lies with the Minister for Transport. His incompetence and mismanagement are also major factors in the airport closures and the disastrous situation developing in the provision of air services. His ad hoc attempts to recruit key technical personnel and air traffic controllers for his Department will prove futile unless the conditions and entitlements of the officers concerned are brought into line with those available elsewhere.
There needs to be a national perspective in transport. It should be geared to the needs of consumers, not suppliers. These are simple aims but they are not supported by this conservative and reactionary Government. Those aims are worth the effort required to realise them. There needs also to be a wider set of influences on transport services to ensure that they serve a wider set of criteria consistent with a social audit of costs and benefits, democratic participation and greater coordination of services and modes. We could then make a start on a soundly based national transport policy co-ordinated with an energy policy, something for which Australians have waited too long and without which our transport system

will always be costly, inequitable, inadequate and inefficient. I turn now to a matter in my own electorate arising from the Government's arrogant and callous decision to abolish the Community Youth Support Scheme. I will quote briefly from a half page advertisement published on 9 September 1981 in the Advocate, circulating in my electorate, by the Budgewoi Waves and The Entrance Waves. It is signed by Maureen Betar, Committee chairperson, and Lyn White, Committee member. It states:

Particularly in the light of the Minister's-

The advertisement refers to the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs (Mr N. A. Brown)-

recent misleading statements suggesting the continuation of CYSS, we are affronted by the baldness of the budget an-
nouncement about CYSS. Particularly in the light of the Minister's assurance that he was deferring the introduction of new CYSS guidelines to allow for 'further community consul-
tation', we are appalled that it was apparently not considered
worthwhile consulting us, the people devoting our time and skills to unemployed youth at no cost to the government . . . Of the 82 CYSS projects in New South Wales, 21 are
in towns where there is no Technical College. Twenty are in towns without a CES office. To these communities, SYETP and SWTP are an irrelevent farce.

I have before me 10 letters from young people who have benefited from the services of the Budgewoi Waves and The Entrance Waves provided under the CYSS program. I will read briefly from a couple of them because they point up the poignancy of the people who enjoy these services and get some benefit from them. A young lady, Janice Giffin, wrote:

I would like to protest on the closure of CYSS as you are not only drowning everything CYSS stands for, you are also drowning everything Australia stands for, and that is getting
up and having a go. You are not only letting down the unemployed citizens of today, but the ones of tomorrow and who
knows, you could be one of them.

Steven King, in his letter to the Minister, wrote:

The closing down of Waves will send the youths and unemployed to more violent measures of boredom.

The skills people learn can help them find jobs more easily.
Waves also stops under age drinking and drags people off the streets to see what is happening in Waves.

I do not have time to refer to the other letters but

I seek leave to have incorporated in Hansard a list

of the names of the writers of those letters and

also a list of the names of firms and service groups

in my electorate which have written a further 20

letters. I refer briefly to the letter from the

Doyalson-Wyee RSL. Club Limited. It is addres-

sed to the Minister. It states:

.

As you yourself must know and appreciate the area is a con-
siderably large one with very little provision of employment or even hope of employment in the near future.

The Lions Club of Buqgewoi stated:

1432 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

As this is an areas of high unemployment, we feel that this--
The abolition of CYSS-
would be a retrograde step and would only aggravate the position that already exists.
Mr McVeigh-MrDeputy Speaker, I take a point of order. The honourable member asked to have something incorporated in Hansard. I do not think leave was granted.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
\0 personal letters to Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs
Penelope White Steven Gabs Peter Shields Janice Giffin Mark Dawkin Steven King Chris Fittler Peter Ridway Local Youth (anonymous) Sharon Arkins
'Further 20 letters from individuals and local organisations and firms deploring the Fraser Government's action in peremptorily abolishing the Community Youth Support Scheme and calling for its contiuation.
M. Manyard, Halekulani Miss Vinginia Louise Lowe, JP, Budgewoi Yvonne Pangello of Budgewoi Joe Henstock of Budgewoi J. & J. Cameron of Budgewoi M. Hinton, CYSS Tutor of Budgewoi Ms Joy Carragher of Budgewoi Doyalson Wyee RSL Club Lions Club of Budgewoi Budgewoi and District Environment Council Wyong Shire Interaction Committee Ray Raucher-Social Planner Wyong Shire Council Michael Nagus-Budgewoi Tavern B. Fookes-Halekulani Laundrette K. & D. Thomas-Budgewoi Supa Save Store Messrs Davis and Reiher-Shell Service Station Budgewoi J. P. L1onghessy-Budgewoi Marine and Sports Store Ms Hughes-10th Avenue Health Foods Budgewoi M. Sharp-Kulani Fruits-Halekulani F. J. Mellington Real Estate-Jannelle Gates.
Mr MORRIS-Letters from this wide range of people from diverse backgrounds evidence the strong public support for the CYSS groups and the services provided to unemployed youth on the Central Coast of New South Wales. In addition, the CYSS group at Gateshead has worked hard, particularly its volunteer helpers and tutors, to give the youth of our region some hope, sense of purpose and dignity. A few weeks ago Pastor David Jones, a dedicated project officer associated with the CYSTEM group of Charlestown, came to Canberra to see the Minister. Regrettably, his pleas to the Minister fell on deaf

ears. He did, however, receive support and assurances from the Opposition and its' shadow Minister.
The Fraser Government's ill-considered and illconceived abolition of the CYSS program without consulting those involved further illustrates the hypocritical and uncaring attitude of the Prime Minister and his colleagues towards our unfortunate unemployed youth. The Government'S callous determination to terminate the CYSS program can be seen in its actions in my own electorate this week. For some time representatives of the CYSS groups, CYSTEM, were able to attend the Charlestown Commonwealth Employment Service office to meet young unemployed people and display posters advising services offered by the group. A few days ago Pastor David Jones, its project officer, was advised to remove the posters and the group was evicted from the CES office. Pastor Jones, not to be deterred by the Government's ruthlessness, has set up a desk in the street near the CES office to carryon his work. This Government deserves the strongest condemnation for its abrupt abolition of the CYSS program and especially for its eviction of the CYSTEM group from the Charlestown CES premises.
However, the Government still has time to assist those young people and to redress the wrong. It can do that by reversing its decision to abolish the CYSS program and by giving an assurance that the program will continue.
In summary, this Budget is inappropriate for today's circumstances. It is the product of a government quite clearly out of touch with the needs and aspirations of the Australian community. Accordingly, 1support the amendment moved by my colleague, the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis).
Mr McLEAN (Perth) (9.39)-ln the context of this Budget. I believe that there is much evidence to suggest that the broad economic record of this Government has been one of considerable success when measured in terms of national indicators. Certainly, problems remain but the national performance to dflte has been creditable. The 1980-81 annual report of the Reserve Bank of Australia, a highly professional, objective and non-political body, stated:
Activity rose strongly in the Australian economy during 1980-81. This contrasted with generally depressed economic conditions overseas. Following healthy increases in 1979-80, real non-farm product and total employment recorded their highest rates of growth for more than half a decade. The recovery was broadly-based with strong contributions from spending on both capital formation and consumption.

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1433

That comment came from the central bank of Australia. If we look at individual national economic indicators we see the same degree of success and confidence in the economy. The consumer price index increased by 8.8 per cent over the year to 30 June 1981-the best inflation result for years. Average weekly earnings rose by 14.1 per cent in 1980-81. When taken in conjunction with the inflation rate, this represents the largest increase in real wages for six years. Unemployment rose by 2.3 per cent during 1980-81. Youth unemployment, although still too high, fell by 17.6 per cent in the year to August 1981, while overall there was an increase in the number of employed people of 321,300 over the two years to July 1981. Real private business fixed investment expenditure grew by 22.5 per cent in real terms during 1980 and longer term investment anticipations data point to a continuation in 1981-82 of very
strong growth in business fixed investment.
This is all official data which indicates that, on a national basis, the Government has made substantial economic progress. I think it augers well for the longer term future of the Australian economy. It shows that the strategy of the Government in fighting inflation and in providing an atmosphere of confidence for consumers and investors is, despite the Government's critics, working well in a broad sense. The policy, as suggested by the indicators to which I have referred already, is providing the basis for strong, long term growth in the economy. But this does not overcome the fact that at present a large section of the community is being disadvantaged in the short term and in a very serious sense. I will refer to these groups, particularly home owners, a little later. Much of this problem is due not to the long term economic objectives of the Government but to the short term strategies adopted to meet those objectives. In this sense, the present Budget, although it has much to commend it, is an example.
The broad objective of the Budget is admirable but the strategy designed to achieve that objective is, I think, questionable. For example, the action taken to eradicate almost totally the Budget deficit is sound. After all, successive deficits and the need to borrow to finance them are a major cause of high interest rates. This Budget, by seeking almost to remove the deficit, is a step in the right direction towards easing upward pressures on interest rates. Furthermore, successive deficits and the need to finance them as they accumulate year on year simply mean that more and more taxpayers' dollars are used to finance previous government excesses rather than to finance present day social needs or to allow present day tax payers to retain more of their income through

tax reductions. So I think most reasonable people would agree that governments should live within their means. After all, it is not government money we are dealing with; it is the money of our constituents. To reduce or to eradicate the deficit is therefore a sound economic objective provided it does not hurt the needy and provided it does not create massive disincentives for people to earn or to spend their incomes and hence reduce their capacity to create additional wealth, productivity and employment for others.
I think we have achieved the desired reduction in the deficit by the wrong process. The overall Budget deficit is estimated to be only $146m for 1981-82. This is a great improvement on the deficit of $3,585m that this Government inherited in 1975-76 and the deficit levels which have prevailed since the early 1970s. But this has been achieved by increasing revenue rather than by reducing expenditure. In this context, the Budget strategy is almost classically anti-liberal. In the present Budget, for example, the Treasurer (Mr Howard) stated that in 1981-82 total outlays will increase by 12.6 per cent while total receiptsthat is, taxes of one kind or another-will increase by 15.8 per cent. In defence of the Government, one could say that it has kept the rate of growth in government expenditure and receipts at a much lower level than would the Labor Party if it were in office. The Labor Party is the socialist party in this country and true to its philosophy it constantly advocates policies which involve increased government expenditure, increased taxes and a reduced private sector. It is consistent for the Labor Party to argue along these lines, no matter how disastrous the consequences would be for the country.
But it is not consistent for this Government simply to reduce the rate of growth of the government sector. We have to reduce its size in absolute terms, and this is not being done. At present the Government is locked into a philosophically inconsistent position which is neither permitting the economy to achieve its full potential nor permitting the achievement of social equity. Of course the Labor Party seldom sees any connection between economic progress and the capacity to provide for the genuine welfare needs of the nation. But so long as this Government is determined, quite rightly, to reduce the deficit, but not to reduce government expenditure, it will remain locked into the classical anti-liberal position of constantly increasing taxes and reducing the size of the private sector. Therefore, at a time when demographic trends will be increasing the demands of an increasingly dependent section of the

1434 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

community, the capacity of the reduced productive sector of the economy-the private sector-will be falling. This eventually will place intolerable burdens on the economy and prevent rather then provide the attaining of both economic growth and social justice.
The decision on family allowances in the Budget reflects the kind of problem to which I refer. The increased family allowances are welcomed by all but the Government's decision to increase family allowances for all families with three or more children, irrespective of need, highlights the problem to which I have referred. The provision of government services to all, irrespective of need, means that the poor two children families in my electorate get nothing-except higher taxes. But in fact they should get the family allowance accruing to my family of almost five children because, frankly, I receive a good salary and do not need that kind of assistance.
If this kind of universal government expenditure persists and government expenditure is not directed as a top priority to those most in need, a number of things will happen, and we are seeing the beginning of this now. If this kind of universal tendency by governments to be popular by giving something to everybody irrespective of need does continue, we will see ever-increasing government expenditure. We will see ever-increasing government taxes. We will see the private sector fall away. The poor will not receive the priority help they need and there will be social inequity which in the long term will only be worsened if the basis of the Australian economy, the private sector, is not permitted to work to its full capacity.
With welfare benefits going to the rich as well as to the poor, with tax avoidance favouring the relatively well off notwithstanding the attempts of the Government to minimise this avoidance, with taxes on wageand salary earners rising to meet ever-increasing government expenditure and with interest rates responding to excessive government expenditure, the burden ultimately will be borne by the middle income wage and salary earners in our society. I only wish that the Labor Party, when it advocates ever-increasing levels of government expenditure and taxation-much higher than this Government would ever tolerate-would consider this fact. By not exercising Commonwealth expenditure restraint on the scale required, we move to higher tax impositions to meet our required deficit positions and we lose credibility with the States whom we ask to share this burden and who, in turn, impose taxes which affect all householders. Further, inevitably the financial demands of government also lead to

higher interest rates which impact on the same people.
On the question of interest rates, I simply want to remind the Government of the way in which interest rates affect the existing, let alone the prospective, home owner. I am not saying that the increase in interest rates was avoidable. Given our recent economic history it almost was impossible not to increase interest rates. I agree that when governments follow an expansive budgetary policy for any length of time, monetary policy inevitably has to bear the burden, and this is now the case through higher interest rates. Without debating the pros and cons of the economic decision itself, I simply remind the Government of the difficulties which these high and rising interest rates cause to so many home owners. I remember not so many years ago, before I became a member of this Parliament in the early 1970s when Labor was in government, how I personally felt the impact of very high interest rates. If I remember correctly, at that time. I was on a salary of about $8,000 per annum which in those days was in the typical middle to lower income bracket. I had a wife, three children, a mortgage and all the normal family expenses of health, education and so forth.
Dr Theophanous-You should have voted Labor.
Mr McLEAN-The Labor Party created those circumstances. I felt a very severe financial impact from the then historically high interest rates which occurred under the Labor Government. The financial strain on my family was enormous. We had to pull in our belts every way, delay paying important bills until well after their due date, take additional employment, and make responses such as that which, in a sense, I suppose are quite normal. But I make the point to the Government that high interest rates impose very great burdens, particularly on the low income and single income two-parent families. I repeat: At that stage I was on a middle.income level and not on a lower income level.
The monthly mortgage repayment is usually the largest bill a family has to pay, and the family has very little power or; discretion to change it. I make this point on behalf of many of the constituents I represent in the Parliament. These interest . rates constitute a further burden to the family unit, which already is hit by increasing State charges throughout Australia and by the indirect taxes imposed in this latest Budget. These comments lead me to two suggestions I want to make to the Government. The first concerns the need for the Government to undertake the preparation

Appropriation Bill (No.1)

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1435

of family impact statements. I have advocated this in the past, and I do so again. I am not calling for a national inquiry, an interdepartmental report or
any mechanism which is likely to produce results only after a lengthy, exhaustive examination. I believe that a small sample of families in each State with an average family income, with average family commitments of a mortgage, health insurance, education and the like, which one would attach to a family of, say, two or three children, should be surveyed. The inquiry should be official. It need not be based on a large sample, but it should involve representatives of each level of government in each State and Territory. It would involve collating data which I think already exists for other purposes. I say this because many people and organisations are making statements about the welfare of the family unit. People such as academics
and politicians and organisations such as political parties, churches, charitable and other nongovernment organisations all have been involved in making certain assertions about the relative well-being of family units.
I believe that, for the sake of objectivity, accuracy and credibility, an official study should be
undertaken in order that policy makers can proceed to make decisions on the basis of known facts. I do not criticise the work which has been done by many people in this area, but the results of studies to date and the assertions made by people and organisations involved in this issue seem to vary widely. We all-have our own views on this matter, no doubt coloured by our own prejudices. But no one seems to have a definitive answer, and we must have one if sensible official policy making is to be based on a concern for the family unit, which I regard as the fundamental base unit of any decent society.
Much comment has been made in my State about what constitutes an appropriate mix of revenue options. That deba.te has also been taking place at a Commonwealth level. But the fact remains that enormous changes have been taking place in many areas involving the familychanges to the health scheme, the taxation system, social security programs and education funding, high interest rates, changing roles of local government activities and so forth. At each level of government, departments take money away from the individual and the fl\mily unit, and other departments reallocate funds, either directly or indirectly, to other individuals and family units. I think it is time we knew exactly what the present position is in each State with regard to the average family unit and how that unit has fared in recent years. If we do not have that official information how can we sensibly develop policies to cater for

the family? I refer to policies regarding government expenditure, taxation relief and the mix of government revenue.
The other comment or suggestion I make to the Government, and it is related to the need for family impact statements to be developed, relates to the need, in my opinion, for future tax reductions
to be directed to the family unit. In a sense, I suppose, I am pre-judging the results of a family impact statement. We certainly will need to know the results of such a study before we know to what extent and in what form such assistance needs to be directed. But I am convinced that under the pressure of rising State charges in all States, rising interest rates and increased taxes-both direct and indirectthe average family unit is being put under increasing pressure. In the long term that is disastrous for any nation. I therefore say to the Government that when it starts to make plans for
its next Budget, tax relief of a very substantial nature must be directed to the 'family unit as a top priority over other tax relief measures. But as I said earlier, the extent and direction of such relief. should be based on official data of a kind which could come from a proper survey of the family unit,' conducted State by State and involving all three levels of government. If such relief is accompanied by sensible long term reductions in low priority government expenditure, lower taxation will be sustainable in the long term to the benefit of all. Government expenditure can then be confined to the genuinely needy, thereby providing the kind of equity which any rapidly growing economy can both morally and economically justify.
There are many aspects of the Budget which I commend. They include the increased funding of manpower and training schemes to assist the unemployed; the increased family allowances, although I believe these increases were implemented in the wrong way; the increased supplementary rental assistance for pensioners; the increased assistance for the handicapped; and, of course, the substantial reduction in the deficit, despite the way in which that reduction was achieved. In my opinion, the overall objective of the Budget is sound, but I have reservations about the way in which the Budget strategy has been designed to meet that objective. There is no doubt in my mind that the policies of the Government, since it came to office in 1975, have restored the basic strength of the Australian economy. In many senses we have led the world with our economic performance and have provided a sound economic base on which to make further solid progress throughout the 1980s. But if we are to maintain this momentum we need to look again at

1436 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Appropriation Bill (No. I)

our economic strategy and ensure that by directing expenditure to the needy and by providing sustainable and substantial tax relief in the next Budget the economic promise we now have can be realised for the benefit of all Australians.
I express concern that it seems to be coming almost impossible for any government in this country to offer tax reductions to the Australian public. The public seems to have become used to the fact that its elected representatives can spend their money on their behalf much more efficiently than they can. When people are asked in isolation whether they want tax cuts, they say yes. When asked whether they want specific expenditure increases they say yes. When specific interest groups are asked whether they will accept specific expenditure cuts they respond by saying no. During the razor gang exercise, which involved some 350-odd decisions, about 350-odd specific interest groups came forward with good reasons why no action should have been taken to reduce Budget expenditure. At all times all people seem to want both increased expenditure and reduced taxes. The public does not seem to be able to accept the economic discipline which is required of government to do one or the other and to establish priorities. Examples of this are to be found in the Community Youth Support Scheme, the education debate in my State and the decisions of the razor gang. I believe it is becoming almost impossible, within our political system, to be able to withstand the political pressures which inevitably come when a government seeks to reduce government expenditure in order to offer lower taxes to the wider Australian community. We also face the same kind of pressures when we seek to reallocate expenditure from those with lower priority needs to those in genuine need. Nevertheless, I believe that the Government, which has been elected with a mandate to move towards lower taxation, smaller government and directing resources to those genuinely in need, should be resolute enough to proceed with that program notwithstanding what, in the short term might be politically disadvantageous flack, but which in the long term will be to the benefit to all.
Mrs DARLING (Lilley) (9.59)-There is one thing a Fraser-Howard Budget can always be relied on to do; that is to find some new and devious way of hitting the weakest in the community. This Budget plumbs new depths. The relative complacency of the Australian media following the Budget announcement indicates just how remarkably immune we all have become to tough Budgets. Over the last six years, and particularly in the four years the Treasurer (Mr Howard) has been on the job, the Government has succeeded in

anaesthetising the community-not that the poor can have the pain killed for them, considering the manner in which they have been treated. The Government has achieved this with a constant dose of fiscal restraint, belt tightening, union bludgeoning and a mixture of monetarist medicines; and all of its cures are worse than the disease.
Debate interrupted.
ADJOURNMENT
Health.Care Services-Groundsel Eradication at Canungra Army Base-Estimates Committee:
Parliament--Sales Tax on Publications- " Victorian Budget-New South Wales Election,
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! It being 10 p.m., I propose the question:
That the House do now adjourn.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (1O.0)-ln the adjournment debate last night the honourable member for Macarthur (Mr Baume), when talking of some remarks that I had supposedly made on the new health scheme, alleged that I had spread a particularly nonsensical proposition and that I was spreading untrue propaganda knowing it to be untrue. One would have thought, if remarks like that were made, that some evidence would have been provided to sustain them. Not a single jot of evidence was provided by the honourable member for Macarthur to suggest that I had ever made the alleged remarks. It was simply slander without substance and smear without argument, and I think one can leave it there and take no further notice of it.
I take the opportunity tonight to talk about misleading propaganda in the health field. Unlike the honourable member for Macarthur, I ,will sustain the argument about misleading propaganda by this Government in relation to the latest health scheme. I refer to a pamphlet published by the Department of Health and called 'In sickness and in health-better value for your dollar'. The phrase 'better value for your dollar' is a pretty subjective statement about the new health scheme and has aroused considerable debate and doubt. It is certainly a subjective rather than an objective description of the new health scheme. In that pamphlet one whole page was devoted simply to propagandising the scheme-not giving people information about the health scheme so that they could make their decisions but simply propagandising the scheme. The Doctors Reform Society attacked that pamphlet as being misleading and not helping people to make accurate decisions. It was particularly misleading about the hospital only insurance option. The Australian Consumers

Adjournment

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1437

Association attacked the pamphlet. Two governments, the Liberal Government of South Australia and the Labor Government in New South Wales, found it necessary to issue corrective pamphlets so that people could have accurate and reliable information on which to make decisions.
We now learn that even the Government has admitted that it was a misleading pamphlet because it has printed a new version, a sanitised version, of the health pamphlet. It has removed from the cover any of the subjective statements. The pamphlet is simply called 'Hospital and medical cover from I September'. There is no longer on the cover anything about 'better value for your dollar'. Perhaps the Government is now admitting . that there is no 'better value for your dollar' in the scheme. That has certainly gone from the front of the pamphlet. The whole panel devoted to propagandising the scheme has been eliminatedthere is no sign of it at all-and the hospital only criticism has been removed entirely from the pamphlet. The new pamphlet was obviously a rush job. I notice that it was put out by Hot Type Phototypesetters. Some four weeks after the Government spent $160,000 on this misleading pamphlet, it has now spent another $30,000 of taxpayers' money putting out this revamped, sanitised version.
The Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar), when he tries to explain it, says: 'We have produced this new pamphlet for public hospital people'. What on earth has removing the phrase 'better value for your dollar' got to do with public hospital patients? What on earth has the whole panel devoted to propagandising the scheme got to do with public hospital patients? That is simply hogwash from the Minister to explain the publication of the new pamphlet. It is quite clear that the new pamphlet was produced because the Government implicitly admits that its first pamphlet was misleading and inaccurate and it found it necessary to put out not a propaganda document but an objective account of the new health scheme. As I said, the explanations of the Minister do not wash. Unfortunately for the taxpayers of this country it has cost them an extra $30,000 for this revamped, sanitised and non-propagandistic version of the Government's new health scheme. It has cost the people that money.
We do not know yet how many of the original pamphlets were simply pulped when the Government made its decision to produce the new and sanitised version. I suggest that if people make allegations about the new health scheme they bring evidence to bear. In conclusion I make the point again to the honourable member for Macarthur

that if he wants to make allegations about what I

say, let us have the real evidence. I say that the

Government, by this new production, has im-

plicitly admitted the misleading nature of its orig-

inal health pamphlet, and the evidence is there for

all to see.

.

Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (10.5)-1 was present at the hearing of Estimates Committee B the other night when the matters spoken of by the previous speaker, the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett), were raised in the presence of the Minister for Health (Mr MacKellar). I am sure that if honourable members refer to the Hansard record of that Committee's proceedings last Thursday night they will receive all the answers to the comments of the honourable member for Bonython.

My electorate of Fadden takes in the town of Canungra and a large rural area outside that town. However, the land warfare camp in Canungra is in the Federal electorate of McPherson. The problem is that'in the Army camp there is growing a noxious bush called groundsel. Once or twice a year the seeds of this plant are blown out of the Army camp, which is Commonwealth property, into my electorate. The laws of the State require local authorities to stamp upon any private individual having groundsel growing on his or her property. Unfortunately the problems concerning herbicides in recent years have caused the Commonwealth Government or the Department of Defence to suspend temporarily the use of sprays whilst inquiries and investigations are carried out. In the meantime the Department of Defence and the people who sit in the departments here in Canberra seem to have the view that groundsel is just a bush that grows and that, if a few soldiers with machetes go in and cut it down, that is the way to eliminate and eradicate it. I want to show the House a piece off a small branch of a groundsel tree. I must admit that I have brought this all the way from the electorate of McPherson to show the House and the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh). I wish the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) was in the chamber to see that groundsel is simply not a little plant that one can take to with a machete or one of those spray cans of weed killer.

Mr Humphreys-How old is that tree?

Mr DONALD CAMERON-I have been trying to count the rings but I am not familiar enough with groundsel to know the number of years. The point I am trying to make is that I have had to go to this extreme length after three or four years of fighting a bitter campaign for the removal of the groundsel. What happens is that the seeds fly into

1438 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Adjournment

my electorate, the plants grow and the council gets on to my constituents who get onto me and say: 'The seeding is coming out of Commonwealth ground; what are you going to do about it'? It has been a thousand-day fight. I have got nowhere. I have turned to the only area where I believe there may be help. From the interest that has been displayed here tonight, I feel our luck may be changing and that people may well take notice that groundsel is not simply a little green bush that can be treated lightly but that it can grow into a large tree which a man cannot get his hands around. Mr Deputy Speaker, I see you shaking your head in acknowledgement that both my hands do not get around this part of the groundsel tree. In future I require the Department not to regard it as a bush, because if it is not treated it will become as large as this and will need more than spray cans and soldiers with machetes to control it. I ask you, Mr Deputy Speaker, as the custodian of this House, to ensure that the Minister for Defence and the Minister for Housing and Construction are acquainted with my plea first thing tomorrow. I seek your advice as to where I should put this bit of timber.
MrFife-Perhaps the honourable member would like to table the exhibit.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-Mr Deputy Speaker, I would like to table it.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)-I think the honourable member might best serve the House by marking the log clearly so that it cannot be confused with another member.
Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports) (10.10)-1 was a member of the Estimates Committee which dealt with the estimates of the Department of the . Prime Minister and Cabinet. I noted with interest that in terms of the Budget allocation for the library and facilities of the Department there was a slight increase. We were looking at an estimate for that Department of some $70,000-odd for books and periodicals. I did not have any objection to that and neither did any other member of the committee. Of course, the Department and advisers ought to have appropriate library facilities because knowledge is very important and we would not want that Department to be deprived of it. However, there seems to me to be a double set of standards.
At the same time that the Prime Minister's Department has no difficulty in maintaining the level of Budget estimates for the provision of its library facilities the Library of this Parliament suffers an overall reduction of 20 per cent without any discussion or reference to the Parliament, and indeed from what we know, without any discussion or

reference to the Presiding Officers of this Parliament. I, as a member of this Parliament who believes in the importance of the independence of the parliamentary institution, want to place my protest on record. I believe the people of Australia view this Parliament in terms .of the Westminster tradition. They see us as beingwhatever our imperfections-the custodian and protector of the parliamentary rights which have been created by the Constitution. Under the Westminster system the concept is that the Executive is answerable to the Parliament for its actions. But we are seeing in Australia the slow and continual erosion of the rights of the parliamentary institution so that the real struggle for political power, and the exercise of that power in Australia, is no longer a struggle between the government of the day subject to the sanctions and the mandates of the Parliament; it has become increasingly a struggle between the Executive, the ministry and the bureaucracy, with members of the Parliament for the most part interested by-standers trying to get in wherever they can to express a point of view.
I believe it is time for all members of this Parliament, across party political lines, to be prepared to stand up to say: 'We have a duty to this institution to make it work more successfully and more appropriately than it is working at the moment'. I have had the benefit-as have some other honourable members-of serving in more than one parliament. When I came to the national Parliament I believed, like most other people, that because it was the national Parliament, in terms of the Westminster tradition, it would be a true custodian of that tradition as compared with the State parliamentary institution in which I served. I am bound to inform the House that from my experience, observations and involvement that is not the case. Parliamentarians in the national Parliament have far fewer rights than parliamentarians in the State Parliament in which I served. I believe that is true generally. Parliamentarians and this institution must be prepared to protect and preserve the prerogatives of this institution. We do not mind if Prime Ministers want to have Budget allocations which are appropriate because we think they should have the best information possible. But just as that standard is good enough for the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and his Department it has to be good enough .for the Parliament. To cut the Parliamentary Library facilities by 20 per cent is to cut the flow of knowledge to every honourable member of this Parliament and to diminish the capacity of every parliamentarian to fulfil his obligations to this institution.

Adjournment

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1439

I want to place my protest on record. I do so not roughly the same impact as a sales tax. These

in party political terms but on the basis that the European tax rates go as high as 22 per cent in

sooner this institution takes the responsibility in a Denmark with most being within the 5 per cent to

non-party way for determining the level of its 10 per cent range. France has a tax of 7 per cent;

finance and restoring the supremacy of the Parlia- .West Germany, 6t per cent; Ireland, 10 per cent;

ment over the Executive, irrespective of the polAustria, 8 per cent; Belgium, 6 per cent; and Italy,

itical complexion of that Executive, the sooner we 5 per cent. Only Britain and Norway among the

will have this parliament back into the great tradeveloped sections of Europe exclude

ditions of the Westminster system.

newspapers, magazines and books from their

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

value added tax systems. However, in the United States-when I last looked, it was almost an
English speaking nation-many States levy sales tax on newspapers, magazines and books with one

Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (l0.15)-Firstly, I levying a specific tax on newspapers as an anti-

would like to apologise to the honourable member litter measure. In view of the rubbish being writ-

for Bonython (Dr Blewett) for wrongly attributen in so many Australian newspapers about this

ting to him propositions that have been made in a modest sales tax in Australia it seems that this

widespread way, particularly in the Budget deanti-litter tax is terribly appropriate.

bate, by many of his colleagues; that there are higher health charges in Australia, recognising of course that for three-quarters of Australians that simply is not true. I am glad to be able to acknowledge the honourable member's strong rejection of the atmosphere created by his colleagues who, I had hoped, would have followed his much more rational line in this matter.

Not only the newspapers appear to be running
a curious campaign. I have been receiving letters from book publishers and others interested in the
book industry which state that this 2+ per cent sales tax will produce a 15 per cent increase in the
retail price of books. It seems to me that the book industry is determined to maintain what seems to me to be an extraordinary rip-off of the com-

However, I will deal now with the question of munity. I know that in some sections of the indus-

sales tax on books and newspapers which has been try there are 100 per cent markups, but not even

the subject of a very strong campaign by some secwith a 100 per cent markup could one get a situ-

tions of the community that have had large ation where a 2+ per cent sales tax rise ends up as

articles printed in newspapers along with some a 15 per cent increase in the retail price. This cam-

editorial comment suggesting, first of all, that paign, which has been run against this Govern-

Australia is the only country in the world to imment as a result of its quite proper decision to in-

pose a sales tax on books. That comment was then crease the proportion of taxes made up of indirect

watered down to read 'the only English speaking taxes to fit in with what happens in the rest of the

country to impose a sales tax on the written developed world-

word'. Of course that is simply untrue. The interesting thing is that although metropolitan
daily newspapers throughout Australia have run these allegations not one of them-with the
exception of a daily, specialist, financial
newspaper-ran the denial of those untrue statements when it was issued by the Treasurer (Mr
Howard) here last week. That statement, which
was issued in Canberra, outlined the reality of
what countries impose what kinds of tax on books, newspapers and so on. Yet not one of the
newspapers that had run the allegations decided
to print the Treasurer's denial and the facts.

Mr Sainsbury-It is still lower than last year.
Mr BAUME-As the honourable member for Eden-Monaro said, the total increase in indirect taxes this year will be lower than it was last year. But given that, it seems to me that this campaign is one of massive self interest which takes no cognisance whatsoever of the real need for a direct and much more interesting and much fairer approach to the taxation system in Australia. The hip pocket nerve of the Australian newspapers appears to me to have been triumphant in this case.

Could it be that the newspapers are suffering or Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIIar)-

will suffer from the 2+ per cent tax and it is in Order! The honourable member's time has

their vested interests not to reveal the truth of this expired.

matter to the people of Australia?

Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (10.20)-In

I think I should restate some of the things that the last few days we have heard a great deal from

were said by the Treasurer. Almost all European the Government benches about the New South

countries impose a value added tax on Wales situation and all the great things which sup-

newspapers, magazines and books which has posedly a Liberal government would bring to that

1440 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Adjournment

State. The Liberal Party has no chance of winning that election. However, a significant event occurred today. The Victorian Budget was brought down by the Treasurer and Premier, Mr Thomson. We can see exactly what will be in store for the people of New South Wales if they are foolish enough to elect such a government. The Victorian Budget is a further continuation of the same absurd Liberal principles which we see manifested in this Parliament. Although we have had statements from various Victorian Ministers, trying to disassociate themselves from Fraser and Fraserism, the situation is that it is the same party, it has the same philosophy and there are the same disastrous consequences. This is illustrated in the Budget brought down in Victoria today. I will provide honourable members with some background information. Only about a month ago electricity charges in Victoria were increased by 20 per cent. This 20 per cent increase was justified on only one ground; it was needed to help finance the electricity arrangements for a multinational corporation, Alcoa. As a result the people of Victoria are required to pay these extra electricity charges.
Mr Lusher-Bring back Keith Johnson.
Dr THEOPHANOUS-Will the honourable member stop interrupting? He has had his go.
Mr Lusher-I amjust dazzled.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr MiIlar)- Order! The honourable member for Burke is entitled, in common with all other members, to address the House in silence. I ask honourable members on my right to remain silent.
Dr THEOPHANOUS-Less than one .month later, what do we get in addition to the 20 per cent increase in electricity charges? The Budget which was brought down today announced a 9 per cent increase in gas charges for the people of Victoria. Energy, electricity and gas are important to the households of Victoria. By increasing these charges the Government is effectively reducing the standards of living of the people of Victoria.
What else is happening? We are told that there will be a one per cent increase in payroll tax for big employers. It was interesting, was it not, to see how this Government screamed when the New South Wales Government was prepared to impose a temporary surcharge on payroll tax. Of course, we will hear nothing about the increase which the Victorian Government has brought in and we will hear nothing about the employment consequences. The Premier said that if there are increases in wages-he expects workers to seek

increased wages to make up for this lost incomethe State services will be reduced further. A reduction in the general State services to the Victorian people is the major feature of the Victorian Budget. It is a further example of Fraserism at work.
What is the justification for the increase in the price of gas? Victoria is the home of natural gas and oil. When the Liberal Premier brought in the Esso-BHP program he said that all Victorians would be able to have free gas. Instead of that we have this drastic situation of increases. These are examples of the kind of policies which have been brought down by the Thompson Government. I am pleased to say that it will no longer be in power after the next election. There is a new opportunity for a new start for the people of Victoria. John Cain, as Premier, will introduce a whole range of new policies covering education, health and energy. I am sure that we will support that program.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.
Mr LUSHER (Hume) (10.25)-We have come in here tonight and listened to this flunky from the socialist left--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member will withdraw. His language is unparliamentary.
Mr LUSHER-Do you want me to withdraw the word 'flunky' or the term 'socialist left'?
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member must not trifle with the Chair. The honourable member will withdraw.
Mr LUSHER-I withdraw. It is absolutely absurd that we come in here--
Dr Theophanous-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. The situation of honourable members opposite using unparliamentary language and racist remarks in relation to myself has been repeated several times in this Parliament and I have not made any comment on it. But I do believe that it is time that these remarks ceased--
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order!
Dr Theophanous-And that the Ministers put their people in order.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Burke will resume his seat.
Dr Theophanous-We are a multicultural so- 'ciety and this sort of nonsense which we have been getting from--

Adjournment

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1441

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Burke will resume his seat. Apparently the honourable member for Burke overlooks the fact that the Chair had already taken the matter in hand and had called on the honourable member for Hume to withdraw, which action he took. I call the honourable member for Hume.
Mr LUSHER-Mr Deputy Speaker, I demand a withdrawal from the honourable member for Burke.
Mr Milton-I raise a point of order.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-I call the honourable member for La Trobe on a point of order.
Mr LUSHER-I made no racist imputations at all. I never mentioned anything racist.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Hume will resume his seat.
Mr Milton-Mr Deputy Speaker, I raise a point of order. The problem here is that Government members make these remarks and they go into Hansard. They remain in Hansard. They should not be on record.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The remarks of the honourable member for La Trobe are noted. It is the practice of the House to record interjections. I take the point that it leaves a little to be desired. The Chair will address itself to the matter.
Mr LUSHER-I raise a point of order. I still require a withdrawal from the honourable member for Burke. The words I used were 'a flunky of the socialist left'. I have withdrawn those words. There is nothing racist in those words.
Dr Theophanous-But you have made racist remarks before.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Hume will resume his seat. The Chair, in informing the House that it had already taken action on the matter, did not accept for one moment the proposition that the honourable member for Hume had made a racist remark. The Chair's requirement for a withdrawal related to the term that the honourable member for Hume again repeated by way of clarification. It has been withdrawn.
Mr LUSHER-Thank you very much, Mr Deputy Speaker. It makes me very angry-I know my colleagues are very concerned-when a Labor member from Victoria comes into the House and makes an attack such as he made on the Victorian Premier. The New South Wales

Labor Premier has brought down a Budget which has horrific implications by comparison with what the Victorian Government has done in recent times. The Victorian Government at least has made pretty clear what it will do. The New South Wales socialist Government has chosen to defer, until after next Saturday, all of the things which it will do. For a start, electricity prices will increase 25 per cent once the election is out of the road. This is the sort of nonsense which is coming out of New South Wales. It almost pains me to talk about what it has done with what freight rates, coal loaders and registration charges, and what it intends to do to land tenure. In Victoria we have a decent government under the control of Lindsay Thompson, the Victorian Premier. He has brought down a responsible Budget. The honourable member for Burke (Dr Theophanous) talks about how horrible it is to experience a 9 per cent rise in gas charges when average weekly wages have gone up by 14 or 15 per cent in a year. Real wages have increased by 5 per cent in the last financial year. The honourable member complained about a 9 per cent rise in the price of gas. In New South Wales the price of energy will increase 25 per cent next week. That is the sort of thing that we have to be concerned about in this Parliament. I think it is absolutely ridiculous when a member of the socialist left comes into the Parliament and expects us to take seriously the sort of nonsense he put forward.
Mr Armitage-I raise a point of order. The honourable member just quoted so-called increases in New South Wales in the next few weeks. He has no idea. He is deliberately misleading this Parliament.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! There is no substance to the point of order. It being 10.30 p.m. the debate is interrupted.
Mr McVeigh-Mr Deputy Speaker, I require the debate to be extended.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The debate may continue until 10.40 -p.m.
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (10.30)-My colleague, the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron), raised the matter of groundsel eradication at Canungra Army base. I understand that, in the course of his remarks, the honourable member for Fadden indicated that he would show me a groundsel plant tomorrow. I advise him that there is no need for him to improve my education by showing me a specimen of that plant tomorrow because, I remind him that on 30 July this year, together with another of our colleagues, the honourable member for McPherson (Mr White),

1442 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Adjournment

I journeyed to Canungra. It was envisaged that from overseas for another week or so. The Army

the honourable member for Fadden would achas confirmed that it has no objection to hand

company us on that tour but I understand he was spraying with 2,4D and that out of its appropri-

ill with influenza. I remind him that the problem. ation it has allocated a sum of $40,000 this year.

at Canungra is not unknown to me. It is appropriThe advice of the experts, as I said, is that the best

atefor me to set the record straight.

time for spraying is from November until the be-

In setting the record straight I indicate to the honourable member that it would have been appropriate for him to advise either the Minister for Defence or me that he was going to raise this matter in the adjournment debate. If a person is
serious about ascertaining the facts of a situation, it is appropriate, as a matter of courtesy under the Westminster system, for him to advise the appropriate Ministers of his intentions. I regret on be-

ginning of the flowering season in February. So
this matter is one that the Defence Department and the Department of Housing and Construction as the department which carries out this work are extremely interested in. It is a complex problem. It is a matter of whether we should control the spread of groundsel by undertaking reafforesta-
tion. The Army and the Albert and Beaudesert shire councils have been consulted--

half of my colleague and myself that he did not see fit so to do. I asked my office, as a matter of courtesy, to advise the honourable member for Fadden that I would be replying to the points that he raised in this debate at this time through the courtesy that you have extended to me in granting this extension, Mr Deputy Speaker.
At the outset it is appropriate to say that the Department of Defence, as the body which has the title to the land, is equally concerned with the problem of groundsel eradication as the State government is and as I know the shires of Boonah and Albert are because I had discussions with

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! The honourable Minister's time has expired. If the Minister is seeking the call he may speak again.
Mr McVEIGH-Thank. you, Mr Deputy Speaker. I regret very much the fact that the honourable member for Fadden was ill when we went to Canungra on 31 July. He rang me the day before, and we apologised for his unavoidable absence. But I remind him that the shire councils have endorsed the proposals submitted to them by the Army.

them. I advise the honourable member for FadMr Armitage-I raise a point of order, Mr

den of the series of events. I advise him also that in Deputy Speaker. I want to know whether the log

the opinion of the experts the appropriate time which the honourable member for Fadden has

for the eradication of groundsel is the period from placed on the table is indicative of the Minister

November to February. So there is still time for being a log. What does it mean?

the appropriate measures of eradication to be ap-

plied. I advise him that the Defence Department wrote to the Commonwealth Scientific and Indus-

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-There is no point of order.

trial Research Organisation on 21 August. That followed discussions that the honourable member for McPherson and I had with the appropriate shire councils. The Department wrote requesting CSIRO to discuss the matter of aerial spraying with the Alan Fletcher Laboratory with a view to reconsidering its opposition to aerial spraying. The Alan Fletcher Laboratory is supervised by Mr Bill Haseler who is a world authority on the eradication of noxious and other weeds.

Mr McVEIGH-The honourable member for Chifley would not know because he is a sleeping log. (Quorum formed). Another initiative has been developed-the Army and the Albert and Beaudesert shire councils have given their approval to a proposal that we release groundsel destroying beetles into selected areas. It is most noteworthy that the shire councils endorse this proposal and the Army has indicated agreement subject to assurance being given concerning the

I believe that it is pertinent to point out that a control of the beetles. The Director of the Lab-

suggestion by the honourable member for Fadden oratory has given verbal: assurance on this matter.

that groundsel could be eradicated by using DeSubject to written confirmation by the Labora-

fence Force personnel is completely inappropritory and to formal acceptance of the proposal by

ate and impractical. I say this as someone who has the Army and shire councils, which we hope will

had a-little experience in the eradication of such be shortly, it is expected that the beetles will be re-

weeds. The Department of Defence waited for a leased into selected areas in October this year.

reply from CSIRO which would prove quite conThe release and monitoring of the performance of

clusively that it was inappropriate to use aerial the beetles will be carried out by the laboratory

spraying. We have had to wait because the expert over a five-year period at no cost to the Common-

from CSIRO, Mr Neil Bodi, will not be returning wealth. I acknowledge that the Albert Shire

Adjournment

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1443

Council has already established areas where experimental beetles have been released in the shire. The Department of Housing and Construction is maintaining continual liaison with the Albert and Beaudesert shire councils, the Army and the Alan Fletcher laboratory. Quite obviously, it is apparent that the Army and the Department are aware of the problem and are moving forward in a meaningful way to overcome the serious problem of groundsel.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-Order! The debate having concluded the House stands adjourned until 10 a.m. tomorrow.

House adjourned at 10.39 p.m.
NOTICE
The following notice was given:
Mr Killen to present a Bill for an Act to amend the law relating to defence.
PAPER
The following paper was deemed to have been presented, on 16 September 1981, pursuant to statute:
Australian Bureau of Statistics Act-Australian Bureau of Statistics-Proposal for collection of information-1981-No. 5-Import price index.

1444 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981 ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS

Answers to Questions

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Petrol Prices
(Question No. 2302)
(Replaces previous answer, Hansard page 3594, 10 June 1981)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 14 May 1981.
(I) Has his allention been drawn to the fact that since the release of the recent Prices Justification Tribunal (PJT) report on petrol prices, the extent of discounting petrol has increased markedly in New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland.
(2) Is it a fact that South Australian motorists have not shared in the benefits of the resultant lower level of petrol prices.
(3) Are South Australians now paying the highest petrol prices in Australia.
(4) Is he satisfied that petrol resellers and motorists in South Australia are not being discriminated against by the oil companies: if not, will he (a) instruct the body replacing the PJT to investigate immediately this discrimination buy the oil companies in South Australia and (b) continue to monitor petrol pricing throughout Australia.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. Indeed I have noted reports that some oil companies intend to withdraw discounts, following the release of the PJT report of 31 March 1981 on Petroleum product prices. I am not able to confirm or deny the accuracy of those reports nor to say whether market conditions will enable companies to withdraw those discounts.
(2) See answer to (I) above.
(3) According to ABS figures (Catalogue No. 6403.0) the average retail price of super grade petrol in Adelaide during the March quarter of 1981 was higher than in other State capitals. In the previous quarter the reverse applied.
(4) Prices determined by the PJT for the oil companies are maximum justified prices. They differ between States only to the extend of differences in State taxes or other charges levied on petroleum products.
Oil companies are not obliged to charge the maximum justified prices and, where competition is keen, they might not be able to obtain the full justified price. Actual prices to resellers would reflect both the strength of competition in particular localities and the operation of any State price controls that may apply.
The Petroleum Products Pricing Authority will take over from the PJT the responsibility for monitoring prices charged by the oil companies. It will have powers as proposed in the Petroleum Products Pricing Bill which I introduced into Parliament on 27 May 1981.
As the Commonwealth's jurisdiction over prices is limited to the corporate sector, effective action to monitor retail petrol prices, including the margins applied by non-corporate resellers, is a maller for State Governments to consider.

Department of Employment and Youth Affairs: Special Arrangements for Disabled Persons
(Question No. 469)

Mr Holding asked the Minister. for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 24
February 1981:

(I) In view of the fact that 1981 is designated as the Inter-
national Year of Disabled Persons, what special arrangements has his Department made to assist disabled persons.

(2) Do any special arrangements made include: (a)
increased employment of disabled persons and (b) improved access for disabled persons to any building or other facility occupied by his Department, ifso what are the details.

(3) What budgetary allocations were made in 1980-81 to

facilitate any special arrangements for disabled persons in his

Department.

.

Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

I refer to the honourable member to the answer given by the

Prime Minister to House of Representatives Question No. 458

(Weekly Hansard No. 12, page 3564).

.

Expenditure Commitments: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs
(Question No.l2I7)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(1) What specific commitments for expenditure, excluding normal recurring costs of running the Department such as salaries and administrative costs, does his Department have for (a) 1980-81 and (b) 1981-82.
(2) What sum is involved in each commitment and what is the purpose of the commitment.
(3) Has the Ministers attention been drawn to the fact that when a similar question was answered by a number of Ministers in 1976, it was claimed that obtaining the information would involve collection of detailed information from a diversity of records and sources, and would therefore require unjustifiable use of staff resources.
(4) Has the development of forward estimates in his Department now been advanced to a stage where a similar reply is no longer valid.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer given to Question No. 1216 by the Minister for Finance. (Weekly Hansard No. 12, 10June 1981,page3551).

Employment of Private Consultants: Department of Aboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 1281)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:

Answers to Questions

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1445

Were any private consultants or consultancy firms employed by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs in 1979-80; if so, (a) how many were employed, (b) who were they, (c) for what pu,rpose was each employed and (d) what payments were made to each consultant or consultancy firm.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
Three consultants were employed by the Department of Aboriginal Affairs in 1979-80. There were:

Name

Purpose

Payments made

Mr B. Rowland Review of the Aboriginal Land
Rights (Northern Territory) Act
1976 . . . . . . Mr W. Prior Pastoral consultant in the
Northern Territory Allan, Kew and Specialist accounting services
Co.

$
32,016 2,460
957

Female Officers and Employees: Department of Aboriginal Affairs
(Question No. 1359)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) How many female officers and employees are employed in the Department of Aboriginal Affairs, in the (a) First, (b) Second, (c) Third and (d) Fourth Divisions.
(2) How many female officers or employees in each Division are married.
(3) How many females were appointed or commenced employment in the Department of Aboriginal Affairs during 1979-80 and how many of these were married.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 1336 given by the Minister assisting the Prime Minister on 5 June 1981 (Hansard, page 3314).
Northern Territory Disabled Persons: Employment and Youth Affairs Projects
(Question No. 2054)
Mr Tambling asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(I) What financial appropriations have been allocated by his Department for use in the Northern Territory for projects to assist the disabled during 1980-81.
(2) For what specific projects has this sum been allocated.

Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) During 1980-81 my Department 'spent over $2.7m under the former National Employment and Training system (NEAT) on vocational training of disabled people throughout Australia. Of this, $10,615 was spent in the Northern Territory.
Action to promote employment opportunities for the disabled was also initiated, in conjunction with the International Year of Disabled Persons, through Committee I established in all States and the Northern Territory.
(2) $Im was allocated from the former NEAT system appropriation in 1980-81 for the establishment of Work Preparation Projects for the disabled. Nine such programs have been commenced in various States, but no projects have yet been proposed for the Northern Territory.
Participation in Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs
(Question No. 2181)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 7 May 1981:
(I) How many (a) 2nd Division, (b) 3rd Division and (c) 4th Division officers in his Department are engaged (i) full time or (ii) part-time in administrative, policy or other preparations for the forthcoming Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Melbourne.
(2) How many officers of his Department are expected to attend the meeting.
(3) What is the expected cost of their attendance at the meeting, including salaries, overtime, accommodation, travel and other expenses.
(4) What other expenses does he expect his Department to incur as a result of Australia's participation in, and conduct of, the meeting.
Mr N. A. Brown-I refer the honourable member to the answer given by the Prime Minister to Question No. 2162. (Weekly Hansard No. 12,10 June 1981 page 3560.)
Names, Classifications and Salary Scales of Prime Minister's Staff
(Question No. 2203)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(I) What is the name, classification and salary scale of each member of the Prime Minister's staff.
(2) What sum was paid to each person during (a) 1979-80 and (b) the period I July 1980 to the date of preparation of the answer to the question.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The name, classification and salary scale of each member of the Prime Minister's staff at 30 June 1981 was:

Name
Professor D. Kemp MrD. Budd

Classification
Consultant Consultant

Salary scale
$p.a. 50,000 49,575(a)

1446 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Answers to Questions

Name

Classification

Salary scale

Mr K. Whitney
Professor P.J. Rose Professor C. Walsh DrD. N. White
Dr D. Rosalky Mr D. Barnett Mr J. Bonner
MrO. Lloyd MrR. Bagley
Mr B. Baulman Mr D. Fraser Miss A. Cleverly
Miss R.M. Murray MrsC. Sande Miss H. McDonald
Miss T. C. Prior Miss V. H. Bond Miss K. O'Connor
Miss S. Clatworthy MrsL. Drake Miss J. Suter
Mrs R.A. Moore
Miss M.J. Reis Mrs M. Reedy . Mrs L. J. Slorach

Ministerial Officer Grade 6* Consultant (Part-time)
Ministerial Officer Grade 5* Ministerial Officer Grade 4*
Ministerial Officer Grade 4* Journalist Grade A4* Journalist Grade Al *
Journalist Grade Al * Clerk Class 9*
Ministerial Officer Grade 2*
Ministerial Officer Grade 1* Ministerial Officer Grade I Ministerial Officer Grade I Assistant Private Secretary Grade 2 Assistant Private Secretary Grade 2
Assistant Private Secretary Grade I Assistant Private Secretary Grade I
Secretary/Typist Secretary/Typist
Secretary/Typist Secretary/Typist
Secretary/Typist Secretary/Typist Clerical Assistant Grade 6
Electorate Assistant

$p.a. 43,594 9,900(b) 37,220
34,031 34,031
30,865 24,547-25,466 24;547-25,466 24,522-25,431
22,693-23,609 18,708-19,935
(c)
(c) 16,582-17,443
16,582-17,443 14,883-15,677
14,883-15,677 13,275-14,079 13,275-14,079
13,275-14,079 13,275-14,079
13,275-14,079 13,275-14,079 14,185-14,917
14,826-16,591

* Ministerial Staff Allowance of $5981 per annum, in addition to salary, is payable to occupants of these positions with the exception of the occupants of the three Journalist positions who receive Ministerial Staff Allowance of $11961 per annum. Ministerial Staff Allowance is by way of compensation for long and irregular hours and overtime is not payable.
(a) Mr Budd ceased duty on 17 July 1981. (b) The University of Melbourne is also paid $9,900 a year to compensate for the time spent by Professor Rose away from
his university duties. (c) Miss Cleverly and Miss Murray are both paid as Clerk Class 5 ($16,874-18,246 p.a.) plus overtime.
(2) The sums paid to each person during 1979-80 and 1980-81 were:

Name
D.Kemp D. Budd K. Whitney P. Rose C. Walsh D. White D. Rosalky D. Barnett J. Bonner O. Lloyd R. Bagley R. Baulman D. Fraser A. Cleverly R. Murray C. Sande . H.McDonald T. Prior . . V. Bond K. O'Connor S. Clatworthy L. Drake J. Suter R. Moore M.Reis . M. Reedy L. Slorach
* Less than full year. t Ministerial Staff Allowance.

1979-80 gross salary
$
Nil Nil Nil 8,373.09 Nil Nil Nil 25,493.91 Nil 21,238.54 *9,235.47 Nil Nil 13,645.53 13,431.91 *4,963.60 Nil 12,399.24 12,050.52 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil 9,653.02 11,191.41

Overtime or Ministerial staff allowance
$
t9,786.60* t9,786.60* t2,181.00*
9,438.62 12,053.77 1,424.76 11,438.19 17,011.67
3,734.24 Nil

1980-81 gross salary
$ *18,785.91 *21,382.99
*2,787.69 6,594.19
*5,416.29 *12,242.09 *14,412.68
28,862.13 *7,637.82 23,813.71 23,844.09
*853.61 1,970.47 14,968.12 14,998.83 12,637.03 13,743.00 14,242.17 14,242.17 *3,534.90 *6,351.09 *4,108.08 *4,809.45 *11,396.73 *1,800.09 11,945.17 14,039.32

Overtime or Ministerial staff allowance
$
382.45
t511.96 t2,151.53 t2,412.11
tI 1,103.28
t3,651.61 tll,103.29 t5,477.6I
224.97 t629.92 18,519.02 21,999.21 4,545.73 19,986.53 13,191.63 18,696.22 2,913.50 3,566.17 3,880.65 4,007.64 10,602.33 1,326.42 4,716.04
Nil

Answers to Questions

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1447

Brokerage Houses
(Question No. 2207)
Mr Jacobi asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(I) Can he provide an estimate of the sum lost in terms of life assurance or superannuation premiums and the loss involved in terms of sums assured, as a consequence of the large number of brokerage house collapses.
(2) Will he also provide statistics in relation to the items referred to in part (I) for (a) permanent assurance, (b) temporary assurance and (c) superannuation cover.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) There are no official statistics available 011 the amount of life insurance business transacted through insurance brokers; however, I understand that the proportion of life insurance business so transacted is small. For this reason and because life insurance cover is not usually granted until a life insurance company receives the premium it would appear that the amount of losses of the kind referred to by the honourable member would also be small.
Hospitals Contribution Fund of Australia: Travel Industry
(Question No. 2425)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(I) Is he able to state whether HCF proposes to expand into the travel industry.
(2) If so, is this (a) a legitimate avenue of activity for a fund whose main role will soon be as agent for the Commonwealth in the payment of medical and hospital benefits and (b) analagous to that fund's earlier purchase of executive planes at the expense of fund contributors.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) To my knowledge, HCF proposes to enter into .the travel agency business. This appears evident from the fact that the organisation has established a subsidiary company-HCF Travel Pty Ltd.
However, I understand that HCF has not formally made application to the State authorities for registration as a travel agent. Apparently, there are a number of formalities that need to be completed before making such application for registration, e.g. recognition within the international travel industry.
(2) (a) In addition to being registered under the National Health Act as a medical and hospital benefits organisation, HCF is also registered as a company (limited by guarantee) under the New South Wales Companies Act. As such, HCF is empowered under its Memorandum and Articles of Association to carry out activities that may seem to HCF to be capable of being conveniently carried out in connection with its health insurance activities or calculated to directly or indirectly enhance the value or render profitable any of the company's property or rights.
(b) I see no analogy between HCF entering the travel business and its purchase some years ago of an aeroplane. The cost of the aeroplane was a charge against the organisation's management expenses.
The establishment by HCF of a subsidiary company to undertake travel agency business could only be viewed as an investment activity. The National Health Act governs the extent to which moneys can be used by registered health

benefits organisations to pay benefits and to meet costs of carrying on business as registered organisations. However, the Act does not specifically control the nature of investments of moneys held by such organisations. Investments by registered health benefits organisations are generally matters for the individual organisations to determine. I would be concerned, however, to ensure that available moneys are invested reasonably, to the advantage of contributors, and there are other powers available to me under the Act to ensure this is done.
It is not unusual for registered health benefits organisations to engage in other activities. Some registered organisations, including HCF, conduct general insurance through subsidiary companies.
Family Medicine Program
(Question No. 2435)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 4 June 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a report entitled 'Funding Conflicts in Times of Constraint' in the National News of the Family Medicine Program of May/June 1981.
(2) If so, has he noted in that report the statement that the Family Medicine Program is having difficulty training existing and increased numbers of general practitioners under the program, and the question posed which asked can the country not afford to train these doctors as they will be controlling health care costs for the next 40 or 50 years.
(3) Is there any substance in this statement; if so, given the Government's concern with cost containment, what will the Government do to educate medical practitioners in costeffectiveness within their practices.
(4) Is it a fact that the current avenue of this education, the Family Medicine Program, has had no increase in funds since 1979.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) General practitioners generate health costs - in the course of their own practices, by referral of patients to specialists, and by arranging admission of patients to hospitals and nursing homes. It can therefore be said that general practitioners have.a significant influence on health costs.
Although the Government is conc~rned with the contain-
ment of health costs, the Commonwealth does not have sole responsibility for promoting cost containment; the States and the medical profession itself also have obligations to the community to contain costs as far as practicable.
The Government has decided to institute an independent review of policy issues surrounding the post-graduate vocational training activities undertaken by the Family Medicine Program. Having regard to the outcome of that review, the Government will decide on what future actions are warranted on its part in relation to post-graduate vocational training of general practitioners, including training related to costeffectiveness within their practices.
(4) The allocations in respect of the Family Medicine Program (including a small component related to Australian Medical Students' Association) since 1978-79 have been:
$m .1978-79-4.478 1979-80-4.676 1980-81-5.107 1981-82-5.025

1448 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Answers to Questions

Trunk Calls Booking Fee
(Question No. 2609)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) Did Telecom Australia, during the dispute of May/June 1981, continue to Follow its normal practice of charging a fee for booked trunk calls which could have been made by Subscriber Trunk Dialling (STD); if so, who was responsible for this decision.
(2) What was the financial return to Telecom as a result of adopting this practice, during the period of the industrial dispute referred to in part (I).
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) I am advised by Telecom that an operator surcharge is applied on all trunk calls booked with an exchange operator which could have been made with STD. However, an exchange manager may waive application of the operator surcharge, when in his opinion, calls to STD destinations are made via the manual service because of some local breakdown 'or difficulty affecting the STD service. In accordance with this procedure, the surcharge was waived at various times at many centres during the period referred to by the honourable member. Unfortunately, statistics of the nature sought are not available.
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme Schedule
(Question No. 2680)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) How many items have been (a) dropped from and (b) added to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme Schedule since 1975.
(2) What has been the (a) saving and (b) cost to his Department of each deletion and addition.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) 437 ready-prepared items and 109 drugs for use in preparations compounded by the pharmacist have been removed.
(b) 284 ready-prepared items have been added.
(2) It is not possible to determine the degree of transfer of prescribing from or to other items as a result of additions to or deletions from the list of pharmaceutical benefits. Accordingly it is not possible to assess the net savings or cost of each of these changes to the list. Items were added to the list on the recommendation of the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee (PBAC) which is established under the National Health Act to give advice on medical grounds on matters concerning the pharmaceutical benefits list. The deletions from the list comprise items deleted on the advice of the PBAC and items discontinued by the manufacturer.
National Abnormalities Register
(Question No. 2681)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) Will a national abnormalities register be established: if so, when.
(2) What steps remain to be taken for the register to be established.
(3) What is the estimated cost of establishing the register.

(4) Which States have established State registers.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. However, a National Perinatal Statistics Unit, funded under a Health Services Planning, Research and Development Grant, is operating at the Commonwealth Institute of Health, and several States are supplying data, including data on congenital abnormalities, to the Unit.
(2) and (3)-See (I).
(4) The. Queensland Government has established a register in regard to abnormalities recognised perinatally. In New South Wales, South Australia, and Tasmania, data on malformations are collected in a general purpose perinatal statistical collection, and there is no separate register of malformations. Similar collections are expected to be introduced in the near future in Victoria and in the Australian Capital Territory. In Western Australia, the perinatal statistical collection is established by the State. A congenital malformation register in that State is being funded, at this initial development a stage, under a Health Services Planning, Research and Development Grant.
Bankcard Customer Mailing Lists
(Question No. 2725)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) Has the Attorney-General's attention been drawn to the article in the Australian Financial Review of9 June 1981 entitled 'Industry looks Longingly at Bankcard Lists'.
(2) If so, as that article discusses the possibility of Banks selling Bankcard Customer Accounts Mailing Lists to promoters of non-Bank services and products will Bankcard customers be afforded protection under planned new privacy laws from such an eventuality.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answers to the honourable member's questions:
(I) Yes.
(2) The question of privacy protection within areas of Commonwealth responsibility is currently under examination by the Commonwealth's Law Reform Commission and its report is expected towards the end of this year. The Government would wish to study the Commission's report before considering whether legislation is needed.
Orthomolecular Medicine Concepts
(Question No. 2753)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 19 Aug!lst 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to evidence supporting orthomolecular medicine concepts in (a) Biological Basis of Schizophrenia by Hemmings, MTP Press Limited, (b) Senate Select Hearings, 1980 Update, Library of Congress 79-57366: (c) Reply to the Task Force Report 1976 by Hoffer et al; (d) Dr C. M. Reading's address to the Government Schedule Revision Committee, Journal of Orthomolecular Psychiatry, Biomedical Library, University of N.S.W. and (e) a note in Index Medicus, March 1980.
(2) Has the Government a report on the need for objective evaluation of costs and benefits of orthomolecular medical practice; if so, is it available to Members ofParliament.

Answers to Questions

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1449

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) I rely for advice on professional matters relating to particular medical practices, such as orthomolecular medicine, on the people best suited to provide it. In the case of orthomolecular medicine I sought counsel on its effectiveness from the Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists, the Royal Australian College of Physicians and the Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia and subsequently from the Medical Benefits Schedule Revision Committee. My reason for doing so was that practitioners of orthomolecular medicine typically order a large number of pathology tests for their patients in order to discover evidence of excessive or deficient intake of heavy metals or vitamins, allergic conditions or manifestations of autoimmune disease. Unfortunately this is done at heavy cost to the medical benefits system. '[he advice received from the above mentioned professional bodies was that orthomolecular medicine has no status in the practice of medicine or psychiatry, its clinical role is unproven and the pathology tests cannot be justified for the rational practice of internal medicine or psychiatry.
In the circumstances I took the step of declaring such pathology tests to be health screening and therefore in breach of section 19 (5) of the Health Insurance Act, which prevents payment of Commonwealth Medical Benefits for health screening services (i.e. tests not reasonably required for management of the medical condition of the patient). I have no reason to believe that the above professional bodies did other than carry out a proper investigation, including reference to appropriate literature on orthomolecular medicine.
(2) The Government has not received a 'report on the need for objective evaluation of costs and benefits of orthomolecular medical practice'. The Government is fully aware of the need for objective evidence of the effectiveness of orthomolecular medicine and is prepared to accept such evidence and act on it should it be forthcoming. I have notified this view to various supporters and practitioners of orthomolecular medicine who have made representations to me on the subject.
Queensland Goverpment Aircraft: Priority in Landing
(Question No. 2780)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) Has the pilot of the Queensland Government plane used by the Queensland Premier ever requested permission to jump the queue of aircraft in a holding pattern awaiting landingat (a) Brisbane or (b) Sydney Airport.
(2) If so, what were the reasons for the request.
(3) Was permission given; ifso, for what reasons.
(4) Does queue jumping disadvantage and delay other aircraft, particularly civil aircraft.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable members question is as follows:
(I) I am advised that no direct requests from the aircraft used by the Queensland Premier to jump the queue of holding aircraft are contained on record at either Brisbane or Sydney. However, when known that the Premier was aboard, efforts have been made at Brisbane to expedite the movement of that aircraft, without upsetting the established movement priorities of other aircraft being sequenced at the time.
(2) Not applicable.
(3 j' See answer to ( I ) above.

(4) When delays to aircraft movements are being experienced, queue jumping, if permitted, would cause further delay to other aircraft of similar or higher priority. For this reason every effort is made to sequence aircraft movements in accordance with the laid down schedule of priorities.
United States Federal Aviation Administration Regulations
(Question No, 2785)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(1) Can he say what requirements the United States of America Federal Aviation Administration make in regard to the fitting of anti-pollution devices and apparatus to jet aircraft operating in that country.
(2) If so, are the requirements of the United States Federal Aviation Administration stronger than Government regulations in Australia.
Mr Hunt--;-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The United States Department of Transportation Federal Aviation Administration requirements for the control of air pollutants emitted by jet aircraft relate to prohibition of fuel venting and limits on the emission of smoke from the engines.
(2) The Australian requirements for air pollutant emission from jet aircraft and engines will be consistent with internationally adopted Standards established under the Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation. These are to be published in Annex 16 (Volume 2) to that Convention and they are expected to come into effect on 30 October 1981. Formal regulations to implement them will be established in due course. In the meantime, implementation of the principles of the Standards have been encouraged by the Department of Transport and Australian airlines currently comply with them. It is understood that the United States and Australian regulations will be similar, if not the same.
Land Acquisition by the Commonwealth Government
(Question No, 2787)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(1) Following the reply to part (3) of question No. 6155 (Hansard, 20 August 1980, page 572), what were the recommendations of the Law Reform Commission on land acquisition by the Commonwealth Government.
(2) Has the report been considered.
(3) If so, what action has been tahn by the Government.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The recommendations of the Law Reform Commission's Report (14) Lands Acqusition and Compensation are lengthy and total thirty-four in number. They can be found in Part II of the Report.
(2) and (3) The Report is still under consideration. It is presently being examined by a working group of officials.

1450 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Answers to Questions

Research into Endoparasites of Ruminants
(Question No. 2800)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) Has the CSIRO been allocated $62,900 from the Meat Research Trust Fund for research in 1981-82 into endoparasites of ruminants in southern Australia.
(2) If so, in what institutions or locations will this research be carried out.
(3) What are the aims and objectives of the project.
(4) Who will be the personnel involved, or, how many persons will be involved.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) CSIRO have been allocated $49,000 For this project.
(2) At the Animal Health Research Laboratory, CSIRO Division of Animal Health, Parkville, Victoria, with field work being undertaken at Werribee and Caramut in Victoria.
(3) The objective and General Outline of AMRC Project CS9, Section A, which commenced on I July 1979 and is due for completion on 30 June 1982, are as follows:
(a) Objective: To define the factors controlling the presence of in-
testinal parasites and production loss Following infections of cattle and sheep, with the aim of establishing principles of optimum control at the lowest possible cost for increased productivity.
(b) General outline: The availability of infective larvae in pasture is the
key factor leading to parasitic gastroenteritis in sheep and cattle. In Western Victoria the availability of larvae depends mainly on the number of worm eggs deposited during autumn, and the subsequent .weather conditions. If the weather is favourable, high numbers of larvae occur on pastures during the cool winter and early spring months, but few survive during the hot, dry months of summer.
Consequently, control strategies being studied are based on: (a) reducing worm egg contamination of pastures during autumn,or (b) avoiding the use of pastures known to be heavily contaminated.
CSIRO will be making application to AMRC For funds to enable these evaluation experiments to continue over a number of years in order to take account of seasonal variability.
(4) The personnel involved are: Dr N. Anderson-Project Supervisor Mr P. J. Martin-Experimental Officer Mr I. K. McTaggart-Senior Technical Officer Mr M. A. Pope-Technical Officer Ms D. Williamson-Technical Assistant
International Code of Marketing of Breast Milk Substitutes
(Question No. 2806)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 20 August 1981:
(I) Did Australia support the International Code of Marketing of Breast Milk Substitutes at the 34th World Health Assembly.
(2) If so, when will he introduce legislation to (a) implement the recommendations of the Code in respect of the marketing of breast 'milk substitutes within Australia and (b)

require Australian companies and authorities operating outside Australia to conform to the recommendations of the Code.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) (a) and (b) The Code has been reFerred by the World Health Orgapization to all Member States as a recommendation only-its implementation is not mandatory. Under these circumstances, it is expected that industry compliance with the Code will be on the basis of self-regulation. Indeed, in Australia negotiations are under way with relevant industry representatives to seek an undertaking from the industry that it will voluntarily comply with the provisions of the Code.
Specific implementation aspects of the Code-for example, labelling requirements-are presently being considered by relevant committees of the National Health and Medical Research Council.
The Code has been referred to all State and Territory health authorities for consideration as regards possible implementation action within their respective jurisdictions.
The Commonwealth Department of Health will be responsible for monitoring the implementation by industry of the principles and aims of the Code.
The Commonwealth does not intend-nor does the Constitution empower it-to introduce legislation on the matter.
Changing Needs of Pensioners
(Question No. 2809)
Mr Good luck asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 20 August 1981:
Would it be possible to form a Parliamentary Committee to look into the immediate and changing needs of the pensioners of Australia; if so, will he undertake to initiate this.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Given the comprehensive system of review which already operates to advise the Government on matters affecting pensioners, the Government does not propose to move to establish such a Parliamentary Committee.
Australian Government Analytical Laboratories
(Question No. 2814)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 25 August 1981:
(I) Did a brochure recently issued by his Department state that the Australian Government Analytical Laboratories assist in safeguarding Australian consumers by examining local and imported goods, ensuring the quality of export foodstuffs: ifso, how many samples of (a) local, (b) imported and (c) exported goods were examined in each year from 1976-77 to 1980-8\.
(2) Into which category of goods did each of the samples Fall, and how many samples were in each category, For example, foods for export, imported textiles for tariff purposes and local products for saFety under the Trade Practices Act.
(3) What were the standards or criteria used in the examination of the various categories of goods.
(4) How many samples failed to meet the standard or criteria in each year, for (a) local, (b) imported and (c) exported goods.

Answers to Questions

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1451

(5) What happened to those goods which failed to meet the standard or criterion.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Yes. A report on the work of the Australian Government Analytical Laboratories is made each year in the

Annual Report of the Department of Science and Technology. The Australian Government Analytical Laboratories provide a chemical and microbiological service and give advice to Government departments and official bodies. The program of work submitted is determined by the client.
While detailed statistics are not available in each of the breakdowns sought by the honourable member the following table may be helpful:

TOTAL NUMBERS OF SAMPLES ANALYSED

Client department

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

Business and Consumer Affairs Primary Industry
Health (including NHMRC)
Others

11,387 30,972
2,708
6,208

12,938 32,224 2,066
6,113

17,797 28,367
5,312 6,291

17,576 31,123
2,879 7,381

16,827 35,856 3,471
10,475-

Total

51,275

53,341

57,767

58,959

66,629

The greater proportion of the samples examined from the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs are from imported goods while almost all the samples submitted by the Department of Primary Industry are from Australian goods exported. Samples submitted by the Department of Health include those from foods imported and are examined largely in support of the quarantine functions of thaI Department whilst the surveys of food for the National Health and Medical Research Council are upon goods consumed within Australia.
(3), (4) and (5) The standards and criteria used in the examination of goods are determined by the organisations submitting the samples. The examination results are supplied to the submitting clients and are used by them to establish acceptance or rejection of the goods and their subsequent fate.
Exports to Middle East Countries
(Question No. 2822)
Mr Jull asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 25 August 1981:
(I) What was the total value of exports and what commodities were exported to (a) Iraq, (b) Iran, (c) the United Arab Emirates, (d) Kuwait, (e) Saudi Arabia, (f) Egypt, (g) Oman, (h) South Yemen, (i) Jordan, (j) the Sudan, (k) North Yemen, (I) Ethiopia and (m) Djibouti, during 1980-81.
(2) What was the value of imports and what commodities were imported to Australia from each of these countries during the same year.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the information provided in the following tables.

SITC
041 05 268 024 292.50 411 5 66
685

Description

$A'OOO f.o.b.

Australia's exports to Iraq 1980-81 (P(
Wheat and meslin unmilled Fruit and vegetables Wool and other animal hair Cheese and curd Seeds, fruits and spores used for sowing Animal oils and fats Chemicals and related products Non-metallic mineral manufactures,
n.e.s. Lead

20,907 2,397 2,480 4,771
738 1,554 1,106
131
860

SITC 69 72 74 75 77 786 84 87 89
05 33
001 011.1 011.20 041 06 08 26 41 5 685 72

Description

$A'OOO f.o.b.

Manufactures of metal, n.e.s.
Machinery specialised for particular industry
General industrial machinery and equipment
Office machines and ADP equipment
Electrical machinery and appara tus
Trailers and other vehicles not motorised
Articles of apparel and clothing accessories
Professkmal, scientific and controlling instruments
Miscellaneous manufactured articles, n.e.s.
Special transactions and nonmerchandise trade
Other (including confidential)

1,061 3,626
2,363
164 219 2,488
941
475
2,174
2,524
8,382

Total exports

59,361

Australia's imports from Iraq 1980-81 (P)
Vegetables and fruit Petroleum, petroleum products and re-
lated materials Other (including confidential)

1,315 94,419
4

Total imports

95,738

Australia's exports to Iran 1980-81 (P)

Live animals chiefly for food

36,060

Beef and veal, chilled or frozen

309

Mutton or lamb, chilled or frozen

35,081

Wheat and meslin unmilled

108,899

Sugar, sugar preparations and honey

376

Feeding stuff for animalS

717

Textile fibres (excluding wool tops) and 1,146'

their wastes

Wheat and meslin

8,134

Chemicals and related products, n.e.s.

159

Refined lead and lead alloys

2,176

Machinery specialised for particular in373 dustry

1452 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Answers to Questions

SITC

Description Other (including confidential)
Total exports

$A'OOO f.o.b.
4,238
197,668

Australia's imports from Iran 1980-81 (P)

05

Vegetables and fruit

369

33

Petroleum, petroleum products and re22,814

lated materials

659

Floor coverings, etc.

10,126

Other (including confidential)

109

Total imports

33,418

Australia's exports to United Arab Emirates 1980-81 (P)

001 0111 0112 0116
023 024 041 043 05 II 334 5 66
rem. Sect. 6 737 74 77 8

Live animals chiefly forfood Beefand veal fresh, chilled orfrozen Mutton and lamb, fresh chilled or frozen Edible animal offals, fresh, chilled or
frozen Butter Cheese and curd Wheat and meslin unmilled Barley unmilled Vegetables and fruit Beverages Petroleum products refined Chemicals and related products Non-metallic mineral manufactures,
n.e.s. Manufactured goods classified by
material Metalmaking machinery General industrial machinery Electrical machinery and apparatus Miscellaneous manufactured articles Other (including confidential)

1,960 7,592 27,541 1,089
1,874 3,537 6,530
777 2,099
601 6,061
925
3,001 4,623
1,192 817 658
1,415 31,398

Total exports

103,690

Australia's imports from United Arab Emirates 1980-81 (P)

33

Petroleum, petroleum products and re195,244

lated materials

Other (including confidential)

Total imports

195,245

001 011.1 0112
024 041 043 048
05 061 081
5 67 69 73 74

Australia's exports to Kuwait 1980-81 (P)

Live animals chiefly for food

50,977

Beef, fresh, chilled or frozen

6,585

Mutton and lamb, fresh, chilled or 7,853

frozen

Cheese and curd

3,861

Wheat and meslin unmilled

102,703

Barley unmilled

2,589

Cereal preparations and preparations of

524

flour, starch, fruit and vegetables

Fruit and vegetables

2,247

Sugar and Honey

202

Feeding stuff for animals (excl. unmilled 2,353

cereal)

Chemicals and related products

298

Iron and steel

21,179

Manufactures of metal n.e.s.

853

Metalmaking machinery

204

General industrial machinery

452

SITC
77 78 8

Description
Electrical machinery and apparatus Road vehicles Miscellaneous manufactured articles Other incl. miscellaneous articles
Total exports

$A'OOO f.a. b.
746 300 277 2,946
187,149

Australia's imports from Kuwait 1980-81 (P)

33

Petroleum, petroleum products and re350,596

lated materials

Other (incl. confidential)

172

Total imports

350,768

Australia's exports to Saudi Arabia 1980-81 (P)

001

Live animals chiefly for food

0111

Beef and vealfresh, chilled orfrozen

0112

Mutton, Lamb fresh, chilled or frozen

0116

Edible animal offals, fresh, chilled or

frozen

014

Meat and edible meat offals Prepared or

Preserved

022

Milk and cream

023

Butter

024

Cheese and curd

041

Wheat and meslin

042

Rice

043

Barley unmilled

048

Cereal and flour preparations

05

Fruit and vegetables

5

Chemicals and related products

66

Non-metallic mineral manufactures

n.e.s.

674

Univerals, plates and sheets of iron and

steel

682

Copper

691

Structures and parts of structures of

Iron and Steel or aluminium

699

Manufactures of base metals n.e.s.

74

General industrial machinery and equip-

ment

793

Ships, boats and floating structures

remainderof7 (excl. 74 and 793)

Machinery and transport equipment

8

Other (incl. confidential)

46,604 29,166 12,748
3,756
488
1,185 5,736 29,807 28,614 8,851 61,998 3,815 4,426
696 1,511
2,146
14,997 1,264
897 1,772
5,021
3,482 1,424 8,561

Total exports

278,965

Australia's imports from Saudi Arabia 1980-81 (P)

33

Petroleum, petroleum products and re-I ,022,536

lated materials

34

Gas, natural and maI)ufactured

67

Other (incl. confidential)

I

Total imports

1,022,604

Australia's exports to Egypt A.R. 1980-81 (P)

0111 0112
0116 041 268 325.10

Beef and veal fresh, chilled or frozen

1,166

Mutton and Lamb fresh, chilled or 2,380

frozen

Edible offals of animals

2,192

Wheat and meslin unmilled

284,996

Wool and other animal hair

13,261

Coal and briquettes

14,277

Answers to Questions

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1453

SITC

Description

$A'OOO f.o.b. SITC

Description

$A'OOO f.o.b.

685.12 72
741 793

Non ferrous metals-refined lead Machinery specialised for particular in-
dustry Heating and cooling equipment
Ships, boats and floating structures Other (incl. confidential)

7,267 2,823
2,253 53,329 26,468

Total exports

410,430

Australia's imports from Egypt A.R. 1980-81 (P)

05

Vegetables and fruit

22

659

Floor coverings etc

51

88

Photographic apparatus, equipment and

12

supplies and optical goods

Other (incl. confidential)

87

Total imports

172

001 011.1 011.2
024 05 5 674
74
778
8

Australia's exports to Jordan 1980-81 (P)
Live animals chiefly for food Beefand veal fresh, chilled or frozen
Lamb and mutton fresh, chilled or frozen Cheese and curd Fruit and vegetables Chemicals and related products Universals, Plates and sheets of iron and steel General Industrial machinery and equipment Electrical Machinery and Apparatus n.e.s. Miscellaneous Manufactured Articles Other (incl. confidential)
Total exports

540 257 1,948
412 71 43
2,405
146
1,238
223 775
8,058

Australia's exports to Oman 1980-81 (P)

0111

Beef and veal fresh, chilled or frozen

0112

Mutton and Lamb, fresh, chilled or

frozen

023

Butter

024

Cheese and curd

041

Wheat and meslin unmilled

044

Maize unrnilled

05

Fruit and vegetables

06

Sugar, sugar preparations and honey

69

Manufactures of metal n.e.s.

71

Power generating machinery and

equipment

79

Other equipment

Remainder Div. 7 (minus 71 and 79)

Machinery and transport equipment

Other (incl. confidential)

1,203 5,340
1,127 546
8,132 633
458 252 266 738
1,045
859 5,153

Total exports

25,752

Australia's imports from Oman 1980-81 (P)

Total imports

Australia's exports to Yemen P.D.R. 1980-81 (P)

001 0112
0116 023 024 041 05 06 08

Live animals chiefly for food Mutton and Lamb fresh, chilled or frozen
Edible offals of animals Butter
Cheese and curd Wheat and meslin unmilled Fruit and vegetables Sugar, sugar preparations and honey
Feeding stuff for animals Other (incl. confidential)

2,616 1,617
576 700 608 26,683 598 843 141 83

Total exports

34,465

Australia's imports from Yemen P.D.R. 1980-81 (P)

Total imports

neg.

Australia's imports from Jordan 1980-81 (P) 896.05.00 Collections and collectors items
Total imports

022 046 292.50 693 699 72
74

Australia's exports to Sudan 1980-81 (P)
Milk and cream Meal and flour of wheat and meslin Seeds fruits and spices used for sowing Wire products and fencing grills Manufactures of base metals n.e.s.
Machinery specialised for particular industries General industrial machinery and equipment Other (incl. confidential)

Total export s

119 4,125
85 122 609 60
17
25
5,162

Australia's imports from Sudan 1980-81 (P)

05

Vegetables and fruit

II

2922.001 Gum Arabic

217

Other (incl. confidential)

29

Total Exports

257

Australia's exports to Yemen A.R. 1980-81 (P)

0111 023 041 05 06 658.10 2

Beef and veal fresh, chilled or frozen Butter Wheat and meslin unmilled Fruit and vegetables Sugar, sugar preparations and honey Sacks and bags of textile materials Crude materials inedible (except fuels) Other (incl. confidential)

187 2,736
42,676 274
194
1,639 184 268

Total Exports

48,158

Australia's Imports from Yemen A.R. 1980-81 (P) Nil

Australia's Exports to Ethiopia 1980-81 (P)

041

Wheat and meslin unmilled

69

Manufacturers of metal n.e.s.

6,199 153

1454 REPRESENTATIVES 16 September 1981

Answers to (2uestions

S[TC 292
74 76
72

Description

$A'OOO f.o.b.

Crude vegetable materials-vegetable

35

seeds

General industrial machinery

369

Telecommunications and sound record-

24

ing apparatus

Machinery specialised for particular in-

27

dustry

Other (incl. confidential)

33

Total Exports

6,840

Australia's Imports from Ethipia 1980-81 (P)

071

Coffee and coffee substitutes

379

Other (incl. con fidentia I)

9

Ansett and Trans Australia Airlines:.Industrial Relations
(Question No, 2867)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
Has the difference in policy between Ansett and TAA which led to TAA cancelling most flights for several days during August 1981 been inlluenced by the Government's directions, guidelines, advice or requests to TAA in regard to the dispute concerned or any aspect of industrial relations of the dispute.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No. [n the circumstances mentioned Trans Australia Airlines would make its own commercial decisions.

Total Imports

388

Australia's Exports to Djibouti 1980-81 (P) 51
Australia's Imports from Djibouti 1980-81 (P) 4

Export Potential of Local Flower Market
(Question No. 2836)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
(I) When will the Government release the report on the export potential of the local lIower market known as the ESAMS study.
(2) What has been the cost of the study.
Mr Thomson-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(I) The study referred to was the first phase of a public interestproject being undertaken by my Department to assist the Australian nursery industry in penetrating the export markets for indoor foliage plants.
As well as achieving its major objective of identifying technology requirements, the study generally identified Western European and US markets totalling $A I,300m per year and analysed the Australian industry's capability to penetrate that market.
The results' of the study were presented at a seminar in December 1980. Because of public interest shown in the months following the seminar, it was decided to arrange for publication of the report.
To allow early industry comment on the study, a limited number of copies (33) of a draft report have been distributed to the nursery industry through the Australian Nurserymen's Association and its affiliated State Associations. Industry members wishing to preview the draft report should contact the Association in their State.
Presently this report is undergoing final editing prior to publication by the AGPS near the end of September.
(2) The cost of the study, including seminar and publication costs was $120,000.

Commonwealth Employment Offices
(Question No, 2868)
Mr Free asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
(I) How many district Commonwealth Employment Service Offices are currently operated by his Department.
(2) [n how many of these offices is (a) counter services and (b) interviewing services available to the public at street level.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 238.
(2) (a) 181, (b) 179.
Prescription Payments to Pharmacists
(Question No. 2896)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 27 August 1981:
(I) How many prescriptions are processed by his Department in each State and Territory.
(2) What is the value of these prescription claims in each State and Territory.
(3) Is the processing by his Department of prescription payments to pharmacists taking between 4-6 weeks in Queensland; ifso, what are the reasons for this delay.
(4) Has the workload of his Department in Queensland been augmented by additional processing work which has been transferred from New Sou~h Wales.
(5) As pharmaceutical wholesalers must be paid within 14 days, and as pharmacists are experiencing long delays in Government processing, will he provide extra staff to reduce the processing delays; if not, why not.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Pharmaceutical benefit prescription items processed for payment by my Department during the month of July 1981, both National Health Scheme (NHS) and Repatriation PharmaceuLical Benefits Scheme (RPBS), broken down by State and Territory were as follows:

Answers to Questions

16 September 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 1455

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Australian Capital Territory Northern Territory
TOTAL

NHS

RPBS

4,114,330
2,540,089
1,239,529 710,368 694,340
258,975 99,840 15,333

421,942
247,759 165,871 58,308
75,463
36,473 6,129
453

$9,672,804 $1,012,398

(2) The value of Commonwealth payments for prescription items processed for payment during the month of July 1981, both National Health Scheme (NHS) and Repatriation Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (RPBS), can be broken down by State and Territory as follows:

NHS

RPBS

New South Wales
Victoria
Queensland South Australia
Western Australia Tasmania Australian Capital Territory
Northern Territory

14,076,288
8,250,130 4,113,280 2,330,900
2,302,603 849,655 296,878
36,177

2,238,436 1,288,153
876,032 296,674
409,541 196,793 34,166
2,312

TOTAL

$32,255,911 $5,342,107

It should be noted that the above amounts in respect of NHS claims are net and do not include the patient contribution for non-pensioner benefits.

(3) My Department undertakes to pay pharmacists' claims for NHS and RPBS dispensing within thirty calendar days of
receipt. This target is currently being met in all Divisional Offices, including Queensland. The majority of NHS and RPBS claims processed for payment by the Queensland Div-
isional Office on my Department on 28 August 1981 were received on 7 and 4 August 1981, respectively.

(4) Processing of both NHS and RPBS claims from certain
pharmacists in north-east New South Wales has been transferred on a temporary basis to the Queensland Divisional Office of my Department. This transfer is one of a number of suc-
cessful measures undertaken to overcome a processing backlog which developed in New South Wales earlier this year.
Appropriate staffing adjustments have been made to compen-
sate for the increased workload in Queensland.

(5) As I stated in (3), my Department undertakes to pay
claims within thirty calendar days of receipt which is con-
sidered to be normal commercial practice. I am advised that suppliers may seek payment within a shorter period but this is not the normal or long-standing practice. The shorter period,
where it occurs, is normally associated with an incentive discount or bonus arrangement. Suppliers do not penalise phar-
macists who pay within thirty days.

Ansett Transport Industries: Capital Transactions
(Question No. 2898)
Dr Everingham asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 27 August 1981:
Will he arrange for the capital transactions of Ansett Transport Industries, to the extent that they concern the 1981 Airlines Agreement, to be disclosed to the Parliament as completely as capital transactions of the Australian national Airlines Commission; if not, why not.
Mr Hunt-The anwer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am unaware of any capital transactions by either Ansett Transport Industries or the Australian National Airlines Commission which are directly concerned with the 1981 Airlines Agreement. I should note that clause 13 of the 1981 Airlines Agreement places virtually the same requirement to provide financial information to Parliament on Ansett Transport industries and the Australian National Airlines Commission.
The clause provides for both the Commission and Ansett Transport Industries to furnish separately to the Minister for Transport for presentation to the Parliament, as soon as practicable after the end of the financial year, financial information in respecl of their respective businesses and those of their subsidiary companies relating to:
(a) the operation of passenger air services on trunk routes, including such other passenger air services as are provided as ancillary to the services on trunk routes; and
(b) the total operation of air services carried on by the Commission and the Company.
The financial information provided by Ansett shall be generally in accordance with the accounting requirements of the Victorian Companies Act, be audited and certified as to correctness by two Directors of the Company.
The financial information provided by the Commission shall be audited by the Auditor-General and certified as to correctness by two Commissioners. When the Commission becomes a public company, the financial information shall be generally in accordance with the accounting requirements of the law relating to companies in the State or Territory of its incorporation, be audited in accordance with the provisions of that law and'certfied as to correctness by two Directors.
Department ofAboriginal Affairs: Percentage of 1980-81 Outlays Spent in May and June
(Question No, 2924)
Mr Rocher asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on ">..7 August 1981:
What percentage of total outlays for 1980-81 was spent by the Minister's Department in (a) May and (b) June 1981.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(a) 8.11 per cent.
(b) 6.93 per cent.


