House of Representatives Official Hansard
No. 125, 1981 Wednesday, 18 November 1981
THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT FIRST SESSION--THIRD PERIOD
BY AUTHORITY OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

THIRTY-SECOND PARLIAMENT

FIRST SESSION-THIRD PERIOD

Governor-General

His Excellency the Right Honourable Sir Zelman Cowen, a Member of Her Majesty's Most Honourable Privy Council, Knight of the
Order of Australia, Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of St Michael and St George, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Knight of the Most Venerable Order of the Hospital of St John of Jerusalem, one of Her Majesty's Counsel learned in the law, Governor-General of the Commonwealth of Australia and Commander-in-Chief of the Defence Force.

Fourth Fraser Ministry (Liberal Party-National Country Party Government)

-Prime Minister "Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and
Resources "Minister for Industry and Commerce -Minister for Communications and Leader of the House "Minister for National Development and Energy,
Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate "Minister for Foreign Affairs -Minister for Primary Industry "Treasurer -Minister for Defence -Minister for Finance
-Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister Assisting the Prime Minister
- Attorney-General "Minister for Social Security "Minister for Education and Minister Assisting the Prime
Minister in Federal Affairs Minister for Transport Minister for Health Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Minister for Science and Technology Minister for Administrative Services and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Defence Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs Minister for the Capital Territory and Minister Assisting
the Minister for Industry and Commerce Minister for Veterans' Affairs and Minister Assisting the
Treasurer Minister for Aboriginal Affairs and Minister Assisting
the Minister for National Development and Energy Minister for Housing and Construction and Minister
Assisting the Minister for Trade and Resources Minister for Home Affairs and Environment

The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, C.H. The Right Honourable John Douglas AnthQny
The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, KCMG. The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair Senator the Honourable John Leslie Carrick
The Honourable Anthony Austin Street The Honourable Peter James Nixon The Honourable John Winston Howard The Honourable Denis James Killen Senator the Honourable Dame Margaret Georgina Constance
Guilfoyle, D.B.E. The Honourable Robert Ian Viner
Senator the Honourable Peter Drew Durack, Q.c.
Senator the Honourable Frederick Michael Chaney The Honourable Wallace Clyde Fife
The Honourable Ralph James Dunnet Hunt The Honourable Michael John Randal MacKellar The Honourable Ian Malcolm Macphee - The Honourable David Scott Thomson, M.C. The Honourable Kevin Eugene Newman
The Honourable Neil Anthony Brown, Q.c.
The Honourable John Colinton Moore The Honourable William Michael Hodgman
Senatonhe Honourable Anthon~ John Messner
Senator the Honourable Peter Erne Baume
The Honourable Daniel Thomas McVeigh
The Honourable Ian Bonython Cameron Wilson

"Minister in the Cabinet

(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP)
(LP) (NCP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP) (LP)
(NCP) (LP)
(LP) (LP) (LP)
(LP)
(LP)
(NCP)
(LP)

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Country Party of Australia

Members of the House of Representatives

Speaker-The Right Honourable Sir Billy Mackie Snedden, K.e.M.G., QC. Chairman a/Committees and Deputy Speaker-Mr Percival Clarence Millar Deput)' Chairmen a/Committees-John Lindsay Armitage, the Honourable James Dona.ld Mathieson Dobie, Peter Hertford Drummond, Geoffrey O'Halloran Giles. Alan William Jarman, Henry Alfred Jenkins, the Honourable Charles Keith Jones and the Honourable Ian Louis Robinson
Leader a/the House-The Right Honourable Ian McCahan Sinclair Leader a/the Opposition-The Honourable William George Hayden DeplIl)' Leader of the Opposition and Manager ofOpposition Business-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen
PARTY LEADERS Leader oJthe Liberal Party oJ Australia-The Right Honourable John Malcolm Fraser, e.H. Deput), Leader oJthe Liberal Party ojAllstralia-The Right Honourable Sir Phillip Reginald Lynch, K.e.M.G. Leodera/the Nalional Country Party of Australia-The Right Honourable John Douglas Anthony DepulJ' uaderofthe NatiollalCountry Par/yofAustra(ia-The Right Honourable Ian McCahon Sinclair
Leader of the Australian Lobor Party-The Honourable William George Hayden Deputy Leader of the Australian Labor PartJ'-The Honourable Lionel Frost Bowen

Member
Adermann, Hon. Albert Evan Anthony, Rt Hon. John Douglas Armitage, John Lindsay Baume. Michael Ehrenrried Beazley, Kim Christian Birney, Reginald John Blewell. Dr Neal Bourchier, John William Bowen. Hon. Lionel Frost Bradfield, James Mark Braithwaite, Raymond Allen Brown, John Joseph Brown, Neil Anthony, Q.e. Brown, Robert James Bungey, Melville Harold Burr. Maxwell Arthur Cadman, Alan Glyndwr Cameron, Donald Milner Cameron, Ewen Colin Cameron, Ian Milne Dixon Campbell, Graeme Carlton, James Joseph Cass, Hon. Moses Henry Chapman, Hedley Grant Pearson Charles, David Ernest
Child,Joan Cohen. Barry Coleman, William Peter Connolly, David Miles Cowan, David Bruce Cross, Manfred Douglas Cunningham, Barry Thomas Darling, Elaine Elizabeth Dawkins, John Sydney Dean, Arthur Gordon Dobie, Han. James Donald Mathieson Drummond, Peter Hertrord Duffy, Michael John Edwards, Dr Harold Raymond Everingham, Han. Douglas Nixon Falconer. Peter David Fife, Hon. Wallace Clyde Fisher, Peter Stanley
Fraser, Rt Hon. John Malcolm, e.H. Free, Ross Vincent Fry, Kenneth Lionel Giles, Geoffrey Q'Halioran Good luck, Bruce John Groom, Hon. Raymond John
Hall, Raymond Steele Harris, Graham McDonald Hawke, Robert James Lee, A.e. Hayden, Hon. William George Hicks, Noel Jeffrey Hodges, John Charles
Hodgman, Hon. William Michael Holding, Allen Clyde Howard, Han. John Winston Howe, Brian Leslie Humphreys, Benjamin Charles Hunt, Hon. Ralph James Dunnet Hurford, Christopher John Hyde, John Martin Innes, Utquhart Edward

Division

Party

Fisher,Qld
Richmond, N.S.W. Chiftey, N.S.W. Macatthur, N.S.W. Swan, WA. Phillip, N.S.W. Bonython, SA Bendigo, Vic. Kingsford-Smith, N.S. W. Barton, N.S.W. Dawson,Qld Parramatla, N.S.W. Diamond Valley, Vic.
Hunter, N.S. W. Canning, WA. Wilmot, Tas. Mitchell, N.S.W. Fadden, Qld
Indi, Vic. Maranoa, Qld Kalgoorlie, WA.
Mackellar, N.S.W. Maribyrnong, Vic. Kingston, S.A. Isaacs, Vic.
Henty, Vic. Robertson, N.S. W.
Wentwotth, N.S.W. Bradfield, N.S.W. Lyne,N.S.W. Brisbane, Qld McMillan, Vic.
Lilley, Qld Fremantle, WA. Herbert, Qld Cook, N.S.W. Forrest, WA. ,
Holt,Vic. Berowra, N.S.W. Capricornia, Qld Casey, Vic. Faner, N.S. W. Mallee, Vic. Wannon, Vic. Macquarie, N.S.w. Fraser, A.e.T. Wakefield, S.A. Franklin, Tas. Braddon, Tas. Boothby, SA Chisholm, Vic. Wills, Vic. Oxley,Qld. Riverina, N.S. W.
Petrie,Qld Denison, Tas. Melbourne Ports, Vic. Bennelong, N.S.W. Batman, Vic. Griffith,Qld Gwydir, N.S.W.
Adelaide, SA Moore,WA. Melbourne, Vic.

NCP
NCP ALP LP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP LP NCP ALP LP
ALP LP LP LP LP LP
NCP ALP LP ALP
LP ALP ALP ALP LP
LP NCP ALP
ALP ALP ALP LP LP LP
ALP LP ALP
Ll' LP NCP
LP ALP ALP LP LP LP
LP LP ALP ALP NCP LP
LP ALP LP ALP ALP NCP
ALP LP ALP

Member
Jacobi, Ralph Jarman, Alan William Jenkins, Dr Henry Alfred Johnson, Hon. Leslie Royston Jones, Barry Owen Jones, Hon. Charles Keith Jull, David Francis Kauer, Hon. Robert Cummin Keating, Hon. Paul John Kelly, Roslyn Joan Kent, Lewis Kerin, John Charles Killen, Hon. Denis James Klugman, Dr Richard Emanuel Lloyd, Bruce Lusher, Stephen Augustus Lynch, Rt Hon. Sir Phillip Reginald,
K.e.M.G. MacKellar, Hon. Michael John Randal MacKenzie, Alexander John McLean, Ross Malcolm McLeay, Leo Boyce McMahon, James Leslie McMahon, Rt Hon. Sir William,
G.C.M.G., e.H.
McVeigh, Hon. Daniel Thomas Macphee, Hon. Ian Malcolm Mildren, John Barry Millar, Percival Clarence Milton, Peter Moore, Hon. John Colinton Morris, Peter Frederick Morrison, Han. William Lawrence Mounlford,John Graham Newman, Han. Kevin Eugene Nixon, Han. Peter James O'Keefe, Frank Lionel, A.M. Peacock, Han. Andrew Sharp Parler, James Robert Robinson, Han. Ian Louis Rocher, Allen Charles Ruddock, Philip Maxwell Sainsbury, Murray Evan Scholes, Gordon Glen Denton Scoll, John Lyden Shack, Peter Donald Shipton, Roger Francis Sinclair, Rt Hon.lan McCahon Snedden, Rt Hon. Sir Billy
Mackie, KCMG., Q.e. Spender, John Michael, Q.e. Street. Han. Anthony Austin TJlmbling, Grant Ernest John Theophanous, Dr Andrew Charles Thomson, Hon. David Scoll, M.e.
Tuckey, Charles Wilson Uren, Han. Thomas Viner, Han. Robert Ian Wallis, Laurie George West, Stewart John White, Peter Nicholson Duckell, M.e.
Willis,Ralph Wilson, Han. Ian Bonython Cameron Young, Michael Jerome

Division
Hawker,S.A. Deakin, Vic. Scullin, Vic. Hughes, N.S.W. Lalor, Vic. Newcastle, N.s.W. Bowman,Qld Kennedy, Qld Blaxland, N.S. W. Canberra, A.e.T. Hotham, Vic. Werriwa, N.S.W. Moreton, Qld Prospect, N.S.W. Murray, Vic. Hume, N.S.W.
Flinders, Vic. Watringah, N.S.W. Calare, N.S. W. Perth, WA. Grayndler, N.S.W. Sydney, N.S. W.
Lowe, N.S.W. Darling Downs, Qld Balaclava, Vic. Ballarat, Vic. Wide Bay, Qld La Trobe, Vic. Ryan,Qld Shorlland, N.S.W. St George, N.S.W. Banks, N.S.W. Bass, Tas. Gippsland, Vic. Paterson, N.S.W. Kooyong, Vic. Barker, S.A. Cowper, N.S.W. Curtin, WA. Dundas, N.S.W. Eden-Monaro, N.S.W. Corio, Vic. Hindmarsh, S.A. Tangney, WA. Higgins, Vic. New England, N.S.W.
Bruce, Vic. North Sydney, N.S.W. Corangamite, Vic. Northern Territory Burke, Vic. Leichhardt, Qld O'Connor, WA. Reid, N.S.w. Stirling, WA. Grey,S.A. Cunningham, N.S. W. McPherson, Qld Gellibrand, Vic. Sturt,S.A. Port Adelaide, S.A.

Party
ALP LP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP ALP ALP ALP ALP LP ALP NCP NCP
LP LP NCP LP ALP ALP
LP NCP LP ALP NCP ALP LP ALP ALP ALP LP NCP NCP LP LP NCP LP' LP LP ALP ALP LP LP NCP
LP LP LP NCP ALP NCP LP ALP LP ALP ALP LP ALP LP ALP

PARTY ABBREVIATIONS ALP-Australian Labor Party; LP-Liberal Party of Australia; NCP-National Counlry Party of Australia

THE COMMITTEES OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
STANDING COMMITTEES
ABORIGINAL AFFAIRS-Mr Ruddock (Chairman), Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins (to 8 September), Mr Groom, Mr Holding, Mr Ian Robinson, Mr Scott (from 8 September), Mr Tambling and Mr Tuckey.
ENVIRONMENT AND CONSERVATION-Mr Hodges (Chairman), Mr Burr, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Drummond, Mr Howe, Dr Jenkins, Mr MacKenzie and Mr West.
EXPENDITURE-Mr Lusher (Chairman), Chairman of the Joint Committee of Public Accounts or his nominee, Mr Braithwaite, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Dr Edwards, Mr Hyde, Mr McLean, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Morris, Mr Mountford and Mr Porter.
HousE-Mr Speaker, Mr John Brown, Mr Burr, Mr Jull, Mr Lusher, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Milton.
LIBRARY -Mr Speaker, Dr Blewett, Mr Chapman, Mr Hyde, Mr Barry Jones, Mr O'Keefe and Dr Theophanous. PRIVILEGES-Mr Oonald Cameron (Chairman), Leader of the House or his nominee, Deputy Leader of the Opposition or
his nominee, Mr Birney, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jarman, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Millar, Mr Porter and Mr Scholes. PUBLICATloNs-Mr Baume (Chairman), Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Dr Edwards, Mr Free, Mr Harris and Mr
Howe. ROAD SAFETY-Mr Katter (Chairman), Mr Chapman, Mrs Darling, Mr Good luck, Mr Groom, Mr Charles Jones, Mr
Morris and Mr Tuckey. STANDING ORDERs-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the Chairman of Committees, the Leader of the House, the Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, Mr Anthony, Mr Giles, Mr Hurford, Dr Jenkins, Mr Mountford, Mr Scholes and Mr Shack.
JOINT STATUTORY COMMITTEES
BROADCASTING OF PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS-Mr Speaker (Chairman), the President, Senator Hamer and Senator Douglas McClelland, and Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Fisher, Mr Jull, Mr Kent and Mr Scholes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS-Mr Connolly (Chairman), Chairman of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Expenditure, Senator Georges,Senator Lajovic and Senator Watson, and Mr Bradfield, Mr Duffy, Mrs Kelly, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Dr Theophanous.
PUBLIC WORKs-Mr Bungey (Chairman), Senator Foreman (from 25 August), Senator Kilgariffand Senator Martyr (from 25 August), and Mr Cowan, Mr Humphreys, Mr Innes, Mr Les McMahon and Mr Sainsbury.
JOINT COMMITTEES
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY-Senator Reid (Chairman), Senator Colston (from 9 September), Senator Georges, Senator Hamer (from 8 September), and Senator Robertson (to 9 September), and Mr Bradfield, Mr Coleman (from 20 August), Mr Dean (t020 August), Mr Dobie, Mr Fry, Mr Hicks and Mrs Kelly.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE-Mr Shipton (Chairman), Senator Bjelke-Petersen (from 23 September), Senator Elstob, Senator Hill (from 23 September), Senator Kilgariff (to 23 September), Senator McIntosh, Senator Martin (to 23 September), Senator Martyr (from 23 September), Senator Sibraa, Senator Teague (from 23 September), and Senator Young (to 23 September) and Mr Beazley, Mr Carlton, Mr Dobie, Mr Falconer, Mr Fry, Mr Holding, Mr Jacobi, Mr Jull, Mr Katter, Dr Klugman, Mr Lusher, Mr McLean and Mr Morrison.
NEW PARLIAMENT HOusE-The President and Mr Speaker (Joint Chairmen), the Mi~ister for the Capital Territory, Senator Colston, Senator Evans, Senator Martin (from 25 August), Senator Missen, Senator Sibra. and Senator Teague, and Mr Chapman, Mr Giles, Mr Keating, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lloyd and Mr Scholes.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEES
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE A: Parliament-Mr Speaker, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Hurford, Mr Les Johnson, Mr Barry Jones, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister assisting the Prime Minister), Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Holding, Mr Hurford, Mrs Kelly, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Mountford, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Foreign Affairs-Mr Street (Minister for Foreign Affairs), Mr Beazley, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Burr, Mr Connolly, Mr Fry, Mr Jacobi, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Peacock, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
Department of Defence-Mr Killen (Minister for Defence), Mr Burr, Mr Campbell, Mr Connolly, Mr Kerin, Mr MacKenzie, Mr Morrison, Mr Peacock, Mr Scholes, Mr Shipton and Mr Spender.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE B: Department of Social SecuritY-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport and Minister representing the Minister for Social Security), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Harris, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Mildren, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.

Department of Health-Mr MacKellar (Minister for Health), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mr Cunningham, Mr Harris, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Veterans' Affairs-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology and Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs), Mr Adermann, Dr Blewett, Mrs Darling, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Leo McLeay, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs-Mr Macphee (Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs), Mr Adennann, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Kent, Dr Klugman, Mr Lloyd, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
Department of Aboriginal Affairs-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs), Mr Adermann, Mr Campbell, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Holding, Mr Lloyd, Mr Milton, Mr Ruddock, Mr Tuckey and Mr White.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE C: Department of the Capital Territory-Mr Hodgman (Minister for the Capital Territory), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Dr Cass, Mr Coleman, Mr Fry, Mr Harris, Mrs Kelly, Mr Lusher and Mr Scholes.
Department of Home Affairs and Environment-Mr Wilson (Minister for Home Affairs and Environment), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Howe, Mr Lusher, Mr Uren and MrWest.
Department of Science and Technology-Mr Thomson (Minister for Science and Technology), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mrs Darling, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Mildren.
Department of Communications-Mr Sinclair (Minister for Communications), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Coleman, Mr Dawkins, Mr Harris, Mr Innes, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Lusher and Mr Wallis.
Department of Administrative Services-Mr Newman (Minister for Administrative Services), Mr Birney, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Carlton, Mr Charles, Mr Coleman, Mr Harris, Mr Humphreys, Mr Lusher, Mr Milton and Mr Scholes.
Attorney-Genera!'s Department-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations and Minister representing the Attorney General), Mr Birney, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Ian Cameron, Mr Coleman, Mr Dean, Mr Duffy, Mr Free, Mr Harris, Mr Holding and Mr Lusher.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE D: Department of the Treasury-Mr Howard (Treasurer). Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Shack, Mr Tambling and Mr Willis.
Department of Finance-Mr Howard (Treasurer and Minister representing the Minister for Finance), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Bungey, Mr Hurford, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Mildren, Mr Milton, Mr Shack and Mr Tambling.
Department of Transport-Mr Hunt (Minister for Transport), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Hyde, Mr Charles Jones, Mr Jull, Mr Morris, Mr Scott, Mr Shack, Mr Tamblingand Mr Wallis.
Department of Primary Industry-Mr Nixon (Minister for Primary Industry), Mr Braithwaite, Mr Bungey, Mr Ewen Cameron, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hyde, Mr Jull, Mr Kerin, Mr Mildren, Mr Tambling and Mr Wallis.
ESTIMA TES COMMITTEE E: Department of Employment and Youth Affairs-Mr N. A. Brown (Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Cunningham, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Mildren and Mr Peacock.
Department of Industrial Relations-Mr Viner (Minister for Industrial Relations), Mr Burr, Mr Charles, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Fisher, Mr Hawke, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Dr Theophanous.
Department of Education-Mr Fife (Minister for Education), Mr Beazley, Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Dawkins, Mr Fisher, Mr Free, Mr Barry Jones, Mr McLean and Mr Peacock.
Department of Housing and Construction-Mr McVeigh (Minister for Housing and Construction), Mr Burr, Mr Chapman, Mr Cowan, Mr Duffy, Mr Fisher, Mr Howe, Mr McLean, Mr Les McMahon, Mr Peacock and Mr Uren.
ESTIMATES COMMITTEE F: Department oflndustry and Commerce-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs acting for the Minister for Industry and Commerce), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Barry Jones, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Business and Consumer Affairs-Mr Moore (Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Cunningham, Mr Hicks, Mrs Kelly, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of Trade and Resources-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr John Brown, Mr Robert Brown, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Hurford, Mr Mountford, Mr O'Keefe and Mr Porter.
Department of National Development and Energy-Mr Anthony (Minister for Trade and Resources representing the Minister for National Development and Energy), Mr Baume, Mr Bradfield, Mr Chapman, Mr Hicks, Mr Howe, Mr Keating, Mr Milton, Mr O'Keefe, Mr Porter and Mr Uren.

PARLIAMENTARY DEPARTMENTS
SENATE
Clerk-K. O. Bradshaw Deputy Clerk-A. R. Cumming Thorn First Clerk-Assistant-H. C. Nicholls
Clerk-Assistant-H. G. Smith Principal Parliamentary Officer (TableJ-T. H. G. Wharton
Principal Parliamentary Officer (ProceduraIJ-H. Evans Usher of the Black Rod-P. N. Murdoch
Senior Clerk of Committees-R. G. Thomson
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
Clerk of the House-J. A. Petti fer, CBE. Deputy Clerk of the House-D. M. Blake, V.R.D.
First Clerk Assistant-A. R. Browning Clerk Assistant-L. M. Barlin
Operations Manager-I. C. Harris Senior Parliamentary Officers:
Serjeant-at-Arms Office-I. C. Cochran Procedure Office-J. K. Porter
Table Office (ProgrammingJ-B. C. Wright (Acting) Table Office (Bills and PapersJ-J. W. Pender (Acting)
Committee Office-M. Adamson
PARLIAMENTARY REPORTING STAFF
Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. W. Roberts Assistant Principal Parliamentary Reporter-J. M. Campbell
Leader ofStaJJ(HouseofRepresimtativesJ-R. T. Martin LeaderofStaJJ(SenateJ-N. Franzi
LIBRARY
Parliamentary Librarian-H. de S. C. MacLean (Acting)
JOINT HOUSE
Secrelary-J. M. Jorgensen

THE ACTS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Air Navigation (Charges) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 123 of 1981)An Act to amend the Air Navigation (Charges) Act 1952, and for related purposes.
Apple and Pear Export Charge Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 147 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Export Ch~rge Act 1976.
Apple and Pear Levy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1460f 1981)- An Act to amend the Apple and Pear Levy Act 1976.
Appropriation Act (No.1) 1981-82 (Act No. 1640f 1981)An Act to appropriate certain sums out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for the service of the year ending on 30 June 1982.
Appropriation Act (No.2) 1981-82 (Act No. 165 of 1981)An Act to appropriate a sum out of the Consolidated Revenue Fund for certain expenditure in respect of the year endingon 30June 1981.
Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 145 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Apple and Pear Corporation Act 1973.
Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 124 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Stamp Duty Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 126 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Cheques) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 125 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Insurance Business) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 130 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 6 of the Australian Capital Territory Tax (lnsurance Bus;ness) Act 1969.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Life Insurance Business) Act 1981 (Act No. 128 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of certain life insurance business having a connection with the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian Capital Territory Tax (Vehicle Registration) Act 1981 (Act No. 129 of 1981)An Act relating to the imposition of tax in respect of the registration of certain vehicles in the Australian Capital Territory.
Australian CapitalTerritory Taxation (Administration) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 127 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Capital Territory Taxation (Administration) Act 1969.
Australian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 150 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 50 of the Austrillian Meat and Live-stock Corporation Act 1977.
Australian National University Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1660f 1981)- An Act to amend the Australian Natiollal University Act 1946.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 168 of 1981)An Act to amend the Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.
Census and Statistics Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 177 of 1981)An Act to amend the Census and Statistics Act 1905, and for related purposes.
Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 151 of 1981)An Act to amend the Commerce (Trade Descriptions) Act 1905 in relation to the exportation of food.
Commonwealth Grants Commission Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 173 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973.
Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 153 of 1981)- An Act to amend laws relating to companies and securities and for related purposes.
Continental Shelf (Living Natural Resources) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 182 of 1981)An Act to amend the Continental Shelf(Living Natural Resources) Act 1968 to facilitate the collection of levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and of amounts payable under certain agreements, and for certain other purposes.
Crimes (Currency) Aat 1981 (Act No. 1220f 1981)An Act to make provision with respect to offences connected with the counterfeiting of money or certain kinds of securities and other activities injurious to Australian currency, and for related purposes.
Customs (Unlawful Exportation of Food) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 152 of 1981)- An Act ~to amend the Cllstoms Act 1901 in relation to the exportation of food.
Customs (Valuations) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 157 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Customs Act 1901.
Defence Acts Amendment Actl981 (Act No. 178 of 1981)- An Act to amend the law relat,ing to defence.

Derence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 144 or 1981)- An Act relating to retirement and death benefits in respect or members or the Derence Force.
Departure Tax Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 131 or 1981)An Act to amend the Departure Tax Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Departure Tax Collection Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 132 or 1981) An Act to amend the Departure Tax Collection Act 1978, and ror related purposes.
Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981 (Act No. 148 or 1981)An Act to provide ror confidentiality in relation to certain epidemiological studies.
Export Grants Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 119 or 1981)- An Act relating to export grants.
Fisheries Agreements (Payments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1800r 1981)- An Act relating to payments under certain fisheries agreements.
Fisheries Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 181 00981)An Act to amend the Fisheries Act 1952 to racilitate the collection or levy imposed by the Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 and or amounts payable under certain agreements, and ror certain other purposes.
Foreign Fishing Boats Levy Act 1981 (Act No. 179 or 1981)An Act to impose a levy on the grant or certain licences in respect or roreign fishing boats.
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 1750r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Income Tax (Companies, Corporate Unit Trusts and Superannuation Funds) Act 1981 (Act No. 156 or 1981)- An Act to impose a tax upon incomes or companies, corporate unit trusts and superannuation runds.
Income Tax (Indi dduals) Act 1981 (Act No. 15500981)An Act to impose a tax upon incomes, other than incomes or companies, or corporate unit trusts and or superannuation runds.
Income Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 143 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Income Tax (Internationa! Agreements) Act 1953.
Income Tax Laws Amendment Act(No. 3) 1981 (Act No. 1540r 1981)- An Act to amend the law relating to income tax.
Judges' Pensions Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 158 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Judges' Pensions Act 1968.
Meat Export (Penalties) Act 1981 (Act No. 149 or 1981)An Act to provide penalties ror certain offences against the Exports (Meat) Regulations.
National Health Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 163 or 1981)- An Act to amend the National Health Act 1953.
Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 174 or 1981)- An Act to amend section 3 or the Nitrogenous Fertilizers Subsidy Act 1966.
Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 161 or 1981)An Act to amend the Non-government Schools (Loans Guarantee) Act 1977, and ror related purposes.
Norrolk Island Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 12000981)- An Act to amend the Norfolk Island Act 1979.
Queensland Grant (Special Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 172 or 1981)- An Act to grant financial assistance to Queensland.
Remuneration and Allowances Amendment Act 198i (Act No. 121 00981)- An Act relating to certain remuneration and allowances.
Repatriation Acts Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 16000981)- An Act relating to repatriation and related matters.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.1) 1981 (Act No. 1330r 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No. I) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 13400981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.2) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.3) 1981 (Act No. 13500981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.3) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.4) 1981 (Act No. 13600981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.4) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.5) 1981 (Act No. 137 or 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.5) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.6) 1981 (Act No. 138 or 1981)-
An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.6) 1930.

Sales Tax Amendme~t Act (No.7) 1981 (Act No. 1390f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.7) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.8) 1981 (Act No. 1400f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.8) 1930.
Sales Tax Amendment Act (No.9) 1981 (Act No. 141 of 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax Act (No.9) 1930.
Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 1420f 1981)- An Act to amend the Sales Tax (Exemptions and Classifications) Act 1935.
Social Services Amendment Act 1981 (Act No. 159 of 1981)An Act to amend the Social Services Act 1947, and for related purposes.
Social Services Amendment Act (No.2) 1981 (Act No. 170 of 1981)- An Act to amend section 105A of the Social Services Act 1947.
States Grants (Capital Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 171 ofl981)An Act to grant financial assistance to the States in connection with expenditure of a capital nature and to authorize the borrowing of certain moneys by the Commonwealth.
States Grants (Schools Assistance) Act 1981 (Act No. 1620f 1981)An Act relating to the grant of financial assistance to the States and the Northern Territory for and in relation to schools and other matters.
States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act(No. 2) 1981 (Act No. 167 of 1981')- An Act to amend the States Grants (Tertiary Education Assistance) Act 1981.
Statute Law (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 (Act No. 1760f 1981)An Act to make various amendments of the statute law of the Commonwealth.
Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1981 (Act No. 169 of 1981)An Act to amend the Television Stations Licence Fees Act 1964, and for related purposes.

THE BILLS OF THE SESSION
(FIRST SESSION: THIRD PERIOD)
Acts Interpretation Amendment Bill (No.2) 1980Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Broadcasting Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill (No.2) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Crimes Amendment Bill 1981__ )nitiated in the Senate. First Reading.
-Domicile Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Domicile (Consequential Amendments) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Dried Sultana Production Underwriting Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Read...g.
Freedom of Information Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
Institute of Freshwater Studies Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Insurance (Agents and Brokers) Bill 1981Initiated in the Senate. First Reading.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Plant Variety Rights Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Public Service Acts Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. First Reading.
Patents Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Sales Tax Amendment Bills (Nos. IA-9A) 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.
Television Stations Licence Fees Amendment Bill 1981Initiated in the House of Representatives. Third Reading.

Petitions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2989

Wednesday, 18 November 1981
Mr SPEAKER (Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden) took the chair at 1.45 p.m., and read prayers.
PETITIONS
The Clerk-Petitions have been lodged for presentation as follows and copies will be referred to the appropriate Ministers:
Funding of Children's Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of certain citizens respectFully showeth:
That Federal Funding of children's services which has been reduced by almost 50 per cent in real terms over the last five years should be restored Forthwith to at least 1975-76 level in real terms so that children's services can be more equitably provided throughout Australia.
That Budget allocations For children's services be spent in Full For the purposes designated.
That current plans to impose a means test on the users of child care services will place them out of the reach of the bulk of the users and should be dropped Forthwith.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Birney, Mr Bungey, Mr Carlton, Mrs Child, Mr Coleman, Mr Dawkins, Mr Fry, Mrs Kelly, Mr Morris, Mr West and Mr Young.
Petitions received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members oFthe House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth:
That your petitioners are gravely concerned by the proposed imposition of Sales Tax on items concerned with educational books, clothing, Footwear, newspapers, buildings and Food wrappings, as these sales taxes impose a Further burden on home builders; Families and children; inhibit the Free How of inFormation through books and newspapers; and reduce employment opportunities.
Your pPetitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives, in Parliament assembled, should exempt these items From the proposed Sales Tax legislation, as requested by the Senate.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Adermann, Mr Braithwaite, Mr Free and MrJull.
Petitions received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the proposed imposition of Sales Tax on items concerned with home building, clothing, Footwear, books and newspapers, wrapping For Food.
Your petitioners thereFore humbly call upon the Federal Parliament to exempt these items From the proposed Sales

Tax as requested by the Senate to avoid such taxes on necessities of liFe becoming a Further burden on home builders, families and children or inhibiting the Free How of inFormation through books and newspapers or reducing employment opportunities For people in the industries concerned and beyond.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Birney, Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Bradfield and MrFree.
Petitions received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectFully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at the proposed imposition of Sales Tax on items concerned with home building, clothing, Footwear, books and newspapers, wrapping for Food.
Your petitioners thereFore humbly call upon the Federal Parliament to exempt these items from the proposed Sales Tax as requested by the Senate to avoid such taxes on necessities of life becoming a further burden on home builders, Families and children or inhibiting the Free How of inFormation through books and newspapers or reducing employment opportunities for people in the industries concerned and beyond.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Donald Cameron, Mr Ewen Cameron and MrMildren.
Petitions received.
Sales Tax on Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That Librarians and library users throughout the nation call for the exemption of books, periodicals and newspapers from the imposition of sales taxes.
The tax exempt status of libraries and schools will not protect them From general cost increases which sales tax and its collection will cause. Indeed, exemption claims on millions of items per year will themselves add to the cost burden of both libraries and suppliers.
This tax is socially injurious and unworkable, and a burden on education, science and culture.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.
Sales Tax on Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Government's decision to impose a tax on books, magazines and newspapers is abhorrent to the notion of the right to information, and that no such tax is levied on any other country with which Australia is usually compared.
Your petitioners therefore humbly. pray that the Government will withdraw its announced intention to impose a sales tax on books, magazines and newspapers.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

2990 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Petitions

by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Sales Tax on Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Government's decision to impose a tax on books, magazines and newspapers particularly educational publications and books of a religious nature, is abhorrent to the notion of the right to information, a clear infringement of our democratic freedom, and that no such tax is levied on any other country with which Australia is usually compared.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will withdraw its announced intention to impose a sales tax on books, magazines and newspapers.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Dr Everingham, Mr Free, Mr Hurford and Mr Wallis.
Petitions received.
Sales Tax on Publications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Commonwealth of Australia in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the proposed sales tax of 2.5 per cent on books, magazines and newspapers represents a tax on knowledge which should not be contemplated in a civilised country. Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that this proposed sales tax be withdrawn from the budget proposals.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hurford.
Petition received.
Sales Tax on Publications
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
We, the undersigned, wish to protest against the Federal Government's proposed 2t per cent Sales Tax on books, newspapers and magazines. This proposed tax is a tax on knowledge and an impediment to the free flow of information.
We respectfully request that these items be exempted from the Sales Tax provisions.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Hurford.
Petition received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully shows that:
I. The 17.5 per cent sales tax on pet foods places unreasonable financial strain on pensioners and other pet owners.
2. A pet is not a luxury item for many owners, it fills a vital part of their lives and, in many cases, is therapeutically beneficial, particularly for families and pensioners.
3. The added financial strain may cause many people to abandon or otherwise dispose of their pets, thus adding to the distress of already disadvantaged people and further overloading the resources of animal welfare societies.

4. In view of the abandonment of sales tax on veterinary drugs, it seems inconsistent to tax pet foods when food is as much a basic need as medicines.
We therefore request that this tax on pet food be immediately withdrawn.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Lionel Bowen, Mr Humphreys, Dr Klugman, Mr Leo McLeay and Mr Morrison.
Petitions received.
Diabetics: Insulin
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectively showeth:
That in view.of the recent standardisation of insulin and insulin syringes; having the effect of increasing the cost of both items to the Diabetic in general, and as every insulindependent Diabetic must use the same, daily or twice daily according to medication.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that syringes be made available on the N.H.S. and that insulin prescriptions revert to 10 bottles as previously supplied.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child and Dr Theophanous.
Petitions received.
Family Allowances
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. Because of an anomaly in tax rates a single income family pays nearly $10 a week more tax than a dual income family earning the same total amount.
2. Family allowances established in 1976 have not been increased since then, yet over the same period living costs have increased by nearly 60%.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that:
The Parliament should act-
I. To restore the lost value of family allowances and to index them for future price rises.
2. To increase the spouse rebate from $830 to $1,342 per year.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling and Mr Falconer.
Petitions received.
Moreton Island: Sand Mining
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. That sand mining on Moreton Island poses a threat to the natural ecology or environment.
2. That Moreton Island is included on the list of the Australian Heritage Commission, and the Federal Government is urged and indeed it must, under the Australian Heritage Commission Act 1975, take into consideration the protection of the island.

Petitions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2991

3. That the Queensland Government has recently renewed mining leases against the advice of conservationists and a State Government sponsored Public Inquiry.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray .that the House will request the Government to refuse requests for export permits covering mineral sand products.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling and Mr Humphreys.
Petitions received.

Plant Breeders' Rights

To the Honourable The Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.

We, the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth, do humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government:

I. Note that legislation establishing plant breeders' rights in other countries has had serious adverse effects, namely:

a. Virtual monopoly control of seed production has passed into the hands of a few large international corporations seeking to profit from the exclusive rights over plant genetic materials created by such legislation.

b. The varieties of seeds available have been restricted mainly to hybrids which will not reproduce truly and
will not grow without the aid of artificial fertilizers and pesticides, thus maximising corporate profits without regard for the interests of growers and consumers.

c. The genetic diversity of crops has been eroded, render-
ing them vulnerable to disease and other environmental threats.

2. Recognise that maintenance of the genetic diversity of plant varieties is crucial to the continued well-being of the
Australian nation, and take all necessary steps to preserve and promote such genetic diversity as a public resource and to prevent exclusive control over plant genetic materials from faIl-
ing into private hands.

3. Defend the vital interests of Australian farmers and gar-
deners, independent Australian seed companies and their employees, and consumers of Australian farm and garden pro-
duce, by rejecting any proposal to legislate for the establishment of plant breeders' rights in Australia.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mr Duffy and Mr Humphreys.

Petitions received.

Unemployment Benefits

To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the
undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:

That, as it is clear that unemployment is a long term prob-

lem in Australia, the Government should extend to the unem-

ployed the same assistance as is given to any other disadvan-

taged member of the community. There is an urgent need to

alleviate the financial hardship and emotional stress that the

unemployed are suffering.

.

Your petitioners therefore pray:

I. That the Government adopt positive policies to reduce unemployment,

2. That the basic Unemployment Benefit be raised to at least the level of the poverty line as calculated by Pro-
fessor Henderson,

3. In line with other Social Service additional income awards, and in order to encourage work creation schemes and the fostering of initiative and self respect,

that the $6 per week additional income limit be raised to at least $20 per week,
4. That the financial penalties above the earning of $20 per week, assessed on a monthly basis, be calculated at the same rate as other Social Security benefits.
5. That the Commonwealth grant subsidies to state governments so that the unemployed can be granted transport concessions in order that they are not penalised injob seeking.
6. That pharmaceutical and medical concessions be granted to the unemployed equivalent to those received by other Socia I Service beneficiaries.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Armitage.
Petition received.

Department of Housing and Construction
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
The humble petition of we, the undersigned citizens of Australia and building, construction and maintenance artesans employed by the Department of Housing and Construction respectfully showeth-
That the dramatic decisions, to dismantle efficient and viable depots and to replace loyal and long serving workers with workers employed by private enterprise, be reversed. In the interests of our national security, government employees, who have been security checked should be the people to work on and within Defence and other government establishments. The trust and reliance placed on us, should not be_ cheaply disregarded.
Your petitioners therefore humbly ask that the harsh decisions of the Review of Commonwealth Functions Committee, be reversed and that common sense will prevail.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever request.
by Mr Armitage.
Petition received.

Family Care Centre, Shalvey
To the Honourable, the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth-
That Save the Children Fund Family Care Centre at Shalvey, New South Wales requires financial support in order to continue providing the Parent and Child Education Programme which has proved over more than six years to be wanted and needed by this community.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House take action.
'And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Armitage.
Petition received.

Interest Rates

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of

Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the

undersigned respectfully showeth:

.

That we request that the Government take immediate steps to relieve us of the burden of increasing mortgage costs result-
ing from increasing home loan interest rates.

2992 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Petitions

We find that the resultant increases in our mortgage payments have unduly caused a reduction in our standard of living, reflected in the severe difficulty we are experiencing meeting our household budgetry commitments.
Your petitioners most humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, should amend the relevant taxation Acts to provide for deduction of home loan interest payments with the necessary adjustments to PAYE deductions to give immediate relief to home buyers.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley.
Petition received.
Proposed Sinai Peacekeeping Force
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
I. bipartisan concern exists in the Australian community over involvement of Australian military forces in the Middle East where those forces are not under United Nations auspices;
2. concern is also evident about Australia's military capacity to provide those forces without weakening Australia's defence;
3. Sinai is not an area within Australia's sphere of influence; and
4. Australian agricultural export markets may be adversely affected by Australian military participation in Sinai.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Parliament does not ratify Australian military participation in the proposed Sinai peacekeeping force, un less that force is fully controlled by the United Nations.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley.
Petition received.
Proposed Casino in Canberra
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the establishment of a gambling casino in Canberra would debase the National Capital and increase crime in Canberra.
Your peititioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, should seek to preserve the dignity of the National Capital by disallowing any ordinance to authorise the establishment of a gambling casino in Canberra.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Ew'en Cameron.
Petition received.
Health Care Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled the petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the decrease in Federal Government funding for health, transfer of Commonwealth responsibility to the States, application of the 'user' pay principle to health services and encouragement of private business and profits in the health sphere will inevitably lead to a downgrading of health services

and increasing health risks among people who cannot afford health insurance or private payment of doctors and hospitals.
That the cuts in Federal Government spending resulting from the recommendations of the Cabinet Sub-Committee of Review of Government Functions (Razor Gang) will lead to an increase in unemployment and a general deterioration in comrrlUnity services and living standards.
Therefore your petitioners urge that:
I. The Government continue Commonwealth funding of health services at an improved, and certainly not a lesser, level than that operating prior to I September 1981.
2. That recommendations of the Cabinet Sub-Committee of Review of Government Functions (Razor Gang) be not proceeded with.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Bradfield.
Petition received.

Motor Vehicle Industry
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled; the humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully sheweth that the proposed changes to assistance to the passenger motor vehicle and components industries after 1984 shall lead to the collapse of the vehicle manufacturing industry in Australia. Your petitioners therefore pray that the industries assistance commission report be not given effect.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Child.
Petition received.

Funding of Child Care Centres

To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of Australian Parliament assembled.

Your Petitioners most humbly pray that the Parliament Assembled takes action as it deems appropriate;

a. to ensure that funding in the area of child care will not be cut or reduced.

b. to ensure that the Children's Service Programme Manual interpretation of the Child Care Act 1972-73 be altered to allow part time occasional care centres to be funded as it seems possible under the Act Section
4(1) a.

c. to ensure that funds are allocated to half day occasional care centres which are meeting the needs of mothers
who stay at home to care for their children.

Your petitioners, therefore humbly request that Parliament

Assembled take immediate and positive action on the above

mentioned issues.

.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

by Mrs Child.

Petition received.

South West Tasmania Wilderness Areas
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned at proposed future hydro-electric developments in South West Tasmania. This area is on the Register of the National Estate and therefore is of national concern.

Petitions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2993

Your petitioners therefore humbly call upon the Federal Parliament not to allocate funds or allow funds to be raised for development of roads or dams in the South West of Tasmania but rather to provide such funds as would enable the preservation of this area. This is a national issue and therefore Tasmanians should not be made to bear any financial burden resulting from its preservation.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Coleman.
Petition received.
Sales Tax on Publications
To the Right Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled:
We, the undersigned, register our strong opposition to the Federal Government's proposed 2t per cent Sales Tax on books. This proposed tax is a tax on knowledge and communication. We therefore request that books continue to be Sales Tax exempt.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Coleman.
Petition received.
Funding of Women's ,Centres
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That women's refuges have provided on a 24 hour a day basis emergency accommodation, child care, financial aid, moral support, legal advice and guidance in dealing with government departments for over 13,000 women and children in the past year at a cost to the national Government substantially less than $4m which is half the cost of holding the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in Australia later this year.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government wiII not proceed with its stated intention to withdraw from funding women's refuges and pass this responsibility to ill-equipped and sometimes unsympathetic State Governments and will increase federal funding levels for women's refuges.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Telegram Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Government and Telecom management have presided over the deliberate scaling down of Australia's telegram services, to the disadvantage of those poorer people in the community who cannot afford telex or telephone facilities and rely on the telegram service in time of emergency;
That the Government and Telecom management have undermined the telegram service by increasing the unit cost of telegrams by over 130 per cent in four years with the result that the use of telegrams as a form of communication has fallen by approximately 60 per cent in that time.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government and Telecom management retain the telegram service at a standard and cost that will not disadvantage the ordinary citizen.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Pancrease: Australian Drug Evaluation Committee
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That tests performed at the Royal Childrens Hospital, Brisbane, indicate that the drug, Pancrease, can provide significant relief and assistance to suffers of cystic fibrosis.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Government will require the processing of the drug, Pancrease, by the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee of the Department of Health, as a matter of high priority.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petitiof received.
Curfew at Eagle Farm Airport
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The undersigned citizens of A ustralia respectfully showeth:
That noise levels created by aircraft using Eagle Farm Airport already constitute an annoyance and inconvenience to those residents living near the airport and along flight paths.
That relaxation of the Eagle Farm Airport curfew to allow any aircraft including T AA's airbus to fly into and out of Eagle Farm Airport between 11 pm and 6 am would-
(a) Substantially increase the inconvenience and annoyance caused by aircraft noise because the operation of aircraft at this time would seriously disturb people's sleep;
(b) Contradict and negate a commendable undertaking made by the Commonwealth Minister for Transport, the Hon. Ralph Hunt, in reply to a question on notice in the Parliament, that the curfew will remain on the runways at the existing site at Eagle Farm Airport.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Commonwealth Government will not approve the application of TAA-or any other airline-to relax or withdraw the curfew at Eagle Farm Airport.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) the financial situation of students enrolled at Australian post-secondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) The imposition of tuition fees for second degrees and post-graduate degrees will deter many able persons

2994 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Petitions

from enrolling-such courses and further preserve higher education for the rich.
(iii) The introduction of a loans scheme, subsequent review of the level of TEAS and the tightening of the eligibility criteria for TEAS will cause great financial hardship and will deter students from enrolling in tertiary institutions.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
I. post-secondary tuition fees not be reintroduced for any courses or for any category of students.
2.. the visa charges upon private overseas students be removed immediately.
3. the Government reverse its decision to intorduce a loans scheme and instead increase and extend TEAS scheme.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled, the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the single parent is part of the most disadvantaged section of the community, that 73 per cent of single parents will not be assisted by the restricted increase in family allowance, that neither the guardian's allowance nor the child allowance is indexed, that sales tax increases on such basic essentials as clothing and shoes will severely disadvantage single ?arents.
That a single parent with one child receives $66.65 per week plus $6.00 guardian's allowance, plus $10.00 child allowance and $3.80 family allowance (totalling $86.45) compared to a married pensioner couple's combined weekly income of$l I 1.10.
That the means test for a married pensioner couple is $34.50, compared to $26.00 for a single parent with one child.
That a married pensioner couple's income, if shared, will not be taxable, whereas a single parent, even with the lone parent rebate, will pay $386 tax.
And finally that, while agreeing that pensions are inadequate to meet rising prices, comparisons between age and invalid pensions and widows pension indicate even greater disadvantage being suffered by single parents.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray:
That the Government will increase the amount of widows pension and supporting parent benefit, index the guardian's allowance, child's allowance and family allowance, raise the tax-free threshold for income tax, and remove the sales tax increase announced in the budget from essential items.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
that the amount of permissable extra private income before the age and invalid pensions is reduced was last increased in September 1972, and that a relaxation of the means test is long overdue.
And your petitioners therefore humbly pray:

that the Government will increase the means test for pensions to the same relative level as applied in 1972, taking into account increases in the cost of living in excess of 100 per cent.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That public investment in tertiary education in the form of Federal Government funding is an investment in Australia's future and enables Australia to meet the demands of technological innovation;
That grave concern has been generated as a result of the Government's decision to:
(a) abolish the Education Research and Development Committee,
(b) terminate special support for educational research,
(c) scale down in-house and contracted research activities of the Department of Education,
(d) scale down participation in international education activities, particularly UNESCO and DECO,
(e) further tighten already restrictive eligibility guidelines for TEAS,
(f) supplement TEAS assistance by means of a loan scheme,
(g) phase in tuition fees for students undertaking degrees and diplomas subsequent to an initial tertiary qualification,
(h) reduce grants to univerSities and colleges to take account of fee income,
(i) completely abolish 30 colleges of advanced education and
Ul scale down various engineering schools in colleges of
advanced education around Australia.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will rescind these regressive decisions and desist from obvious attempts to pave the way for a complete reintroduction of tertiary fees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
The Federal Government should provide sufficient funds for State Education Systems that will ensure the maintenance of the current high quality of Education and the continuance of educational services to all children in a happy and stress free environment.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Drummond.
Petition received.

Petitions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2995

Narellan House, Australian Capital Territory
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The petition of the undersigned respectfully showeth:
That the lease on Narellan House is due to be handed back to the Department of the Capital Territory on 4 December 1981.
Your Petitioners most humbly pray that Mr Hodgman should act to lease Narellan House to the Canberra College of Technical and Further Education so that Narellan House will remain as a student residence.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Fry.
Petition received.
La Boite Theatre, Brisbane
To the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
I. The decision by the Australia Council to discontinue the General Grant of $20,000 (which is in the nature of recurrent funding) to La Boite Theatre, Brisbane, will jeopardise the continued viability of the theatre, and in particular, the Main House Theatre; Adult Theatre Workshops; Youth Theatre activities and the existence of the professional core of the theatre.
2. The decision has been taken without sufficient consultation and without giving sufficient notice to La Boite Administration.
3. The absence of Federal Government funding will mean the loss to Brisbane of genuine community-oriented and community-based projects and of the regular presentation of Australian plays.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to cause the Theatre Board's General Grant of $20,000 to La Boite Theatre to be reinstated without delay.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Brisbane International Airport
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia showeth:
(a) That residents of densely populated suburbs in the vicinity of the airport and residents of other suburbs in the flight path of international and domestic jets are experiencing an unreasonable degree of aircraft noise.
(b) Further, that these same residents will be SUbjected to prolonged bouts of such aircraft noise if a decision is taken to extend the curfew at both the domestic and international airports,
(c) That this decision has been foreshadowed on two occasions as follows:
(i) In submissions to the.public hearing held by the Public Works Committee of this Parliament in regard to Stage 6ne-Redevelopment of Brisbane's International Airport; these submissions proposed an extension of the existing curfew when the new runway is completed (approximately 1986). This proposal received the full support of the Queensland Government.

(ii) TAA's request for an extended curfew to coincide with the introduction of the Airbus.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Government will refuse to extend the existing curfew and will reconsider its siting plans for the proposed new runway so as to minimise noise pollution over high density suburbs.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Sales T~x Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That the Budget imposition of 2+ per cent additional sales tax to both existing sales tax items and to previously exempt goods
(a) will add to the regressivity of the tax structure by imposing a similar. burden on all sections of the community-regardless of the capacity to pay tax;
(b) will be highly inflationary and a disincentive to economic performance in key sectors of manufacturing industry, e.g. car manufacturing, textile and footwear industries;
(c) is yet another breach of Government promise, given the Treasurer's undertaking in the Parliament on March 12 of this year that there would be no increases in indirect taxes.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House will request the Government to repeal the Budget Amendments to Sales Tax Legislation which increases existing saleS-tax items from 19th August and to withdraw its Sales Tax Amendment Bills which add Sales Tax to presently exempt goods as from I January 1982.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Export of Live Animals
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
There is an urgent need that the Australian Government immediately upgrade the Regulations concerning exportation of animals overseas for slaughter and that there is unnecessary suffering caused to the animals under the present system.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that: the Parliament of Australia will amend the Legislation to
ensure that the animals being exported be done so h umanely and that, until this is achieved a total ban be placed on the export of animals for slaughter. Further, it is requested that the export of horses be stopped.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will every pray.
by Mr Humphreys.
Petition received.
Self-government for the Australian Capital Territory
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:

2996 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Petitions

I. Residents of the Australian Capital Territory are the only Australians who have taxation without representation at State and local government level;
2. ACT residents are amongst the highest per capita income tax payers in Australia yet do not participate in the Commonwealth Government's tax sharing arrangements with the States and the Northern Territory (including local government grants).
3. Responsibility for raising and spending State-type and municipal taxes and charges should be vested in elected local representatives.
4. It is inappropriate for members of the Federal Parliament to continue to deal with local matters in the ACTmembers of the governing body responsible for such matters should live in the ACT and be accountable to the residents of the ACT.
Accordingly, your petitioners call upon their legislators to confer on the Australian Capital Territory State-like self government established on a sound financial basis which is to be agreed between elected representatives of the ACt and the Commonwealth Government.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Kelly.
Petition received.
Trans Australia Airlines
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
Many Australians depend almost exclusively upon Trans Australia Airlines for the provision of essential air services.
The Federal Liberal Party policy objective of selling Trans Australia Airlines within 4 years is contrary to the national interest.
Sales of Trans Australia Airlines would inevitably result in-'--
(i) the creation of a private monopoly of major airline services in Australia
(ii) higher domestic air fares.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to sell Trans Australia Airlines.
by MrKent.
Petition received.
Pensions
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled.
The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is not fulfilling its responsibility in ensuring an adequate standard of living for all Australians, which is causing untold hardship on relief agencies' limited resources, and require the following steps to be taken as a 'matter of urgency:
I. That the Commonwealth Government raise the levei'of all pensions and benefits at least to the poverty line.
2. That the Commonwealth Government reconsider its recent decisions in relation to the health system and cuts to Commonwealth activity.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action to avert further poverty and suffering in our community by implementation of the above measures.

And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
byMrKent.
Petition received.
Tertiary Education
To the Honourable the Speaker and Memoers of the House of Representatives in the Parliament assembled. This petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth that:
(i) the financial situation of students enrolled at Australian post-secondary institutions is already extremely difficult (as indicated in the Commonwealth Department of Education's 1979 survey of student incomes and expenditure) and any substantial increase in the financial commitments of students would gravely worsen their financial difficulties.
(ii) the imposition of post-secondary tuition fees of comparable levels to those imposed prior to 1971 would force many currently enrolled students to discontinue their studies and deter many persons willing and able at present to undertake post-secondary study from doing so.
(iii) those students and potential students from social groups currently underrepresented and disadvantaged in the post secondary education system would be most severely affected by the reintroduction of fees for post-secondary education.
Your petitioners therefore pray that:
I. post-secondary tuition fees not be reintroduced for any courses or for any category of students
2. the visa charges upon private overseas students be removed immediately
3. the Minister of Education immediately clarify the government's attitude to the reintroduction of postsecondary tuition fees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound shall ever humbly pray.
by Mr Kent.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled, the humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Commonwealth respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade postal and mail services throughout Australia will place in jeopardy the existing services and the security of the mails by:
downgrading a large number of official post offices reducing the number of post offices open for business during the lunch period reducing the number of street posting boxes delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified staff using private contractors for mail cartage.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the Australian Government will take immediate, action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will downgrade the postal and mail services of the citizens of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.

Petitions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2997

by Mr Lloyd.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Lilley respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to downgrade postal and mail services throughout Australia, will place in jeopardy the existing services and the security of the mails by:
downgrading a large number of official post offices; reducing the number of post offices open for business during the lunch period; reducing the number of street posting boxes; delaying telegrams by reducing the number of delivery offices; downgrading post office services by employing untrained and unqualified staff; and using private contractors for mail cartage.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission implementing any plan which will downgrade the postal and mail services of the citizens of Australia.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mrs Darling.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of Grey Northern Division, Whyalla respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of post offices places an jeopardy the existing postal and mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the postal and mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Wallis.
Petition received.
Postal Services
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of the Division of JIlawarra respectfully showeth:
That the plan by the Australian Postal Commission to investigate the downgrading or closure of Taralga post office places in jeopardy the existing Postal and Mail services to our community.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Australian Government will take immediate action to prevent the Australian Postal Commission taking any action to downgrade the Postal and Mail services of our community.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Sainsbury.
Petition received.

Chilean Refugees
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
That many people have left Chile because of political, religious and economic persecution, and that these people would face imprisonment, and political and economic harassment if forced to return.
That statements by Amnesty International and the London-based Chilean Committee for Human Rights reveal there has been no abatement of political, religious and economic persecution in Chile.
That Australia, as a signatory to the 1951 United Nations' Convention and the 1967 United Nations' Protocol on refugees, adopt and endorse the principles for refugee status espoused by the legal advisor to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Dr Guy Goodwin-Gill.
That many Chileans presently in Australia, including two refugee status applicants, Fernando Del Carmen Cerda Labarca and Pedro Jose Belmar Aguilera, clearly fall within the parameters of Dr Goodwin-Gill's definition.
We urge the Government to grant refugee statu's to these two refugees.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Macphee.
Petition received.
Interest Rates
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned showeth that your petitioners are gravely concerned that the Government is not protecting family home buyers from the severe effects of increased and increasing rates of interest on home mortgage loans.
Your petitioners, therefore, humbly request that Parliament take immediate and positive action through tax relief and other measures to avert any further effect~ of increases in interest rates on home mortgage loans which cause detrimental financial, social and psychological pressures on families, and in many cases, positive hardship.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Milton.
Petition received.
Rights of Disabled
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
1. The failure of the Federal Government to seek information from the census re disabled people-i.e. partial or total disability-to enable for adequate planning of, and for, types of services needed by disabled people to be undertaken.
2. The failure of the Federal Government to lead the way in employment of disabled people by employing a greater number of such people within the Commonwealth Public Service-note the small number currently employed within the Service.
3. The wastage of the Federal Government funds perpetuating large, bureaucratic institutions and organisations where there are often few disabled people on their boards and little emphasis is placed on consumer participation in decision making.

2998 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Petitions

4. The failure of the Federal Government to encourage independence of disabled people, or to develop 'normalised' support systems-attendant care.
5. The failure of the Federal Government to provide 'noninstitutionalised' specialised accommodation for those people who would not be able to benefit from, or cope with attendant care.
6. Failure by the Federal Government to alter, or create a 'disability' allowance means test free for all disabled peoplethis would assist with necessary equipment and mobility costs.
7. Failure to provide a national compensation scheme thus saving time and enabling people to be automatically covered in the event of a disability.
8. Failure by the Federal Government to abolish tariffs on all equipment available to the disabled-e.g. Optacon.
9. Mismanagement of Federal IYDP Funds-e.g. nonreceipt by some States of funds through unresolved negotiations.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that immediate action be taken to remedy the above stated and that the Federal Government recognise that disabled people are citizens who should have equal rights.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Mountford.
Petition received.
Sales Tax Legislation
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled: The humble petition of undersigned citizens of Australia respectfully showeth:
The proposed increase in sales tax on the white goods and shelf goods industry, if implemented, would have a devastating effect on employment in Australia.
The white goods industry in South Australia is one of the largest industries the economy of this state relies on.
Any increase in sales tax would depress the industry further and throw thousands of workers out of work, also dependent companies would go out of business.
We therefore call upon your Government not to increase sales tax in this industry for the good of the workers employed and the economy in South Australia.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the House of Representatives will reject outright any proposal to increase sales tax on white goods and shelf goods.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrScott.
Petition received.
Immigration
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned residents of Australia respectfully showeth:
Your petitioners' deep concern about the Federal Government's cuts to services to migrants and refugees in Australia. We are concerned about the Review of Commonwealth Functions (known as the Razor Gang) cuts including:
Translation and interpreting services
Staff in overseas posts
Information services
Adult migrant and refugee education

Introduction of 'charges for examination of overseas qualifications and for translation and interpreting services and the
Termination of the assisted passage scheme.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that the decisions announced by the Federal Government which adversely affect migrants and refugees in Australia not proceed.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr West.
Petition received.
Great Barrier Reef: Oil Exploration
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of citizens of the Commonwealth submits:
That off-shore oil exploration within the Great Barrier Reef Region constitutes a serious threat to the richest and most varied living system on earth.
Your petitioners request that your Honourable House will-
I. Prohibit oil exploration within the Great Barrier Reef Region,
2. Declare the entire Great Barrier Reef Region a Marine Park under the Federal Government's Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975,
3. Provide the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority with the staff and resources for effective management of the Region.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr West.
Petition received.
Minister for Communications
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives of the Australian Parliament assembled, the humble petition of the undersigned members of the Australian Postal and Telecommunications Union respectfully showeth:
That the Prime Minister of Australia should seek the resignation of the Minister for Communications. Failing this the Prime Minister should dismiss the aforementioned Minister. We seek this action following the Minister's apparent lack of concern for the welfare of his employees in the Australian Postal Commission and the Australian Telecommunications Commission.
Staff ceilings imposed as directed by the Minister show that the future employment security of Australian Postal and Telecommunications Union members is jeopardised. It is our educated estimation that these staff ceilings will also affect the standard of service provided to the public by the two commissions.
Your petitioners therefore pray that the Prime Minister will take immediate action to abide by our desire.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by Mr Beazley, Mr John Brown, Mr Dawkins, Mr Duffy and Mr Mildren.
Petitions received.
W. S. and L. B. Robinson College, Broken Hill
To the Honourable the Speaker and Members of the House of Representatives in Parliament assembled. The humble petition of the undersigned electors of the Division of Riverina respectfully showeth:

Questions Without Notice

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 2999

That the W. S. & L. B. Robinson College of the University of New South Wales must continue to service the tertiary educational needs of the people of Broken Hill and train people for the mining industry in Australia.
Your petitioners therefore humbly pray that:
The Parliament shall require the Council of the University of New South Wales to maintain and expand the educational courses offered by the W. S. & L. B. Robinson College and take all such other action as is necessary to ensure the acceptance of new enrolments in 1982 and thereafter.
And your petitioners as in duty bound will ever pray.
by MrHicks.
Petition received.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES INDUSTRY
Notice of Motion
Mr GILES (Wakefield)-I give notice that, on the next day of sitting, I shall move:
That this House-
(I) is concerned at the changing structure of ownership and control of the alcoholic beverages industry with regard to-
(a) the trend towards monopoly at the retail level;
(b) the trend towards increased foreign participation;
(c) decreasing producer influence on marketing;
(d) the danger that bulk marketing of wines will damage the sales of quality bottled wines; and
(2) calls on the Government to consider the introduction of United Stlltes of America style anti-trust legislation for the alcoholic beverages industry.
DISALLOWED NOTICE OF MOTION
Mr Porter proceeding to give a notice of motion-
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will need to put his notice of motion in proposition form.
QUESTIONS WITHOUT NOTICE
AUSTRALIAN FINANCIAL SYSTEM: INTEREST RATES
Mr HURFORD-My question is directed -to the Treasurer, and of course it is about the report of the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System. I refer the Treasurer to the reference on page 641 of the report to a consultancy study which said that, as a consequence of deregulation, the savings bank mortgage rate might reasonably be estimated to move up by some 3.5 per cent to a level some 2 per cent above the then existing bond rate. Is it a fact that current bond rates stand at between 14.6 per cent and 15 per cent and that, if mortgage rates rise by the amount predicted by that Campbell consultant, home owners could face interest rates of around 17 per cent o~ their mortgages? Would

this mean an extra $99 a month in repayments on a $30,000 loan over 25 years from a savings bank? Finally, does the Treasurer believe that higher interest rates will force prospective home buyers out of the market for loans and thus help to restrict the extent of interest rate rises?
Mr HOWARD~I am grateful that the honourable member for Adelaide, in his courteous fashion, has referred me to the consultancy report. I might refer the honourable member for Adelaide to the conclusions of the Committee on that subject. The Committee's conclusions were that the average cost of funds in that area would not vary appreciably. It concluded that there would be rises in some areas and there could be falls in others. I remind the honourable gentleman that the Committee's recommendations are now before the Government. I have already indicated in the tabling statement a number of principles which will guide the Government's deliberations. So far as the assessing of that report is concerned, those principles include a concern to concentrate on the method of providing assistance to various areas of the community and the economy and not necessarily upon the levels of that assistance. In that I am in fact mirroring the approach of the Committee. I refer the honourable gentleman to page 624 of the report. I think it is very-salient that what was said be borne in mind by people who are objectively assessing the Government's response to this report. In a chapter dealing with sectoral assistance, the Committee stated:
The Committee has not sought to assess the appropriate level of assistance to particular groups . . .
The judgments involved extend well beyond questions of economic efficiency and are outside the Committee's terms of reference. The Committee has instead focused solely on the methods of assistance and their implications for the financial system.
In adopting the approach that I outlined in my statement yesterday, the Government is being entirely consistent with the approach adopted by the Committee and is in no way in conflict with. the basic approach adopted by the Committee. .
VICTORIA: WELFARE HOUSING FINANCIAL ARRANGEMENTS
Mr FALCONER-Is the Minister for Housing and Construction aware of a recent comment by his counterpart in the Victorian Government that this year Victoria will have to pay the Commonwealth $2.6m more in interest and loan repayments than it has received in its welfare housing allocation from the Commonwealth? Can the Minister confirm that repaynients of previous loans now exceed Victoria's allocation from the Commonwealth?

3000 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Questions Without Notice

Mr McVEIGH-I.am aware of the recent article in the Press by the Honourable Jeff Kennett, the Minister for Housing in the Victorian Parliament. I advise the House that there is a basic-I suspect mischievous-inaccuracy in the statement referred to. If the Minister cares to look at Table 101 in Budget Paper No.7-it is to be hoped that he can add and subtract-he will find that the allocation the Victorian Government will receive from the Commonwealth Government is $58.5m and that his Government has to repay $56.5m. That gives the lie to his statement. However, there is a more basic and fundamental fact to which his statement must be related. It is simply that since 1945 a long list of free enterprise governments have contributed a sum of $5,000m to the States for welfare housing on the basis of very low interest loans and straight-out grants. These loans have to be repaid over a period of 53 years. Quite obviously, the greater the number of years over which loans have to be repaid the more closely will the repayments approximate the amount given by the Commonwealth to an individual State in a year. We note that these payments are made not by the Victorian Government, but by the people who have loans and who are in receipt of rental assistance.
To summarise, I repeat for the benefit of my counterpart in Victoria that this year no State in Australia will repay-not from its own money but from the money of renters and home ownersmore than it receives. I conclude by giving a couple of other examples. This year the State of New South Wales will receive $82.6m and will repay $71.4m. Queensland will receive $30.8m and will repay $19.1m. South Australia will receive $34.7m and will repay $31m. Those figures indicate that the Federal Government is quite .charitable in its contributions to the States for welfare housing. Inaccurate and mischievous sta tern en ts do nothing to improve Commonwealth-State relations.
AUSTRALIAN FINANCIAL SYSTEM: INTEREST RATES
Dr CASS-I direct my question to the Treasurer. Is it a fact that the report of the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System recommends immediate abolition of the 30-20 rule which requires certain institutions to hold a minimum of 30 per cent of their investment portfolios in government securities? Does the Committee indicate that it would be preferable to make government securities more responsive to market preferences? Would this mean that the Commonwealth, in order to market its debt, would have to raise the interest rates on

its bonds, thus setting off a round of further interest rate rises and competition for funds in all sectors, as well as necessitating increased government taxes and charges to meet higher debt costs? In addition, would State and local authorities, which are also covered by the 30-20 rule, be forced to pay higher interest rates on their borrowings and also be forced either to curtail services or to increase taxes and charges?
Mr HOWARD-The answer to the first part of the honourable gentleman's question is yes. The answer to the second part is that the real determinant of the price that governments have to pay for the amount of paper they shift is the total volume of paper they have to shift. When it comes to total volumes of paper that must be shifted, the Opposition can leave the Government for dead. The real determinant of the level of interest rates is ultimately the competitive demand for funds in the community. The best contribution that any government can make towards reducing the demand for funds in the community, and therefore reducing the price that one has to pay to raise funds in the community, is to reduce its own borrowing demands. Anybody who examines this subject knows that under our side of politics the borrowing demands of government are significantly less.
HIGH COURT DECISION ON SUPPLIERS OF INFORMATION
Mr DONALD CAMERON-I direct my question to the Minister representing the Attorney General. Does the Minister recall that earlier this year I was threatened with legal action by Medibank Private following my drawing public attention to the disastrous financial position of the fund in some States and the financial danger contributors to that fund were in if Medibank collapsed? Though I have since received an apology I am, therefore, law suit conscious. Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the recent case in the High Court of Australia known as Shaddock v. City of Parramatta in which the Court has ruled that many individuals and companies providing information to others as part of a service will be liable for any negligence in providing the information if another has suffered loss by relying on it? Has the Minister considered the application of this decision to members of parliament and their staffs who are continually called upon by constituents for advice of a sometimes delicate nature which, if relied upon and incorrect, could cause a loss?
Mr VINER-I am well aware of the involvement of the honourable member with Medibank Private. I am well aware of how law suit conscious

Questions Without Notice

-18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3001

he is. I should be careful about giving a dispatch box opinion for the benefit of the honourable member. The question that he raises is a very important one for honourable members and honourable senators. As we all know, in the course of doing our duty for members of the public we are asked for and we give advice to them on a variety of matters. It is questionable whether this decision in Shaddock v. City of Parramatta would, in fact, apply to advice given by honourable members. Nevertheless, there is a word of caution to be given to honourable members.
For the information of honourable members. I just give a precis of the essence of the decision in Shaddock's case without giving any history of decisions by the Privy Council or Australian courts beforehand. The essence of the decision in Shaddock's case is that the duty of care is not so narrowly confined as was decided in an earlier case of MLC v. Evatt. A duty of care will arise whenever a person gives information or advice to another upon a serious matter in circumstances where the speaker realises or ought to realise that he is being relied upon to give the best of his information or advice as a basis for action on the part of the other party and it is reasonable in the circumstances for the other party to act on that information or advice. As to the applicability of that decision to the situation of honourable members and honourable senators, I will refer the question to the Attorney-General and provide further information to the honourable member.
Mr Armitage-Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order. I request that, in accordance with Standing Order 321, you require the Minister to table the document from which he has been reading. I know that he got into trouble once before.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable member for Chifley will resume his seat. Was the honourable gentleman quoting from a document?
Mr VINER-I would be glad to incorporate the paper in Hansard because it contains a reference to earlier decisions of the High Court and the Privy Council and may be of benefit to honourable members.
Mr SPEAKER-The Minister has asked for leave to incorporate the document in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
SHADDOCK v CITY OF PARRAMATTA
(A decision of the Full Court of the High Court on 28 October 1981)
Prior to the decision in this case it was settled that when a duty of care exists a person can be liable for financial loss resulting from a negligent mis-statement of fact or opinion,

although the mis-statement was honestly made and there was no fiduciary or contractural relationship between the parties.
The Privy Council had held in MLC v EVATT (1970) 122 CLR 628 that the duty of care is casf only on a person who carries on a business or proFession which involves the giving of advice of a kind which calls For special skill and competence or on persons who, while not carrying on such a business or profession, nevertheless profess to have a comparable competence.
The essence of the decision in Shaddock's case is that the duty of care is not no narrowly confined and will arise whenever a person gives inFormation or advice to another upon a serious matter in circumstances where the speaker realises or ought to realise that he is being relied on to give the best of his information or advice as a basis for action on the part of the other party and it is reasonable in the circumstances For the other party to act on that information or advice.
AUSTRALIAN FINANCIAL SYSTEM: PROPOSED DEREGULATION
Mr WILLIS-My question, which is addressed to the Treasurer, concerns the suggestion in the report of the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System that the cost of the considerable increase in interest rates for home buyers, farmers and small businessmen that would flow from deregulation could be offset by budgetary measures such as subsidies or tax concessions. Does the Treasurer acknowledge that the cost of any such measure would have to be considerable if these groups were to be fully protected from the consequences of deregulation? Does the Treasurer also acknowledge that implementation of the taxation recommendations of the Campbell Committee would result in further considerable reductions in tax revenue? If so, does the Treasurer agree that the consequence of implementation of the Campbell Committee report and ensuring that protected groups remain protected by budgetary measures would be to greatly reduce the prospect or extent of a general tax cut which the Treasurer and the Prime Minister have previously indicated was likely to be forthcoming?
Mr HOWARD-I am not in a position to give any quantification of particular measures that a government might decide to introduce in the future, given a certain set of assumptions in a certain set of decisions in this or, indeed, any other area. I remind the honourable gentleman that this report is of very great complexity. It has only just been received by the Parliament and I hope it receives a more detailed study from the Opposition than his remarks yesterday would indicate that it has been receiving. I do not know how any party in this Parliament could have seriously studied the report in the less than 36 hours that it was available to the Opposition to enable it to responsibly reach the conclusion that it reached yesterday.

3002 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Questions Without Notice

Yet, apparently, it is within the capacity of the Opposition to reach that conclusion.
I merely repeat what I said to the honourable gentleman and the House yesterday in tabling the report-that there are certain areas where this Government has, and indeed, other governments have, over the years maintained priorities. The Committee essentially dealt with methods of assistance. It indicated in certain areas that in its view, on efficiency grounds, if governments wish to help a sector the best method of helping that sector is through direct budgetary assistance. Questions as to what volume of assistance, what direction that assistance might take and whether that method of assistance might be adopted are naturally questions for the future. I am certainly not, therefore, going to get into the business of giving hypothetical responses as to quantum and cost.
TAP BONDS
Mr BRADFIELD-I ask the Treasurer a question which does not concern the Campbell report. It concerns something more relevant. Has the recent sale of tap bonds been successful? Is the successful sale of tap bonds a necessary ing~edient for the future reduction of interest rates?
Mr HOWARD--.:It is true to say that recent sales of government paper have been more succ~ssful. In fact, it would appear that, as a combmed result of the decisions taken at the Loan Council meeting just before the Budget and also the near balance achieved in the Budget, the tone of the bond market has changed appreciably. Although I am traditionally very cautious about responding to questions in this area, I believe the outlo~k in the interest rate area is more promising than It has been for some time. It is certainly a prerequisite to any downward movement that we commence selling government paper in a very significant volume. That certainly has occurred. I naturally enter a number of cautions, including the fact that to counterbalance the sale from the tap there have been significant net redemptions of Australian savings bonds which have offset the ?on~bank take-up effect of sales out of the tap. It IS still early days but the outlook is certainly better than it has been for some months. It would appear that the market sees the rates as being totally realistic. Of course, ultimately that is what influences whether we sell paper, be it public or private.
AUSTRALIAN FINANCIAL SYSTEM: PROPOSED DEREGULATION
Mr ROBERT BROWN-I ask the Treasurer: Is it a fact that the terms of reference given to the

Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System in January 1979 and the Treasurer's accompanying statement made it clear to the Committee that the Government's aim was to deregulate the financial system? Is it also a fact that in April the Treasurer described the Committee's work as a landmark in the development of the Australian financial system, that in June he said that his personal bias was towards deregulation and that as recently as four weeks ago he stated that the Government would not have established the Campbell inquiry if it did not intend to deregulate the financial system? Why, then, has the Treasurer, since tabling the Committee's final report, sought firmly to distance himself and the Government from the Committee's specific deregulation recommendations, such as the abolition of lending and interest rate controls?

Mr HOWARD-I made all the statements to

which the honourable gentleman referred. I do

not resile from any of those statements in any

way. I believe that the Committee was established

against the background of this Government's

commitment to a freer, less regulated and more

competitive financial system. We would not have

established the inquiry in the first place if we had

not believed in those objectives. I remind the

honourable gentleman that I repeated those

objectives in my tabling statement yesterday. I

said that many of the recommendations of the

Committee were fully consistent with those objec-

tives. I do not retreat one inch from what I have

said about the objectives of the Government in

this area, but that Committee itself

in no way alters the acknowledges, that

ifnacrt~aacshithneg

decisions on reports of this kind the Government

has to achieve an appropriate balance between

considerations of economic efficiency and social

-and political realities.

BEEF INDUSTRY
Mr COWAN-I address a question to the Minister for Primary Industry. In view of the problems being experienced by beef producers within Australia, is the Minister in a situation to say what consideration the Government has given to relieving producers of the export tax and the meat inspection charges?
Mr NIXON-The proposal suggested by the honourable member was brought to the Government's attention by the Meat Council of Australia, which sought relief from the necessity of raising these levies during the current beef price problem situation to ease the financial strains on the meat processing works. The Government looked at this proposition, along with a number of

Questions Without Notice

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3003

other propositions that were put at the same time, and came to the conclusion that none of the propositions would resolve the difficulties faced by the meat processing works. It would be a temporary expedient. It would not help with the rationalisation of the works-a rationalisation which, whilst unfortunate, is nevertheless very necessary for the industry right across Australia. Therefore, I have to say that the Government rejected the proposal.

Minister advise the House of the intended composition of the suggested inquiry being initiated into the marketing of petrol in Australia? Will the Minister ensure that the inquiry pays special attention to the practices of oil companies in relation to the marketing of petrol? Will the Minister ensure that the inquiry or working party, as it has been described, be composed of, as well as academics, persons who have been actively involved in the industry?

COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY INTO THE AUSTRALIAN FINANCIAL SYSTEM
Mr LEO McLEAY-Has the Treasurer given the special task force examining the final report of the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System any deadline for its report? Will the task force's deliberations cover the same source documents, such as submissions, technical papers and transcripts of public hearings, as the Campbell inquiry used to arrive at its recommendations? Will the task force's recommendations' and comments on the Campbell report be made public? Will the Treasurer assure the House that the task force will not be preserved as a convenient means of postponing announcements of the Government's attitude to the key recommendations concerning interest rates and lending controls until after the next election?
Mr HOWARD-I hope to meet the chairman of the task force, who is the deputy secretary of my Department, and perhaps other members of that task force-one of them is a member of my own personal staff-over the next few days to discuss the methodology of the operation of the task force and to provide some guidance as to how it might operate. At this stage I do not want to respond about the scope of the documents that might be available. I do not want to be unduly restrictive but equally, having allowed a period of three years for this report to be put together, we hardly want a report upon a report to take an equally lengthy period. Without wanting or frankly being able to commit myself to a specific time, I obviously do not want to see the work of the task force wither away. I want to see it respond to the Government's request promptly. On the question of whether the task force report will be tabled, I think it is too early for f!1e to try to answer that.
PETROL PRICING
Mr GOODLUCK-Is the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs aware that there is a continued disparity in the price of petrol, firstly between the capital cities of Australia and, secondly, the country areas of Australia? Will the

Mr MOORE-At the Standing Committee of Consumer Affairs Ministers conference in Adelaide just on a fortnight ago the questions of pricing, marketing and divorcement within the petroleum industry were discussed by all the State Ministers and the Commonwealth Minister. The honourable member will be aware that there is a divergence between the States in terms of thei,r pricing policies. New South Wales and South Australia have fixed prices. Yictoria is looking at this possibility. Needless to say, Queensland has no desire to move in that area. On top of that is the question of divorcement proceedings. In that area the Commonwealth has a particular law. The Victorian Government is looking at the same question. Because of this wide range of approaches the meeting decided to establish a working party consisting of officers of the various departments involved in that meeting. They have been asked to look at the consequences of the various regulations with the hope that we will be able to develop a common approach. That will take some time.
It is probably worth pointing out that at present the Petroleum Products Pricing Authority justifies petroleum product prices in Australia, that this particular form of pricing is not accepted by New South Wales and is added to by other States by various State taxes. The price levels between the States thus vary enormously. It is also fair to say that it is a tribute to the forces of supply and demand that the prices vary enormously throughout Australia. In very few States at present are retailers getting the price for petrol justified by the Petroleum Products Pricing Authority.
FORK LIFT TRUCKS
Mr MOUNTFORD-Does the Minister for Industry and Commerce recall the recommendations of the Industries Assistance Commission for the fork lift truck and associated industries, which, if implemented, would cause large scale displacement of workers in those industries? Will the Minister assure the House that the Government has no intention of implementing the recommendations of the Industries Assistance

3004 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Questions Without Notice

Commission and thus save this worthwhile local industry from closure?
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH-I am aware of the concerns which have been expressed by the honourable gentleman. I assure him that those concerns will be very much in the mind of the Government when it approaches a policy position.
AUSTRALIAN FINANCIAL SYSTEM: HOUSING INTEREST RATES
Mr HYDE-My question is to the Treasurer. It follows several that have been asked already. Does the Campbell Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System indicate that interest rate controls are regressive, failing to assist those for whom the controls were intended? Will the Government take into account the need to adopt policies which favour poorer rather than more well to do people in determining policy for the housing capital market?
Mr HOWARD-As the honourable member for Moore pointed out in his question, it is a fact that, according to the view of the Committee, interest rate controls have a regressive effect.
Mr Hurford-But not the view of the consultants.
Mr HOWARD-Perhaps the honourable gentleman will contain himself. That is the conclusion that is reached in the Committee's report. One of the obligations of the Government. is to assess that conclusion and to form a view as to whether it agrees with it. I find it absolutely amazing that a party that professes to be interested in the interests of low income earners in this country can, in 36 hours, dismiss a conclusion that argues against a regressive system in a report that has taken three years to compile. I think it is a very remarkable exercise in indifference towards an objective examination of whether the conclusions of the report are correct. Without seeking to pass a view as to whether the Government agrees with the conclusions of the Committee on this particular subject, I can say to the honourable member for Moore that in assessing the Committee's recommendations the Government, unlike the Australian Labor Party, will be concerned to ensure that the existing financial system does not have regressive effects on low income earners.
HOME LOAN INTEREST RATES
Mr FRY-Is the Prime Minister aware that two of his Ministers, the Minister for Trade and Resources and the Minister for Primary Industry, have long-standing government housing loans on which they are paying interest rates of 4.75 per cent and 6.25 per cent respectively? Does the

Prime Minister think it appropriate that these loans should continue at such low interest rates when the working people of Australia are being burdened with ever increasing high interest rates on housing loans, which will be still higher if the Campbell report is adopted? Will the Prime Minister request the Ministers concerned either to pay back the loans or to volunteer to pay the going interest rate which ordinary citizens of this country have to pay?
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-In the Australian Capital Territory there was a policy of making loans available to Ministers .and sometimes members of Parliament at various times. A number of members of this Parliament, I think from all parties, have probably taken advantage of that opportunity over the years. My advice is that the honourable member fot Fraser himself in fact took advantage of such a loan, and that the honourable member for St George took advantage of such a loan.
Mr Fry-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. I am concerned that the remarks of the Prime Minister could be interpreted to mean that I received a loan as a member of Parliament. That is not correct. I received a loan as a public servant. I repaid that loan soon after I came into the Parliament.
Mr SPEAKER-I call the Prime Minister.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable gentleman is making the point that he received a concessional loan. I am advised also that the honourable member for St George and an earlier member for Wills had the advantage--
Mr Morrison-Mr Speaker, I take a point of order. I received a loan as a member of the Departmentof Foreign Affairs. The loan was undertaken in 1963, well before I became a member of Parliament, and it was not a government house that I got the loan for.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-The honourable member could have continued by advising us whether he still lives in the house that he bought on that subsidised loan.
Mr Morrison-Mr Speaker, I take a poiJ?t of order. I will be very happy to answer the Prime Minister's question. I do not and I have not since 1969.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I am also advised that a former member for Riverina, Mr Grassby, had the advantage of such a loan. I do not know whether we should give permission to the former member for Wills and to a former member for Riverina to come into this Parliament and give personal explanations in relation to this matter.
Honourable members interjecling'----

Questions Without Notice

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3005

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The House will come to order. I ask all honourable gentlemen to remain silent. The honourable ladies have not interjected. The House will come to order. I ask every member to remain silent. I ask the Prime Minister to draw his answer to a conclusion.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-There are one or two points that need to be made seriously. Quite obviously, members from both sides of this Parliament have taken advimtage of loans that were available in the Australian Capital Territory at varying times. I want to make a point about the conduct of the Parliament and the way in which we do our business. Many former and present members of this Parliament have young families. Very few members of this Parliament can afford to have a home in the Australian Capital Territory and a real home in their own electorates or wherever they come from. For a long time. I have doubted the wisdom of moving members to Canberra on Monday or Tuesday mornings and moving them out on Thursday nights or Friday mornings. I believe that over time. I think it will take time because it is a habit that will die hard-we would probably do much better if we ultimately established the circumstances whereby members of parliament could come to this place for the session and then leave and have the electorates educated to understand that this is the way that they are going to get better service from members, electorally and through this Parliament.
The amount of time that we all collectively spend travelling every week is enormous. It is all very well for me because I use a government aircraft which is a travelling office, but it is obviously very hard to work in a commercial aircraft. So there is an enormous waste of time for all members of parliament, which is dead time to them, while they are travelling. I believe that over time it would make more sense if there were arrangements that made it possible for members to establish a home in the capital as well as in their electorates. I am not suggesting that there can or should be any early change of policy in relation to these matters, but there is no doubt that the loans that were available to enable members of parliament to purchase homes in Canberra were in part a recognition of the very plain fact that I think most honourable gentlemen recognise. We do not conduct our business in the best way, with the best use of our time and to the best advantage of our eleCtors and of the constituency at large. I think that it is petty in the extreme for members of the Opposition to raise these points when they know that these loans are matters of long standing and were available to members of all parties.

NEW ZEALAND SUPPLEMENTARY MINIMUM PRICE SCHEME
Mr LLOYD-Is the Minister for Primary Industry aware that the New Zealand Government's supplementary minimum price scheme is now estimated to cost $200m this year to support, at this stage at least, wool, beef and skim milk powder export prices? What effect could this open-ended and massively expensive subsidy scheme have on international prices for these commodities, on closer economic relations between our two countries and on the level of the New Zealand dollar?
Mr NIXON-The supplementary minimum price scheme was introduced by the New Zealand Government in 1978. It was said to be a temporary measure to assist farmers in achieving incomes which might more adequately provide for meeting farm costs than the stabilisation schemes which presently exist in New Zealand. I do not know how temporary the scheme is, but certainly this year it is estimated to cost an extra $200m. However, I note that most of that cost will not be on this year's Budget. I understand that most of that cost will be on the ensuing year's Budget. The scheme applies to lamb, mutton, cow beef, bull beef, prime beef, milk fat and wool.
The honourable member asked about the impact on the international prices of commodities. I think that is difficult to assess. It is also difficult to assess the real cost of the scheme on the value of the New Zealand dollar. I quote what the Leader of the Opposition in New Zealand, Mr Rowling, had to say about the matter. It seems to be a complete quote from a newspaper article. It states:
What we have got with the supplementary minimum price proposals is a government trying to head off the anger of the farmers by pitching SMP levels not at the market realisations or any relationship to the market realisations but at the escalating costs that are actually occurring on the farm.
I draw attention to the point he made about market realisations because I think that is the aspect of it that in terms of closer economic relations with New Zealand we, as a Government, will have to study, along with other important factors such as the difference in the value of the New Zealand dollar and the Australian dollar. The value of the New Zealand dollar is running at about 140c to the Australian dollar. I think that the impact on CER is an important impact and is something that will have to be studied more closely. One cannot assume that there will be any quick conclusion to the CER study because of all the factors that are involved. Indeed, I think one can assume that it will be a very difficult process to get agreement between the industries on a

3006 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Questions Without Notice

number of the factors that are outstanding at the moment.
AUSTRALIAN FINANCIAL SYSTEM: HOUSING FINANCE
Mr HAYDENMy question, which is directed to the Treasurer, follows the answer he gave a few minutes ago in which he declared that the Opposition had arrived at conclusions repudiating recommendations of the Committee of Inquiry into the Australian Financial System in relation to housing finance after only 36 hours of consideration of that report. Is the Treasurer aware of a consultant's report to that inquiry by a Miss Judy Yates entitled 'The Distributional Impact of Interest Rate Regulation on the Household Sector'? I ask him whether he has had the opportunity of noting part 3, 'Conclusions', which declared, inter alia:
The first is that the argument that regulation has regressive effects is not supported conclusively because of the contradictory evidence from the various surveys.
Has he also had the opportunity to consider in detail this report and, more specifically, the recommendations for overcoming the nature of regressiveness to the extent that it may occur in the provision of housing finance within the regulated system of financial availability? Is he aware that this report has been available to the Opposition and, indeed, to the public since March 1981? Is he aware that the report is very much the basis for the conclusions which have been reached by the Opposition in response to the Australian financial system inquiry report and therefore vindicates the declaration of the Opposition that it has been a very careful consideration that has led, very properly, t<;> its repudiation of the recommendations of the Campbell inquiry which can only serve to pander to the interests of powerful sections of the corporate part of the economy at the expense of the great mass of people, especially home buyers, farmers and small business people in the community?
Mr HOWARD-The answer to the first part of the honourable gentleman's question is yes. I am fully aware of that consultancy report and I am fully aware that that consultancy report would have been available to the Opposition for many months. I merely remind the honourable gentleman that on page 647 of the report the Committee came to the following conclusion:
. . . interest rate controls are an inefficient and ineffective means of assisting low income potential home buyers. They have regressive distributional consequences, harming many of those they are intended to benefit, and benefiting--
Mr Hayden-They have drawn their conclusion out of self-interest. You have all the representatives of big business interests. You have no

one representing the average community. They jumped to a conclusion which is quite contrary to the consultancy submission.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The Leader of the Opposition will remain silent. He asked his question , in silence. I ask him to listen to the answer in silence.
Mr HOWARD-For the benefit of the Leader of the Opposition, I will start that again. The report states:
In summary, interest rate controls are an inefficient and ineffective means of assisting low incomepotential home buyers. They have regressive distributional consequences, harming many of those they are intended to benefit, and benefiting many who do not require assistance. In short, they can be said to have been counter-productive in achieving their welfare objectives, while hurting the community at large by impairing the efficiency of the financial system.
That is the Committee's conclusion. I am not standing here and saying that that is right or wrong. We have to assess that. I am saying, and I repeat, that the Opposition was irresponsible to reject that conclusion in a mere 36 hours.
ALBURY-WODONGA DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Minister for Trade and Resources)-Pursuant to section 32 of the Albury-Wodonga Development Act 1973, I present the interim annual report for 1980-81 of the Albury-Wodonga Development Corporation.
DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
Sir PHILLIP LYNCH (Flinders-Minister for Industry and Commerce)-For the information of honourable members, I present the annual report for 1980-81 of the Department of Industry and Commerce.
WHEAT RESEARCH
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 18 of the Wheat Research Act 1957, as amended, I present a report on operations of the Act for 1980-81.
AUSTRALIAN WHEAT BOARD
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-For the information of honourable members, I present a corrigenda to the Australian Wheat Board annual report for the year ended 30 November 1980 which I tabled in the House on 19 August 1981.
BARLEY RESEARCH COUNCIL
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 35 of the Barley Research Act 1980, I present the annual

General

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3007

report for 1980-81 of the Barley Research Council.
TOBACCO INDUSTRY TRUST ACCOUNT Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Pri-
mary Industry)-Pursuant to section 7 of the Tobacco Industry Act 1955, I present the 1980-81 Annual Report of the Tobacco Industry Trust Account.
FRUIT INDUSTRY SUGAR CONCESSION COMMITTEE
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to clause 11 of the Sugar Agreement 1979, I present the annual report for 1980-81 of the Fruit Industry Sugar Concession Committee.
AUSTRALIAN MEAT RESEARCH COMMITTEE
Mr NIXON (Gippsland-Minister for Primary Industry)-Pursuant to section 17 of the Meat Research Act 1960, I present the annual report for 1980-81 of the Australian Meat Research Committee.
PAPUA NEW GUINEA SUPERANNUATION SCHEME
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)- Pursuant to section 21 of the Papua New Guinea (Staffing Assistance) Act 1973, I present the annual report for 1980-81 of the Commissioner for Superannuation on the general administration and operation of the Papua New Guinea superannuation scheme and the contract officers retirement benefits scheme.
ADVANCE TO THE MINISTER FOR FINANCE
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-For the information of honourable members, I present a statement on the advance to the Minister for Finance dated October 1981.
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY AGREEMENTS
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)- Pursuant to section 10 of the International Monetary Agreements Act 1947, I present the annual report for 1980-81 on the operation of the Act and the operations of the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction 'and Development insofar as they relate to Australia.

ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIR FORCE: MEMORANDUM OF ARRANGEMENTS
BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT AND THE AUSTRALIAN
GOVERNMENT
Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence)-For the information of honourable members, in the context of the Government's recently announced selection of the FA18 for acquisition as the new tactical fighter for the Royal Australian Air Force, I table the 'Memorandum of Arrangements between the United States Government and the Australian Government relating to the Procurement and Co~production of the New Tactical Fighter Aircraft-12 September 1980', together with the 'Amendment Number I' to the Memorandum of Arrangements.
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House take note of the Agreement and accompanying papers,
Debate (on motion by Mr Scholes) adjourned.
DEFENCE FORCE RETIREMENTS AND DEATH BENEFITS AUTHORITY
Mr KILLEN (Moreton-Minister for Defence)-Pursuant to section 16 (2) of the Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Act 1973, I present the ninth report of the Defence Force Retirement and Death Benefits Authority, dealing with the general administration and working of that Act and of the Defence Forces Retirement Benefits Act 1948 f01 the year ended 30 June 1981.
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS BUREAU
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations) - Pursuant to section 126R of the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904 I present the 1980-81 annual report of the Industrial Relations Bureau.
REPORT ON THE CONCILIATION AND ARBITRATION ACT
Mr VINER (Stirling-Minister for Industrial Relations)-For the information of honourable members. I present the report by the Consultants to the Department of Industrial Relations on the Conciliation and Arbitration Act 1904.
STATES' LOCAL GOVERNMENT GRANTS COMMISSIONS
Mr FIFE (Farrer-Minister for Education)- Pursuant to section 10 of the Local Government (Personal Income Tax Sharing) Act 1976, and in

3008 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

General

accordance with the Federal Government's federalism policy to direct personal income tax assistance to local government I present the reports of the States' Local Government Grants Commissions which contain the recommendations for distribution of Commonwealth funds to individual councils by the State Grants Commissions for New South Wales, Queensland and Tasmania. Honourable senators and members have already been advised of the allocation within their own States. Payments to the States in respect of the recommendations contained within the reports were made during late August and early September by the Department of the Treasury.
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL RAILWAYS COMMISSION
Mr HUNT (Gwydir-Minister for Transport)-For the information of honourable members, I present the financial statements for 1980-81 of the Australian National Railways Commission.
MEDICAL RESEARCH PROJECTS
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health)-For the information of honourable members, I present the Medical Research Projects annual report 1980.
HEALTH INSURANCE COMMISSION
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health)-Pursuant to section 42 of the Health Commission Act 1973 I present the 1980-81 annual report of the Health Insurance Commission.
HEALTH NEEDS OF ADOLESCENTS
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health)-For the information of honourable members, I present the report entitled 'Health Needs of Adolescents~, 1981.
CAPITAL TERRITORY HEALTH COMMISSION
Mr MacKELLAR (Warringah-Minister for Health)-For the information of honourable members, I present the annual report for 1980-81 of the Capital Territory Health Commission.
AUSTRALIAN INSTITUTE OF MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS
Mr MACPHEE (Balaclava-Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs)-Pursuant to section 49 (4) of the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs Act 1979, I present the annual report for 1980-81 of the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs.

POPULATION STATISTICS
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services) - As required by section 7 of the Representation Act, I present a copy of the certificate of the Chief Australian Electoral Officer setting forth the numbers of the people of the Commonwealth and of the several States in accordance with the latest statistics of the Commonwealth.
MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-For the information of honourable members. I also present a copy of the notificationmade by the Chief Australian Electoral Officer under section II of the Representation Act setting forth the number of members of the House of Representatives to be chosen in the several States. There has been no change in the representation entitlement of any State.
COMMONWEALTH GRANTS COMMISSION
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-Pursuant to section 25 of the Commonwealth Grants Commission Act 1973, I present the Commonwealth Grants Commission second report 1981 on Special Assistance for the Northern Territory.
COMMONWEALTH FIRE BOARD
Mr NEWMAN (Bass-Minister for Administrative Services)-For the information of honourable members, I present the 1980-81 annual report of the Commonwealth Fire Board.
STATEMENT OF RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURE OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CAPITAL TERRITORY
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-Pursuant to section 10 of the Seat of Government (Administration) Act 1930, I present the Statement of Receipts and Expenditure for 1980-81 of the Australian Capital Territory.
PARLIAMENT HOUSE CONSTRUCTION AUTHORITY
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-Pursuant to section 38 (3) of the Parliament House Construction Authority Act 1979, I present the 1980-81 annual report of the Parliament House Construction Authority.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY ELECTRICITY AUTHORITY
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-Pursuant to section 33 (4) of

Personal Explanation

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3009

the Australian Capital Territory Electricity Supply Act 1962, I present the annufll report for 1980-81 of the Australian Capital Territory Electricity Authority.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY FIRE BRIGADE
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-For the information of honourable members, I present the annual report for 1980-81 of the Australian Capital Territory Fire Brigade.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY BUSH FIRE COUNCIL
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-For the information of honourable members, I present the annual report for 1980-81 of the Australian Capital Territory Bush Fire Council.
AUSTRALIAN CAPITAL TERRITORY ARCHITECTS BOARD
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-For the information of honourable members, I present the annual report for 1980-81 of the Australian Capital Territory Architects Board.
CANBERRA SH.OWGROUND TRUST
Mr HODGMAN (Denison-Minister for the Capital Territory)-For the information of honourable members, I present the annual report for 1979-80 of the Canberra Showground Trust.
NATIONAL STANDARDS COMMISSION
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction)-Pursuant to section 19c of the Weights and Measures (National Standards) Act 1960, and on behalf of the Minister for Science and Technology, I present the annual report for 1980-81 of the National Standards Commission.
HOUSING LOANS INSURANCE CORPORATION
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction)-Pursuant to section 39 of the Housing Loans Insurance Act 1965, I .present the annual report of the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation.
PERSONAL EXPLANATION
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON (Lowe)-Mr Speaker, I have b~en misrepresented on two occasions in the Sydney Morning Herald and I would like to make a personal explanation.

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman may proceed.
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-On 12 November, there was an article headed 'Abe Saffron'-I do not know him-'visited AlIen'-1 do not know him either-'Dowd claims'. In answer to a question, Mr Anderson--
Mr Young-He is in the Liberal Party.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member for Port Adelaide will be seated and remain silent.
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-The honourable member should sit down and be a good boy.
Mr Young-He is in the Liberal Party In Double Bay up there near you.
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-That is a lie.
Mr Young-He used to give--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! I warn the honourable member for Port Adelaide to cease interjecting.
Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-Mr Anderson, as you might know, Sir, is a new New South Wales Minister, has not yet left his political swaddling clothes and does not know what to do, as you will see. The article states:
Referring to Opposition claims that Labor politicians had been seen with Mr Juddah Wise at the races, Mr-Anderson said no one had mentioned that Mr Wise 'was a drinking mate of the Federal Minister for Defence, Jim Killen.
That has been denied emphatically by Mr Killen, and that denial has been put in the newspaper. The article further states:
'And what about the former Prime Minister who is a friend of his?' . . .
I am glad to say that he has recognised that at least. I have known Mr Killen for 36 years and I regard him as a friend and I hope he is my friend for the next 63 years.
You will remember, Sir, that I was not very pleasant to Mr Wran when I answered a question in the House on the Thursday before the House rose. The article further states:
Mr Wran: 'Which one?'
Mr Anderson: 'William McMahon.'
The truth is I have never heard of Mr luddah Wise. I deny that I know him. I do not go to the races these days except to three meetings a yeartwo at Randwick and one at Flemington. I seldom go. I seldom move out of the areas where I can talk to friends and I certainly do not ever talk to people whom I do not know. Obviously from now on I would never talk to a person such as Mr luddah Wise who seems to have earned a reputation for what he has done.
Mr Killen-I hope you always win.

3010 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs

Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-I always like to win but I never feel the joy of doing it when I know what my friend opposite is likely to say. Naturally enough, people asked me why I did not make a correction. I did not because I had not read the article. But, on 14 November,there was an article in the Sydney Morning Herald--
Mr SPEAKER-I interrupt the right honourable gentleman.. I think he intends that his personal explanation should be a denial of the allegation.
, Sir WILLIAM McMAHON-That is right, Sir, and that is a denial of that allegation. I do not know him and have never before heard his name. The article in the Sydney Morning Herald also stated:
The former Prime Minister, Sir William McMahon, denied yesterday that he was in any way linked with a Sydney businessman, Mr Juddah Wise, who, the State Opposition has alleged, was connected with illegal gambling casinos.
That is true--
The Police Minister, Mr Anderson, told Parliament on Wednesday that Sir William was a friend ofMr Wise,
I state again that that is totally untrue. I have never heard of him. I have never seen him. I deny completely the accuracy of the statement.
REPORT ON RELEASE OF EVIDENCE AND RECORDS OF COMMITTEES
Mr SPEAKER-As required by the resolutions of the Senate and the House of Representatives of 22 May 1980, I present a report showing the records and evidence of joint committees of the Parliament which the President of the Senate and I have authorised for release, and the names of the persons to whom they were released, during the period 22 May 1980 to 18 November 1981.
JOINT COMMITTEE ON FOREIGN AFFAIRS AND DEFENCE
Mr KATTER (Kennedy)-On behalf of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence, I present the Committee's report 'Threats to Australia's Security: Their Nature and Probability', together with the transcript of evidence.
Ordered that the report be printed.
Mr KATTER-by leave-I thank the House and I also thank the Chairman of the Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence, the honourable member for Higgins (Mr Shipton), for the privilege of being able to table this report. The purpose of this report is to canvass' the concept of threat within the Australian context. Throughout the report there is understandable reference' to Australia's relationship with the ,United States of America and the

ANZUS alliance. In this regard I state at the outset that the more I observe and analyse the Australian defence situation the more I am totally convinced that our alliance, our understanding with the United States, is of critical importance to our security and to our defence. What responsible Australian would fail to appreciate the advantage of having such a powerful friend? What thoughtful Australian would not work and pray to bring about an even closer friendship with a people with whom we have so much in common and whose destiny in so many ways is so irretrievably associated with ours? This is the background against which I now present this report.
The report is intended as a forerunner to further reports covering particular aspects of the terms of reference given to the Sub-committee on Defence Matters on 26 February 1980 which are 'to monitor the implementation of the Australian Government's announced defence programs'. I must emphasise that this is not a report in the usual sense. It does not at all finalise the inquiry under our current terms of reference. The Committee decided that the terms of reference were so comprehensive, so all-embracing, that it would be better to report in significant segments that would highlight basic considerations such as the levels of threats to this nation. The report seeks also to provide a framework for public discussion of the subsequent issues. It is the Committee's view that no analysis of the defence program can proceed without a thorough understanding of the type of threats and contingencies which may be faced by the Australian defence forces. It is the Committee's hope that a frank discussion of such matters will dispel unnecessary fears, lead to, an informed appreciation of Australia's regional relationships and improve the climate of understanding between Australia and its neighbours.
The report has considered threats to Australia under four headings: Firstly, the potential for global conflict and its implications for Australia; secondly, the invasion of Australia; thirdly, intermediate level threats to Australian interests; and fourthly, low level contingencies. With regard to each category of threat the report discusses the level of capability needed to pose the type of threat, which nation might have the capability, which nation might have the motive, the likely warning time involved and possible deterrents. The report devotes substantial space to the issue of global conflict because of the importance of this subject. However, I draw attention to the importance for defence planning of the issues, canvassed in chapters three and four. These deal with

Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3011

intermediate level threats and low level contingencies which might require an Australian response independent of the actions of our allies, and have serious implications for the structure and capacity of our defence forces.
The Committee concluded that Australia would be a difficult invasion target. Australia is separated by oceanic distances from other countries. It has a considerable capacity to deter potential aggressors and its alliance with the United States of America involves the threat of retaliation against a major aggressor. Large scale attack on Australia is regarded as remote and improbable in the foreseeable future. It could be expected that such an eventuality would be preceded by a period of warning which is likely to include a severe crisis or confrontation between the Soviet Union and the United States. An assault on Australia would involve a very difficult military operation, as chapter two of the report explains in detail. Even for an economical\y advanced regional power it could be expected to take at least five years to develop a capability. Australia's relations with neighbouring countries and most regional states are good, despite some relatively minor irritations which develop from time to time. In fact there are currently no serious disputes with any member of the international community which in the foreseeable future could develop into motives for warlike actions against Australia.
Nevertheless, the Australian Defence Force needs to continue to sustain a technological level relevant to those of regional powers to include those long lead time capabilities which act as a deterrent to hostile action. Australia needs also to maintain the skills relevant to operations in the region and to have the capability for the timely expansion of its forces. Although there is no discernible threat of invasion of Australia on which force structure can be based, there is a danger that the emergence of such a threat may take less time than is likely to be required to obtain long lead items of important equipment and increased trained manpower. There is therefore a heavy responsibility on our intelligence agencies and on those responsible for planning for a smooth expansion of Australia's Defence Force. This matter was taken very much into account in the recent operations at Shoalwater Bay. There was particular accent on that aspect and I believe that the results were very gratifying. A nation that spends relatively little of its gross national product on defence requires a relatively large and competent intel\igence effort. The Sub-committee on Defence Matters received significant evidence on

the need to have appropriately trained intel\igence analysts.
The report discusses elements current in the world situation that contribute to an uncertain global strategic outlook. The main risk or threat to Australia's security at present lies in a global context rather than in our regional situation-in the possibility of world-wide conflict or disruption of the strategic balance between the superpowers. The deterioration in the global relationship between the super-powers, or possible conflicts in our region which might attract the support of one or both of the super-powers, could affect adversely Australia's strategic prospects. It is difficult to envision a serious strategic threat to Australia which would be unrelated to a major breakdown of the existing world order.
There is likely to be continuing, and perhaps increased, tension and competition between the super-powers, particularly in regions where there is instability or confrontation. Nevertheless, on all rational calculations, nuclear war between the super-powers should be regarded as an unlikely eventuality because of the immense devastation which would result from such a conflict, which would wipe out any conceivable benefits to the warring states. In a nuclear war between the northern hemisphere powers, even if Australia were not directly targeted, we would be disastrously affected. One of the consequences of such a war would be a complete breakdown in international trade which, of course, would have catastrophic consequences for Australia's economy. Even if Australia were not seriously affected directly by radioactive fall-out from the northern hemisphere, there would be ecological consequences for the whole world which would also affect, of course, Australia.
The report discusses the joint AustralianUnited States facilities at Pine Gap, Nurrungar and North West Cape. I believe that the risks associated with nuclear attack on Australia, which might result from the alliance with the United States, are outweighed by the advantages Australia derives from the alliance. The ANZUS alliance is likely to act as a deterrent to hostile actions against Australia that would be beyond Australia's own capabilities. Australia is more likely to suffer from low level contingency type threats than from the threat of outright invasion, or from what the Committee has called intermediate level threats.
Low level threats could arise at short notice and pose challenging problems. Australia would almost certainly be required to meet such threats

3012 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs

from its own resources with little or no allied support. This calls for continuing emphasis on self reliance and on the possession of well balanced defence forces. Irrespective of whether significant threats to Australia develop, the Defence Force must be capable of undertaking current tasks. Current tasks include contributing to coastal and maritime surveillance. In the course of its inquiries the Sub-committee on Defence Matters devoted considerable time and attention to this question. Evidence was taken in many parts of northern and western Australia. Support for the law enforcement agencies against terrorism is also an important current task for the Defence Force. We know that considerable advances have been made in that area. The Australian Defence Force should also have the capability to contribute to United Nations and other international peacekeeping forces.
The report stresses that the relative absence of short and medium term threats arises not only from Australia's fortunate geographical location, but also from the success, so far, of the war prevention strategy of the Western alliance and from the comparative strength of Australia's own defence forces within our own region. Indeed, the primary aim of a defence strategy is to prevent war and not to fight it. Reassurance as to Australia's security is available only so long as the perilous balance between super-powers is maintained or their armaments are dismantled and also so long as we continue to play our part in contributing to the Western alliance and in improving our own self-reliance within our region. Though we do not make firm judgments, we did set out conclusions, many of which could well be regarded as arguable. This is what they are intended to be.
During the years I have had the privilege of chairing the Sub-committee on Defence Matters, its members generally speaking have accepted their responsibility as being one of profound and serious importance to our country. We see our role in three categories: Firstly, to provide a forum for those sufficiently qualified and experienced to express to the Sub-committee their valuations of the matters under scrutiny. Then we feel that the exposure of these opinions and the conclusions made on them should provide the Parliament, our masters, with sufficient opportunity to develop further the defence subjects under examination by a meaningful debate. In this regard it has always been my hope that such a debate would be bipartisan and constructive.
Finally, we see our role as doing all possible to bring the whole matter of defence closer to the

Australian people, to have them feel an involvement in this supremely important element of our national life; that is, our security, our defence. I conclude on a personal note. I thank Mr Claus Ducker and Mr Robert King for the way they have worked with their staff with enthusiasm and obvious dedication finally to produce this report. Members of our Committee, whom I cannot thank enough, have time and again gathered from all parts of this vast country to spend long hours examining witnesses, analysing evidence and finally producing this report.
I thank the Minister for Defence, Jim Killen, and senior officers of the Defence Force for their ever ready assistance to us. I thank the American Defence Attache, Colonel Jim Rider, for arranging the splendid briefing I experienced in Hawaii with the Commander-in-Chief, PacificCINPAC-Admiral Long and his senior officers. I am sure that this is not so much a recognition of my position as a tribute to our Sub-committee. I am convinced by my discussions with the American defence chiefs that they see how valuable a sub-committee such as ours is not only in offering a forum to responsible and qualified Australians, but also in being able to cement further our splendid relationship with the United States. I commend the Committee's report to the House.
Mr MORRISON CSt George)-by leaveThe basic purpose of the report, as the Chairman of the Sub-Committee has outlined, is to provide a basis for a sane and sensible debate on the defence issues in Australia. As the title indicates, the report examines threats to Australia's security, their nature and probability. We undertook that analysis in measured terms and certainly not in the frantic and emotional terms that frequently mark the discussion of threats or defence in some sections of the defence community in Australia. The report concludes that a large scale attack on Australia is regarded as remote and improbable in the foreseeable future. It points out that it is difficult to envisage a serious strategic threat to Australia or to Australia's area of primary strategic concern which is unrelated to a major breakdown in the existing world order or to Australia's alliance with the United States.
The report further notes that it is the presence of the joint facilities and the role that they could be called on to play in the event of war between the super-powers that provide the risk of attack. I believe that the report faces up squarely to the balance ofrisk and advantage in hosting the facilities. In fact, there is a large section in the report dealing with this balance of risk and advantage associated not only with the alliance with the

Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3013

United States but also with the hosting of United States facilities on Australian soil.
All countries have an interest in the maintenance of a stable central balance between the super-powers, if by that it is meant a condition which prevails against the outbreak of war between the two super-powers, which would be horrendously destructive of all mankind. Australia, through the three main United States facilities on our territory, contributes to that United States deterrent capability. To the extent that that contribution plays a significant role in the maintenance of a stable central balance between the superpowers it can be justified.
All countries also have a professed interest in disarmament and have encouraged the two superpowers to negotiate the limitation of nuclear arms. The Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty discussions, limited as they are, are a feature of that process. Intrinsic to reaching an agreement on arms limitation between the United States and the Soviet Union was the capacity of each superpower to conduct its own verification procedures. There is no doubt that SALT was predicated on adequate and detailedverification capabilities available to each of the super-powers and that Pine Gap, with its surveillance and monitoring capacity, was crucial to the United States acceptance of the SALT agreement. Therefore, viewed in the broad perspective of a stable central balance and of steps towards arms limitation, there are strong arguments in favour of Australia hosting the United States facilities. Nevertheless, very real risks are associated with the presence on Australian territory of the facilities.
The United States nuclear powered and armed submarines, which receive communications through the North West Cape station, are part of the United States deterrent but equally they are highly potent offensive units which have a prescribed role should the international situation degrade and deterrents fail. Similarly, the very characteristics that enable the other facilities to be effective in verification have a relevance to situations that might arise in periods of increased tension possibly leading to open conflict between the two super-powers. For these reasons, the facilities are likely to be targets in the event of a nuclear exchange between the super-powers.
However, another likelihood has emerged in recent statements by the Reagan Administration over the last few weeks. The timing prevented the Sub-committee from a detailed examination of these statements. I think we can sum them upby saying that there is now a greater emphasis by the

Reagan Administration on the possibility of limited nuclear war and the use of tactical or theatre nuclear weapons. But of particular significance to us in these recent very confused signals emerging from the Reagan Administration is the statement by the Secretary of State, Mr Haig, about what he describes as a demonstration strike. I suppose that we can only try to describe a demonstration strike in the sense of the old gunboat diplomacy-a shot
across the bows.
The notion is not really all that new because I can recall, as undoubtedly the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) can recall, a statement in 1975 by the then United States Defense Secretary Schlesinger to a Congressional committee that in a limited war situation the Soviets 'could, for example, just go after one of the communications systems to our submarines'. Of course, as we all know, North West Cape is one such submarine communications system. The danger is that, if the Soviet Union followed Secretary Haig's logic, North West Cape would be an ideal demon-
stration strike target. It would show to the United States that the Soviet Union was serious. Its loss would be serious but not crippling to the United States communications system and, as it was not on United States territory, it would be less of a provocation to the United States than a strike on similar facilities in the United States. That is what is bound up in this concept of a demonstration strike. It is in this context, the very real risks associated with the advantages, that Australia has a role to play.
The arrangements for North West Cape, which were renegotiated by the Labor Government in 1974, prescribed Australia's consultation rights
and made clear to the United States that the denial of the rights pursuant to the exchange of letters between the United States Ambassador and the Australian Minister for Internal Affairs in 1963 was not acceptable. That renegotiation was not a cosmetic change but was intended to give Australia a greater role in the operations of North West Cape. Following that renegotiation, a framework was put in place to allow for greater
Australian participation. The opportunity thereby presented for a more active role for Australia, of course, depends upon the attitude of the Australian government of the time. The Fraser Government has not chosen to avail itself to the ftill extent of the opportunities thereby presented. A Labor government would certainly carryon from the position that we had developed prior to dismissal from office.
The Australian Labor Party, in the statement made recently by the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden), has announced its intention of

3014 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs

establishing a national security committee. One of the functions of that committee would be to analyse and to provide assessments from the Australian viewpoint of the United States and Soviet
strategic concepts, capabilities and planning. We must have our own source of information on what developments are likely to exacerbate the risks associated with Australia's hosting of facilities and our own assessment of circumstances under which the United States is likely to act in ways which are inimical to our interests. We must also ensure that we are fully capable of utilising the information that should be available to us from the surveillance systems which Australia hosts and that consultation procedures negotiated by the Labor Government are fully implemented.
As the hosts of facilities that are acknowledged to playa significant role in the super-power balance, we have the opportunity of encouraging restraint and promoting meaningful disarmament between the super-powers. It would be, I must confess, an unaccustomed role for Australia, but the preparatory groundwork was laid by the last Labor Government. I trust that the debate of this report will lead to a revita1isation of Australia's interest in the nuclear power balance and an
interest in the role that Australia can play in assuring that the world is not subject to the nuclear holocaust, the possibilities of which seem to be prevalent now in statements emanating from both Washington and Moscow.
Mr FALCONER (Casey)-by leave-As a member of the Sub-committee of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence which prepared the report which has been tabled by the honourable member for Kennedy (Mr Katter), I outline briefly the hopes that I have for the way in
which this report will be treated in the context of a forthcoming public debate. As previous speakers have said, there is a need in Australia for a sensible debate on the nature of threats facing Australia. To the extent that there is any debate on this subject, too much of it seems to go to one
of two extremes. One extreme is that Australia is in dire danger of invasion and we must keep ourselves virtually on a war footing, on the point of national mobilisation, so that we can deal with any eventuality, however substantial, when it might arise. At the other extreme, some people say that it is alarmist to talk about threats, that Australia is surrounded by a vast amount of water anyway and that no one is likely to molest us: So, let us not spend any money on defence; let us spend it elsewhere.
I believe that there is a need to involve in a defence debate the reasonably well-informed citizen who has made no special study of defence but who

may have some balanced perspectives to offer if
he or she takes some time to study the issue. This is a major objective of our report-to involve ordinary citizens in a discussion about defence.
There appears to be in Australia-indeed, in any democracy-a fundamental difficulty in main-
taining a viable peacetime defence force. In a democratic community there are always other and more appealing claims forced upon governments by pressure groups and by the broader electorate. A government seeking electoral popularity
will always be tempted to accede to these electorate pressures. When a democratic government de-
cides that a bigger defence effort is called for and that more public funds must be devoted to mili-
tary manpower and equipment, that government
often feels that it has to justify higher defence expenditure and drum up public support by, in a
sense, drumming up a threat.

To obtain public support for a reasonable de-

fence effort, politicians often in the past have had

to go around talking up a threat, so to speak. We

soowmnetrihmeetsorigcetinintthoistromuabtlteer.evrenbteulaiellvye

with that

our the

motto 'Walk softly and carry a big stick' is appro-

priate for Australia's defence effort. Australia

should have a credible defence force, but without

the Government having to raise unnecessary fears

by exaggerated public statements about the

threats we face. That is a difficult position to

maintain in a democracy, as I have said. Accord-

ingly, I welcome the publication of this report as, I

hope, a major contribution to an informed public

debate.

There has already been some comment about
aspects of the report which deal with the overall
global nuclear balance. I do not want to add to the comments that have already been made except to
say that I believe that there is some danger that
those parts of the report could become a preoccu-
pation in any public debate, compared with some
other parts of the report which are not so spec-
tacular but which deserve a great deal of analysis. Chapter I of the report refers particularly to the
global nuclear situation. This is a source of fasci-
nation for many people who become involved in discussions and analyses about Strategic Arms
Limitation Talks, about the throw weight of vari-
ous categories of missiles and about whether certain installations at various points in the world are
likely to be nuclear targets in various types of nu-
clear exchanges. This can have the unfortunate effect of diverting attention away from matters di-
rectly within Australia's own control. We can
have, for example, the situation in which people interested in selling nuclear air-raid shelters have

Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3015

an interest in drumming up fears about some imminent nuclear attack. We have seen that happen in Australia very recently. We have seen public statements made by public officials who unfortunately have given credence to some of those fears. The point I make is that we would be better advised to put all of that nervous energy and, indeed, that expenditure into working out how we, as a nation, can contribute to the lessening of world tensions and to the reduction of risks in our area of the world in particular.
If we look at those parts of the report which deal with low level contingencies and with medium level threats, we read of several situations that Australia has actually seen occur or has come close to seeing occur in recent years. For example, under the heading 'Low Level Contingencies' we have listed matters such as 'sporadic intrusions into Australia's air space by military aircraft or smugglers'. That has actually occurred in Australia in recent years. We have mentioned 'the planned introduction of exotic diseases or the support of illegal migrants or drug-runners'. The support of illegal migrants into Australia has apparently occurred very recently. We have mentioned also 'external support for dissident elements in, or military pressures against, a regional country the security of which is important to Australia'. I suggest that the newly independent country of Vanuatu comes into precisely that category. Only last year we saw activities taking place in Vanuatu which were supported by outside elements and in which, through our defence co-operation program
involving the Papua New Guinea forces, Australia eventually become involved, even if only to a marginal extent. However, those are the sorts of situations that have occurred. I believe that we ought to consider very seriously how our defence forces ought to be structured in order to meet these levels of threats so that we can respond quickly and effectively when the occasion arises.
Let me give one example of what I mean by a rational defence debate which, in fact, leads us to proper conclusions about the structure of our Defence Force, having in mind the types of threats we might face. Many people in Australia suggest that we ought to have a significant effort in national service training on some broadly based level for the purpose of greater mobilisation of manpower, if that should be called for. Without debating in full the arguments for or against those propositions, let me say that if we faced an intermediate level threat or lower level contingency in one of the island groups off Australia's shore and our main defence effort had gone into providing the capability to raise an army of 200,000 or 300,000 people, but we did not have the capacity

to get even a small number of people with our own facilities, our own ships and planes, to some point only slightly off-shore from Australia, then we would not be able to cope with the actual threat that had developed. We would have developed something which may look good on paper in terms of the figures that we could produce-the numbers of people we could put under arms if a major threat arose-but we might not be able to deal with the lower level threat which we were facing and which could become a real situation within a very short period. I draw attention to that part of paragraph II of the introduction to the report which states:
Substantial space has been devoted to the issues concerning globalconfiict because of the immensity of the subject. However the Committee wishes to draw attention to the importance for Australian defence planning of the issues canvassed in Chapters 3 and 4. These deal with intermediate level threats and low level contingencies which may require an Australian response independent of the actions of our allies. Therefore they have implications for the structure and capacity of our Defence Force.
Mr Deputy Speaker, I commend this report to the Parliament and, indeed, to the public. Speaking for myself, let me say that there are aspects of the report which I would give a greater emphasis to in some areas, or less emphasis to in others, but I support the general thrust of the reporr. I would say also, however, that if, as a result of the public debate other considerations are brought to light which cause me to change my attitude to any of our recommendations and conclusions, then I believe that that would be a very good result for the report. I am sure that no members of the Committee who are responsible for preparing this report would take a dogmatic attitude that they are irrevocably committed to every sentence in it.
Mr BEAZLEY (Swan)-by leave-As a member of the Sub-committee on Defence Matters of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence, I have much pleasure in supporting the remarks of the Chairman of the Subcommittee, the honourable member for Kennedy (Mr Katter), in commending the report to honourable members for their consideration and to the public for debate. The Committee has addressed itself to one of the most difficult questions which confront Australian defence planners; that is, to define threats to Australia's security. Our geographic location is one of our principal strategic advantages. It gives us time to see a threat developing, but it makes the type of long term projections of a likely threat suitable for the appropriate planning of a force structure and weapons procurement program extraordinarily difficult. The absence of immediate threats to our

3016 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs

security has not prevented Australians from becoming threat obsessed. The British military historian, Professor Michael Howard, said, after a visit to Australia in 1971, that there were more 'threat, experts' per square mile in this country than in any other of the many he had visited.
The Committee confidently expects and wishes to encourage the minute examination of this report by those experts and others with an interest in the general public. The Sub-committee has a
general reference to monitor the implementation of the Government's defence program. We did not feel that we could do this /',ffectively until we had addressed the basis on which any defence policy for Australia must be made. We recognised the inexact nature of that task, but were no more deterred by it than anyone with an interest ought to be. We did not draw conclusions. The Committee report's real value is the systematic organisation
and presentation of the problem.
The report really is in two parts, One part deals with a level of threat which is largely a problem for Australian diplomacy rather than defence planning. This involves the question of threats arising out of involvement in a global war. The Committee does not see such a war as likely, but if it occurs we argue that aspects of Australia's alliance relationship make our involvement in that conflict highly likely. This includes the possibility of a nuclear attack on Australian territory, at
least one directed to the joint defence facilities. We do not see this as a threat to major population centres, at least while those centres are not involved in basing allied military activity. This level of threat-an attack involving nuclear tipped missiles-is not a problem for Australia's defence
beyond the area of civil defence. As I said, we would never have the capacity to interdict such an attack; therefore, it is not a defence problem. But it is a problem for Australian diplomacy and I will say a little on that a bit later.
The second level of threat which concerned the Committee was of various forms of conventional invasion and harassment. In the remainder of the report the Committee addressed itself to the question of motive and capability on the part of various nations or movements capable of posing such threats. 'I would say that most members of the Committee are optimistic that most contingencies at this level of threat can be dealt with from within Australian resources, provided we keep our priorities clear. As we point out, even the super-powers would require a massive diversion of resources and forward bases which they do not currently possess, to be able to mount an effective assault, assuming the development of the necessary motive on their part. We were supported in

those views and came to those conclusions as a result of evidence given by various members of the Department of Defence. Defence policy based on deterring such an assault by appropriate maritime strike capabilities and the mobility of Australian land forces would make a difficult task almost
impossible.
It is my view that defence procurement and planning should be oriented to deal with the maximum possible conventional threat even though, because of the difficulties such a task may pose to a potentional enemy, this is less likely than lesser conventional threats. Here I do part company with some of the remarks that were made by the
honourable member for Casey (Mr Falconer). The problems of minor harassment, such as those to which he referred, and limited lodgment, can be picked up on the way to achieving the primary objective of deterrence agairist major attack. Planning for the maximum possible threat that we can deal with from our own resources will, I believe, prevent us from being diverted by debilitating side issues along the way, as we have been diverted so often in the past in the planning of our defence policy and in our international commitments. The Committee's report and the very
extensive evidence presented to it by government and private sources, which is also incidentally publicly available, will provide a useful data base for a serious and systematic discussion of these Issues.
In conclusion, I refer back to an aspect of the Committee's report that I mentioned earlier, and that was of a nuclear threat to Australia, The Committee discerned, as have Australian governments, a very clear Australian interest in superpower arms control agreements and multilateral nuclear arms control agreements, such as the nuclear non-proliferation treaty. We have documented why we should be interested. Instead of just saying that a potential nuclear threat exists, we have gone into detail as to the circumstances, the strategies adopted by the principal nuclear powers and the manner in which such a
threat may come about and emerge in our region. In fact, in chapter 1 we go into detail as to the nuclear delivery systems which should be of interest to us as well as the particular strategies which are being pursued by the super-powers that could mean that they would come into use. For the sake of completeness, I want to incorporate in
Hansard a research note produced in the journal of the International Institute of Strategic Studies written by one of the committee's witnesses, Dr Desmond Ball, which gives in greater detail than we felt justified information about Soviet intercontinental ballistic missiles deployment. I would

Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3017

like to do that to assist further public debate on the matter. In particular, I believe that this would provide useful information on the use of an SS-18 missile to which we refer in the report. I seek leave of the House to have that document incorporated in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
RESEARCH NOTE: SOVIET ICBM DEPLOYMENT
Desmond Ball
(Dr Ball, Fellow in the Strategic & Defence Studies Centre, Canberra, is currently a Research Associate at the I1SS.)
Since the United States put together the first Single Integrated Operational Plan (SlOP) in 1960, US target plans for strategic nuclear war have become extremely comprehensive. The current plan, designated SIOP-5, was approved in December 1975 and came into effect in 1976, but has been regularly up-dated and revised since then.' It includes some 40,000 potential target installations,' divided into four principal target groups, each of which in turn contains a wide range of target types. The four principal groups are Soviet nuclear forces, general purpose forces, military and political leadership centres and the Soviet economic and industrial base.'
Soviet target structure
However, nowhere in the public strategic discourse on nuclear targeting doctrines and basic national security policies is there any comprehensive description of this Soviet strategic target structure-the locations of the installations relevant to US targeting policy, the characteristics of the particular installations, and their geographical proximity to one another and to population areas within the Soviet Union. This is particularly remarkable since such considerations are not only the essential data of the military war planners but are also critical to any informed discussion of some fundamental questions of strategic policy. For example, the locations and characteristics of Soviet targets are obviously important factors in US strategic nuclear force structure development since they should, at least in part, inform decisions on the numbers and types of forces needed to attack them. They figure centrally in certain aspects of arms control measures and negotiations and the geographical relationship between the targets and the Soviet population centres is a key factor in assessing the viability of any strategic policies involving limitations and constraints, or of any targeting doctrines designed to destroy certain target categories (such as Soviet strategic nuclear forces) while limiting civilian casualties and damage to nonmilitary installations. These points are the subject of particular elucidation in the following discussion of Soviet ICBM deployment as these missiles are a primary element of the nuclear forces group of Soviet targets.
As shown on the map on page 168, the Soviet ICBM force is deployed in 26 complexes.' Contrary to frequent observations that these complexes lie in a broad band astride the TransSiberian Railway, they are in fact distributed quite widely throughout the Soviet Union, with about half of them situated west of the Ural Mountains. According to the supplement to the F.Y. 1981 Military Posture of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Soviet Strategic Rocket Force deployed in these complexes consists of 1,398 ICBMs.' Some limited information is available which indicates the relative numbers and locations of some of the missile types that comprise this force. For example, there are reportedly 60 SS-13 ICBMs, all based at a single location.' The SS-18 deployment, which is limited under the SALT constraints to 308 ICBMs, is now essentially

completed. These SS-18s are located in six fields in southcentral USSR previously occupied by SS-9s; each field contains eight or nine flights of about six SS-18s each.' The SS-II force was in the past far more widely deployed-in western USSR, around the Urals, and in three locations near the Mongolian border (at Drovyanaya, Olovyannaya and Svobodnyy).' Under the SALT constraints, the Soviet Union is allowed to replace 512 of these SS-II s with SS-17 and SS-19 missiles equipped with multiple independently-targetable reentry vehicles (MIRVs). According to the Organisation of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the deployment of the SS-17 has been completed at about 150 silos,' suggesting that SS-19 deployment will level off in the near future at about 360 missiles. In general, the Soviet Union has continued the practice of deploying different kinds of missiles in separate complexes, although there are two exceptions-Derazhnya and Pervomaysk, where 180 launchers consist of both SS-ils and SS-19s."
Soviet ICBM Deployment
In addition to these 26 ICBM fields, the Soviet Union reportedly has about 150 test and training launchers deployed at the two ICBM test centres at Plesetsk and Tyuratam; these are used for both research and development purposes as well as for crew training and testing of operational ICBMS." Plesetsk is used principally for testing solid-fuel ICBMS (the SS-13 and SS-16) while Tyuratam is the test site for all the liquid-fuel ICBMS (the SS-II, SS-17, SS-18, and SS-19). Many of these launchers including eighteen SS-18s at Tyuratarn, are reckoned to have an operational capability.
Implications for US Strategy
These locations are significant, first, from the perspective of US strategic nuclear force development and employment. About two-thirds of the complexes are located-deep within the Soviet Union, which enhances the US concern with respect to Qoth the range and defence penetration capabilities of her strategic forces. The depth and intensity of Soviet air defences poses special problems for bombers and air-delivered weapons, including short range attack missiles (SRAMS) and air-launched cruise missiles (ALCMS) that might be considered for use in some circumstances against ICBM sites or their associated command posts and support systems. These problems might be met partially by the development of longer-range missiles capable of being launched at stand-off distances outside the Soviet borders, but they may also require the employment of penetration aids.
In the case of ICBMS and submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMS) there is rather marginal problem of penetration deriving from the deployment of the Galosh antiballistic missile (ABM) system around Moscow. As John Newhouse has noted, this system 'affords some protection to about 300 ICBMS deployed within its operating area '." Given that the Galosh has a range of something in excess of 200 miles, it is likely that the potentially defended ICBM fields are those at Kozelsk, Teykovo, Kostroma and perhaps Yedrovo, although there is some uncertainty due to the lack of data on the specific locations of both the ABM launchers and the actual ICBM silos. Of course, the 64 Galosh missiles currently deployed could not defend all of these 300 ICBMS as well as Moscow, but the capability must be given some consideration, particularly in scenarios involving very limited counterforce strikes.
The question of range is especially relevant to the possibility that SLBMS might be targeted against the Soviet ICBM sites. These sites can certainly all be reached by the Minuteman and Titan 11 ICBMS, and by the bomber force, granted in-flight refuelling capabilities and appropriate penetration aids, but the situation with respect to SLBMS is problematical, depending essentially on the nominal operating areas of the fleet ballistic missile (FBM) submarines. The

3018 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs

Trident I SLBM which is currently entering service has a reported range of about 4,000 nautical miles, whereas that of the Poseidon SLBMS is only about 2,500 nautical miles; however, the US Navy has repeatedly emphasized that this in, crease is to provide the submarines with a much greater operating area, hence maintaining t~eir survivability. against any advances in Soviet anti-submarine warfare. ThiS could well mean that some of the Soviet ICBM sites, and most particularly the SS-9-cum-SS-18 fields in south-central USSR, are beyond the range of US SLBMS, so that US counter-silo capability rests with two rather than three legs of the American Triad. This will become an increasingly important consideration if the counterforce potential of US SLBMS improves through the I980s.
With respect to arms control, the question of the locations of Soviet ICBM deployments has figured in the SALT debate in two ways, quite apart from the issue of the numbers of missi1es involved. The first derived from the deployment of the mixture of MIRVed SS-19ICBMS and single-warhead SS-II ICBMS in nearly identical launchers at the two fields near the small towns of Derazhnya and Pervomaysk. This problem was eventually resolved in a Common Understandng to the effect that all launchers in any fields judged by the United States to contain MIRVed ICBMS would be counted as MIRVed launchers even though some might in fact contain singlewarhead missiles." The second concern, which was raised in US Senate Hearings in 1972, relates to the possibility of more general verification problems. According to Se~ator B.uckley, the monitoring of Soviet ICBM deployments IS particularly difficult because 'the general area in which Soviet ICBMS are deployed is in North-Central Asia, where the normal cloud cover is among the heaviest of any region in the Northern Hemisphere'." This concern might well have been alleviated had the location of the Soviet ICBM fields been generally known, since they clearly extend far beyond Central Asia and are mostly located south of 60 N latitude. While some fields in this wide deployment area might be covered by clouds at some times, the coverage is unlikely to be concurrently severe in all areas. In fact, many of the ICBM fields, including the SS-9/SS-18 fields, are in areas which are generally free of cloud cover.
Targeting and Collateral Damage
Finally, the particular locations of the Soviet ICBM fields has implications for the development of viable strategic policies and targeting doctrines. For example, the geographic spread of Soviet ICBM sites suggests possible difficulties with strategic policies which attempt to control escalation and rely, at least in part, on Soviet attack assessment capability. Unlike the US, which has deployed her ICBMS generally in the centre of the country, the Soviet ICBMS extend across virtually the entire USSR. A Soviet attack limited to US ICBM sites would fall completely east of 115W longitude and west of the Mississippi River, and would be less difficult for US early-warning and attack assessment systems to differentiate from an attack involving the major US population and industrial centres and the national capital. A US retaliatory strike against the Soviet ICBM fields, on the other hand, must cover nearly the entire geographic expanse of the Soviet Union, including the more heavily populated and industrialized area of west of the Urals. Processing data on some 1,000 and 2,000 warheads and other objects such as penetration aids and booster fragments targeted over this vast region might pose insuperable problems for the Soviet attack assessment system. This is especially the case vis-'a-vis the three or four ICBM fields in the Moscow area.
A similar concern arises from the possibility of extensive collateral damage attending a US strike against the Soviet ICBM fields. In the US case, the separation of the ICBM fields from major areas means that the collateral impact on population of a Soviet counter-ICBM attack would be relatively small, although casualties in St Louis and Kansas City

might be significant, depending on the prevailing winds, pursuant to an attack on the 150 Minuteman II ICBMS at Whiteman Air Force Base, Missouri." On the other hand, with about half of the Soviet ICBM fields west of the Urals and several of them located near some of the most densely populated areas of the USSR, the Soviet casualty figures following a counter-ICBM attack could be quite high, depending very much on the nature of the attack and the prevailing wind directions at the time. At the least, the relative location of the Soviet ICBM fields increases the difficulties of persuading the Soviet leadership to accept the notion of limited counterforce nuclear warfare.
These considerations are only some of those that would arise in any serious strategic discussion of the targeting of Soviet ICBM fields. Moreover, these sites obviously represent a relatively small proportion of the potential targets contained in the SlOP. A comprehensive discussion of the complete Soviet target structure would greatly illumine the development of US strategic policy and associated force posture.
NOTES
I Testimony of General Slay, Senate Armed Services Committee, Fiscal Year 1977 Authorizatioli for Military Procurement, Research and Development, and Active Duty, Selected Reserve and Civilian Personnel Strengths (USGPO: Washington, 1976), p. 6422; and testimony of Colonel Magee, House Appropriations Committee, Department of Defense Appropriatoins for 1980 (USGPO: Washington, 1979), p. 878.
2 There are several references to the effect that in 1974, at the time the development of SIOP-5 was initiated, the US strategic targeting plan contained more than 25,000 targets. See, for example, Senate Foreign Relations Committee, US-USSR Strategic Policies (USGPO: Washington, 1974), p. 38.
In 1979, General Ellis testified that there had been 'an annual average increase in the numbers of installations included in the target list of approximately 10 per cent over the past several years'. Senate Armed Services Committee, Department of Defense Authorization for Appropriations for /fiscal Year 1980 (USGPO: Washington, 1979), p. 397.
3 Testimony of Dr William Perry, House Armed Services Committee, Hearings on Military Posture and H. R. 1872 (USGPO: Washington, 1979), Book 1 of Part 3, p. 186.
4 This map is derived from the testimony of James R. Miller, Chief, Ballistic Missiles Systems Branch, Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), op. cit., in note 3, p. 124.
'United States Military Posture for F. Y. 1981, Supplement to the Chairman's Overview, prepared by the Organization of the Joint Chiefs to Staff. (USGPO: Washington, 1980), pp. 67-68.
6 Aviation Week and Space Technology, 11 October 1971, pp. 36-37; Flight International, 10 June 1978, p. 1763.
7 See William Beecher, 'US Data Indicate Moscow is slowing ICBM Deployment', New York Times, 17 December 1970; Stewart Alsop, 'What's Going in the HolesT, Newsweek, 10 May 1971, p. 124; and John Newhouse, Cold Dawn: The Story of SALT (Holt, Rinehart & Winston: New York, 1973), p. 201.
'Aviation Week and Space Technology, 11 October 1971, pp. 36-37; New York Times, 27 May 1971, pp. 1,6; and New York Times, 17 February 1973, p. 4.
9 Organization of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, op. cit. in note 5, p. 6.8.
10 Senate Foreign Relations Committee, The SALT II Treaty (USGPO: Washington, 1979), Part I, p. 238, and Strobe Talbott, Endgame: The Inside Story of SALT II (Harper and Row: London, 1979) pp. 110-113.

Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3019

II San Diego Union. 25 October 1979.
12 John Newhouse. op. cit. in note 7, p. 226.
IJ Senate Foreign Relations Committee, op. cit. in note 10, pp. 8,238; and Strobe Talbott, op. cit. in note 10, pp. I 10-113.
" Senator James L. Buckley, Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Strategic Arms Limitation Agreements (USGPO: Washington, 1972), p. 259.
" Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Briefing on COUlllerforce Attacks (USGPO: Washington, 1975).
Mr BEAZLEY-This means, I believe, that we should see our arms control stance as a central part of and fully integral with our defence strategy, not as a side issue in which we occasionally interest ourselves or something to be undertaken by the diplomats assigned to the arms control committee of the United Nations. It should be in the centre of our defence strategy and of our foreign policy stance, as it is in the centre of the types of situation which could, at some time in the future, create difficulties for Australia and pose a threat to Australian security. We have the right to comment on this matter. These comments are openly sought by virtue of the agreement to which the honourable member for St George (Mr Morrison) referred and which was signed by the then Defence Secretary of the United Nations Administration, James Schlesinger, and Lance Barnard. The United States, by that agreement, invites our comments on a wide variety of strategic nuclear matters.
The second reason why we have a right to comment is that we host facilities. This has been referred to already and I do not want to refer to it at any great length. From the evidence presented to our Committee on this matter-evidence at some considerable length-we discovered that those installations have a very serious contributing role in regard to arms control agreements. In assessing, as the honourable member for St George said, the balance of risk and advantage in the presence of those installations, that is one of the matters to be weighed in the balance. However, that arms control function will be meaningless if we are not to pursue a diplomatic strategy aimed at achieving arms control arrangements. We believe, as this Government believes and all other Australian governments have believed, that those arms control agreements are absolutely vital to Australian security. Our report makes clear, in detail, precisely why. I join in the comments of thanks of the honourable member for Kennedy to members of the staff of the Committee. They did an excellent support job for the investigations that we undertook. In conclusion, I hope that the general public will treat this as a seminar document, a document for a widespread public discussion. If it does, I believe that it will be of considerable value to the defence debate in Australia for many years to come.

Mr SHIPTON (Higgins)-by leave-I welcome this report, as it has been welcomed by other members of the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence, as a contribution to the defence debate in Australia. As the Chairman of the Sub-committee, the honourable member for Kennedy (Mr Katter) said, it is an interim report and it must be seen as a report that raises issues for discussion in the Parliament and the community rather than a report that makes particular recommendations at this time. As the Chairman of the Sub-committee pointed out, the report makes
no firm judgments but does set out some conclusions on the evidence before it. It is important that the report be seen for what it is; that is, a contribution to the debate. This must be clearly understood. The honourable member for Casey (Mr Falconer) made a good point when he said that, in his view, no member of the' Committee was firmly committed to every sentence of the report and that the public debate may, in fact, throw up other aspects of the defence debate that will cause honourable members and senators to change their minds.
In any discussion of a report of this nature it is important to reflect on the United States alliance and Australia's relations with that country. I think that Australia's relations with the United
States, particularly the ANZUS alliance, are the basic uinbrella of defence for Australia. The United States alliance is as important now as it was at the time of the Battle of the Coral Sea. I was distressed recently, in talking to some higher school certificate students in Melbourne, to find that they had not heard of the Battle of the Coral Sea. Our alliance with the United States is our most important alliance and is vital to the security of Australia. But the relationship between the two countries must be based and is based on mutual respect. I reiterate that it must also be one in which Australia is in no way subservient, nor does it have a subservient role, to the United States even though it is not a super-power, as is the United States.
In speaking today, I see my comments as additional to the comments in the report. I would have liked to include in the report as printed some comments under the heading 'additional comments', but under the Standing Orders one can only table and note a dissent or a protest. I certainly do not want to note a dissent or protest in those formal terms because the very nature of the report is one that raises matters for discussion. The course open to me is to comment in the House today on some additional points on the report itself. The report mentions a number' of countries in the region and makes comments

3020 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs

about some particular countries. In that regard, I can do no more than refer to paragraph 2.23 of the report, which states:
Australia's relations with neighbouring countries and most regional states are good despite some relatively minor irritations that develop from time to time. In fact, there are currently no serious disputes with any member of the international community which, in the foreseeable future, could develop into motives for warlike actions against Australia.
I believe that that paragraph is paramount. I believe that that paragraph needs to be taken into account in any examination of the report and consideration of the countries mentioned. Two countries that spring to mind are Japan and Indonesia.
The report comments also on the question of the joint Australia-United States facilities in Australia. I think it is important, at the outset, to refer to the comments of the Chairman of the Sub-committee in tabling the report when he said:
I believe that the risks associated with nuclear attack on Australia, which might result from the alliance with the United States, ar!' outweighed by the advantages Australia derives from the alliance.
I believe that the report supports the proposition that the presence in Australia of the joint facilities poses a much lesser risk to Australia than not having them. I refer to paragraph 1.76 and to conclusion 10 because these are two paragraphs that are relevant to the debate on the joint facilities. Paragraph 1.76, in part, states:
The SALT agreements were predicated on adequate and detailed verification capabilities. It would seem that the part played in this regard by the joint United States-Australian facilities at Pine Gap and Nurrungar is vital.
I differ with the comments made by some of my colleagues in this regard, particularly the comment made a few moments ago by the honourable member for Swan (Mr Beazley) when he said something along these lines: 'The Committee discovered that these facilities had a contribution to make to arms control arrangements'. I do not believe that the evidence taken by the' SubGommittee supports that conclusion. Some of the evidence quoted in the report-evidence which was taken from a Dr Desmond Ball-is of opinions of Dr Ball and that is all that it is. Some conclusions were drawn also from some of Dr Ball's evidence and paragraph 1.50 states:
It would seem from what has been said . . .
These are Dr Ball's opinions and the report uses the word 'opinions'-
that the Soviet Union is likely to think that the North West Cape installation . , . Pine Gap and Nurrungar are connected in one of the following ways . . .
Inasmuch as that might be seen as a committee observation and determination I do not think that anybody could draw that conclusion. It gives

some credibility to an opinion that I personally do not think it deserves.
I have examined the public evidence given by Mr Mathams, former director of Defence Scientific and Technical Intelligence, where he said:
I have no comment to make on the joint facilities in Australia-
I point out that evidence also to the House.
Mr Morrison-Read the report.
Mr SHIPTON-I am reading the report. I am reading from the evidence of Mr Mathams at page 1349. He said:
I have no comment to make on the joint facilities in Australia-
I am sorry that the honourable member for St George saw fit to interject but I read that part of the record into Hansard because of his intervention. Similarly, I believe that the comment made in paragraph 1.76, concerning a part of the evidence of Dr Ball does not support the comment in conclusion 10 which states:
, The presence of the installations can be justified in terms of their contribution to the central balance between the superpowers . . .
It is a matter of opinion. In my opinion the comment in conclusion 10 is based on the comment in paragraph 1.76. As I said, it is only a comment. In my opinion, on my analysis and on my reading of the evidence, it is not evidence upon which one can make those comments or draw the conclusion which has been reached in conclusion 10, or that part of it to which I have just referred.
At this stage, I refer also to the visit by some honourable members of the Joint Committee to some of the joint facilities. I am sure that honourable members will agree that the Committee received no evidence during its visits to those facilities which would support any of the conclusions in the document tabled today. Even though there may be some agreement or disagreement as to what are the conclusions in the document today, they are based on the evidence given to the Sub-committee referred to in the document and are not the result of any evidence obtained by visits by the Committee to any of the facilities. I believe that the report recognises that fact. I believe that the House will clearly understand that fact. The report analyses threats of various sorts which are set out. 1 welcome the discussion and analysis of threats in the debate today. I point out that honourable members must always remember-this is always a case of eternal vigilance as honourable members obviously know that the strategic environment can often change rapidly and unpredictable threats can arise at any time.

Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3021

Mr HOLDING (Melbourne Ports)-by leave-The report that has been tabled by the Joint Committee on Foreign Affairs and Defence is an important document. I believe it is important in this way: It is basically a consensus document which is concerned to consider the range of threat which must be considered by defence planners and the Government in the maintenance of an effective Australian defence capacity. It has reached some fairly broad conclusions. I believe the importance of the report lies not so much in the conclusions that it has reached but in the number of questions that are pqsed and the way in which those questions are posed. I believe this is probably the first occasion when any parliamentary committee has considered the threat of nuclear war, its impact and effect upon Australia, and the way in which Australia could unfortunately be involved in such a conflict. I say to the Chairman of the Joint Committee that, on the evidence given to the Committee, it reached the conclusion that while the joint American facilities within Australia played an important rolehonourable members might have 'their own views as to the significance of the role that they played-the conclusions that the Committee
reached were not just based on the evidence of Dr Ball. There was substantial evidence which indicated that those who examined this matter had reached the conclusion that the presence of those bases made them a likely target in the event of nuclear conflict between the Soviet Union and the United States of America. I think that is a view that has also been supported in the House by the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) and the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden).
Mr Killen-I have offered no view on that whatsoever. My friend does me a great disservice.
Mr HOLDING-If the Minister takes that view I apologise to him. I was not concerned to do
him any disservice. I rather recall that the Minister tended to be quoted in respect of a statement about potential nuclyar threat. But if he says that he has not made that statement. I certainly adopt what he says as I do not want to misrepresent him. I think the importance of this document lies in the fact that whatever view one might take members of this Committee or parliamentarians have a wide range of deeply held views about the role that Australia must play in its defence preparedness. They are differing and strongly held views. I think it possibly says something for the effectiveness of the committee system that despite the depth and divergence of those views members of parliament are capable of sitting together, weighing the evidence and producing a consensus document which, as I have said, is concerned not so

much with inviting conclusions but to posing questions which we hope will be very seriously considered not merely by the Parliament but by the people of Australia. I think that is the real significance of this report. I think that some of the generalities which have coloured the whole approach to Australia's defence preparedness were long overdue to be dealt with in the way that they were approached in the Sub-committee's report. We realised that we had to deal with some sensitive issues when looking at the question of regional threat and the way in which any Minister or any government has to deal with that subject. Those issues, I think, were faced squarely and objectively.
The major conclusion that was reached, I believe-and fairly reached-is that the major threat which could affect us lies in the possibility of a major nuclear conflict between the United States and the Soviet Union. I think the Subcommittee performed a useful service by pointing out the awesome display of weaponry that exists in the arsenals of both the United States and the Soviet Union and the faci that those nations have an overkill capacity of about five or six. There is an analogy used, not directed against the United States but in terms of technological development,
that one United States Polaris submarine has enough nuclear strike capacity to destroy every major: Soviet city with a population over 150,000. That is the kind of evidence that I think has to be thought about seriously by the community because it is equally true that, just as the United States has that capacity, so too does the Soviet Union. Therefore I think that makes it even more important that the Australian Government, in considering our defence role, gives a great deal of importance and a great deal of emphasis to the need for continuing discussion between the
United States and the Soviet Union on the whole question of disarmament.
If one takes the view of this Government that Australia has to operate within the framework of the American alliance, that does not prevent us, within that alliance, within the United Nations and in the world assemblies, from raising our
voice to point out that the greatest single threat to the people of this nation, and indeed to the people of the world, is the threat of nuclear conflict. Already there are very considerable movements in Europe. People are concerned that Europe could in fact be turned into a nuclear graveyard as a result of what is glibly described as limited nuclear conflict. I believe the impact of those movements will ultimately be felt in Australia. Whichever view one might take of these issues, I think what is important is that we now have a document which,

3022 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Minister for Communications

for better or for worse, puts the range of arguments that have to be considered by every parliamentarian and by every citizen upon which an informed debate can take place within the Australian community and the Australian defence establishment.
I thank my fellow members of the Subcommittee because I believe all members made a genuine attempt to put aside their own political attitudes to produce a document which was based on fact. I particularly thank the officers of the Parliament without whose work and dedication this report would not have been available. I think it comes to the Parliament as a document on which a useful and informed debate upon the whole question of the range of threats that face Australia may be predicated.
MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS
Suspension of Standing Orders
Motion (by Mr Sinclair)-by leave-agreed to:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent Notice No.6 General Business standing in the name of the honourable member for Werriwa from being called on and debated forthwith.
Motion of Censure
Mr KERIN (Werriwa) (4.0)-1 move:
That this House censures the Minister for Communications for having misled the Parliament with respect to his knowledge of activities by the Australian Dairy Corporation when under his ministerial control.
At the weekend, the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) described critics of his dear old mates the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) and the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) as 'toad-like creatures skilled in the personal smear'. At the outset, I wish to say that my croaky voice has nothing to do with the Deputy Prime Minister's statement. I think the Deputy Prime Minister was rather upset because there have been new developments in this case. Previously we had been discussing the findings of an all-party committee, a committee that came down with a unanimous finding. We had been discussing matters that are subject to widespread public debate and we had been discussing the whole concept of ministerial responsibility. No doubt the Deputy Prime Minister was stung also at the weekend by the disclosure that his house in Canberra is subsidised by the taxpayers to the extent that he pays only 4.75 per cent interest; but, basically, he was upset because people dare question those of his mates who are born to rule.
This is the National Country Party's problem. There is cine rule for it and another rule for the rest. According to the Country Party's double

standards, it is okay for the leader of the National Country Party in the New South Wales Parliament to smear an innocent man under parliamentary privilege. It was okay for the right honourable member for Flinders (Sir Phillip Lynch) and the right honourable member for New England to use smear, innuendo and lies to hound Connor and Cairns out of this Parliament. But, no; the Opposition is supposedly not allowed to raise questions relating to this report of an all-party Senate committee which cast serious doubt on the capacity of the Minister for Communications to tell the truth. The question of ministerial responsibility demanded and still demands debate. If this Parliament has standards or is not to be run by the cowshed Cabinet, which the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the top three Country Party Ministers so cynically form, these matters must be debated. There, are double standards galore. The Prime Minister is the master of the double standard. I would like to refer to the standards of previous parliaments.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar) -Order! I invite the honourable member to be relevant to the motion that he has before the House. There must be some limit to the latitude that the Chair can extend to him.
Mr KERIN-I was trying to prove that, given that we have a Case of ministerial responsibility, we need to have consistent standards applied. I was going to point out that Connor resigned from this House because he left out one sentence in a statement and that Senator Withers was dismissed from the Cabinet-he was a Liberal-because he might have said something in a telephone conversation. What I am referring to are the double standards in this House. What we are talking about is ministerial responsibility. On that question, as I have quoted to the House before, the Prime Minister said:
It is certainly true that Ministers cannot be aware of everything that occurs in their departments . . . But if a major blunder occurred in a department, of real importance to Australia, and if the Minister were unaware of it, that Minister should take responsibility for the mistakes of his department and offer to resign.
I was pointing out that these are the sorts of standards that are now hot air. Although the present Prime Minister may have believed in them when he made that statement, it is certain that those standards are not being applied in this House because the Prime Minister will do nothing. That is why his language is not believed and that is why people cannot trust anything he says.
This is the third time in as many months when the Minister has been the subject of a censure motion raised by the Opposition. On both

Minister for Communications

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3023

occasions, the censure was directed towards the Government or the Minister for failure to ensure adequate and proper standards and for lack of ministerial responsibility. On both occasions, the main questions were whether the Minister for Communications knew of the continuing breach of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade with respect to the sale of skim milk powder, whether the Minister had acted promptly in ensuring that the breach did not continue and whether the conclusions of the all-party Senate committee which investigated Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd could be upheld.
Honourable members will recall that, in the personal explanation of the Minister for Communications of 16 March 1981, his speeches of 17 September 1981, 22 September 1981 and of 29 October 1981 and in correspondence with the Senate Committee on several dates commencing on 16 March 1981, the Minister categorically denied that he knew of the continuing breach of the GATT agreement and that, once he learnt of it, he took steps to stop the breach by issuing instructions to the Australian Dairy Corporation which in his view, from that point on, had the responsibility of ensuring that no further breaches occurred. The Minister refused to give sworn evidence to the Committee, stating that his ministerial oath meant that his correspondence was sufficient. The Minister confirmed his recollection of the events in 1976 in clear and unequivocal terms in statements to the House of Representatives.
At the weekend the Minister did not deny the latest sets of allegations; that is, the latest sets of allegations appearing in the PM interview on the Australian Broadcasting Commission network last Thursday. I do not think he denied them because they are facts. He simply said that his memory is worse than those of other people. So, all of this business of posturing about toad-like creatures and character smearing is nothing more than a manifestation of the fact that the Country Party thinks it is born to rule, as does the Liberal Party. They can have double standards-one standard for the Australian Labor Party and one for the coalition-one for the Liberal Party and one for the Country Party. At all times the Minister said that the breach of GATT would be totally unacceptable. I will read what the Minister said on other occasions. In his letter to the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations, he said:
Such an arrangement, if known about, would have been totally unacceptable to the Government.
In his speech on 17 September, as recorded on page 1484 of Hansard the Minister said:

I strongly support the contention that action should be taken by a government with a chairman of a statutory corporation or a subsidiary of a statutory corporation if it finds there is a breach of an international arrangement. Such action was undertaken by me immediately evidence came forward to that effect.
He is saying that the arrangement was totally unacceptable. He keeps on saying that he took immediate steps to end the breach. Again, I quote from Hansard wherein he stated:
I recall discussing the situation with the then Chairman of the ADC, Mr A. A. S. Webster in November 1976 and requesting him to take action to rectify the situation so that the GATT minimum price would be observed.
At page 1601 of Hansard he stated:
. . . there was a reference by me directly to the Chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation, immediately a breach of this arrangement under GATT had been identified, requesting that he terminate those arrangements and ensure that the obligations under that arrangement be met.
He drew the attention of the House to other statements that he had made. We have other evidence of the Minister's categorical position on whether he believes that immediate steps should be taken to end the breach and on the concept of ministerial responsibility. I refer honourable members to page 2694 of Hansard. The Minister stated:
I urge those honourable members who wish to pursue the matter further to analyse the great volume of reports that my colleague has tabled. I might point out the fact that everything has been tabled other than some reports which the Australian Federal Police Commissioner has suggested should not be tabled, and they relate only to some evidence obtained by the Federal Police. If one looks at these reports one sees that at no stage did any member of the Ministry or the Government have any knowledge of these mailers. As soon as there was knowledge, of course, action was taken.
I am trying to make a case that the Minister at all stages has said that any breach of the GATT arrangement would be totally unacceptable and that once he learnt of it immediate steps to end the breach would be put in train. Now we have a new situation. All previous debate on this question related to the Minister's having a knowledge of the continuing breach of GATT, not the initial
breach, and whether he knew in September ot
November 1976. It was subsequently shown that he knew of it on 9 November 1976. So, there is a bit of a question about whether the Minister knew of it in early September 1976. Nearly all discussion in this House in the two censure motions and the debate concerned the sale of skim milk powder to the Philippines subsidiary, Holland Milk Products Inc. Now, we have evidence of Mr Jack McGuire of the Murray-Goulburn Dairy Co-operative Ltd and the Minister for Communications who is at the table knowing of the GATT situation on about 4 April 1976. In other words, he knew of a GATT breach that was in the offing. He knew of the GATT situation at that time.

3024 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Minister for Communications

Dr Theophanous-Shame!
Mr KERIN-Indeed, but before I get on to that matter, let me take honourable members back over the evidence thus far and examine the Minister's reply in the light of evidence that has now come out-evidence, incidentally, that the National Country Party never thought would come out. There have been three possible breaches of GATT. There was a breach when the price fell under the GATT limit on about 5 April 1976. The Australian Dairy Corporation and the New Zealand Dairy Produce Board negotiated jointly to sell $5tm of skim milk powder to Mexico at a price close to and possibly below the GATT minimum. The sale was approved on 2 April 1976 at an ADC board meeting. The price returned to the ADC was nearly $10 a tonne under the agreed world minimum price. It is the records relating to this sale which have been deliberately falsified to demonstrate that the GATT minimum pricing arrangement had not been breached, according to the General Manager of the Australian Dairy Corporation.
The second breach was the HOMPI rebate. This was negotiated in early 1975 when the price for skim milk powder was $670 a tonne. The fall in the world price to the GATT minimum coupled with a $25 a tonne rebate appeared to the ADC board at its meeting on 2 April 1976 to constitute a prima facie breach of Australia's obligations under GATT. The board agreed that the rebate would have to stop on 2 April 1976. However, no apparent action was taken to end the rebate until 1 September 1976 when a telex was sen.t by the Department of Primary Industry to the ADC drawing the attention of the ADC to the apparent GATT breach. A further two months elapsed before moves to end the rebate are recorded elsewhere. On 13 October 1976 Mr Webstertold a meeting attended by the chairmen of other statutory authorities and officers of the Department of Primary Industry that the $25 a tonne rebate on sales to HOMPI had been discontinued.
The third breach occurred when Mr McGuire, Chairman of the Murray-Goulburn Dairy Cooperative, reported that Murray-Goulburn in April 1976 received a firm offer to purchase about $5m worth of skim milk powder. MurrayGoulburn applied to the ADC for approval on the same day as the Corporaton approved the Mexico deal. The price offered to Murray-Goulburn was $US340 a tonne, in breach of GATT, but returned to Australia almost exactly the same as the ADC contract with Mexico. The ADC refused to give export approval because of the GATT breach. Mr MCGl ;re raised the matter with the

Minister who is presently at the table and the Minister raised the matter with Mr Webster of the Australian Dairy Corporation who said that the ADC could not approve because the sale would be in breach of GATT.
I can go through all the evidence and counterevidence, what transpired in each of these breaches. What we are mainly talking about now is the evidence of Mr McGuire and whether we can now say very clearly that the Minister had knowledge of a potential breach of GATT as early as April 1976. I seek leave of the House to incorporate in Hansard the relevant parts of the PM interview which come from the Press office of the Prime Minister and which have been incorporated in Hansard in the Senate.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
New revelations in the hands of 'P.M.' in the Asia Dairy Industries affair could involve the former Minister for Primary Industry, Mr Ian Sinclair, in further controversy.
Simon Nasht: The major criticism surrounding Mr Sinclair in the Asia Dairy affair is that while Minister for Primary Industry, he failed to ensure that many doubtful practices within the Dairy Corporation at the time were firstly not identified and secondly, once discovered, weren't corrected. Mr Sinclair denied these claims, saying that in many cases, the Dairy Corporation and particularly its former chairman, Tony Webster, were keeping the problems from him. Mr Sinclair say that when he did become aware of the problem areas, he acted quickly to put a stop to them. One of the main areas of controversy surrounds contracts made by the Dairy Corporation which breached Australia's international trading obligations under the GATT-the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. In one particular instance in which the corporation was selling skimmed milk powder to the Philippines, the Senate enquiry which investigated these sales came to the damaging conclusion that it preferred the evidence of Mr Webster in these events rather t'an that of the Minister, Mr Sinclair. Mr Sinclair has attacked that finding strongly, and repeatedly defended himself by saying at no time would he consider contracts that meant GATT would have been breached. In evidence to the Senate enquiry, and I quote, 'Such an agreement, if known about, would have been totally unacceptable to the Government.' And again, two weeks ago, he told Parliament in a carefully worded statement which centred on his responsibilities as the Minister, he said, 'it was not for me to do other than to direct that sales should not be made under the GATT arranged price. At no stage did I in any way accept that there should be international sales by the Dairy Corporation, its subsidiaries or any other private organisation that might have breached that direction.' At the time in question, in the mid seventies, the world price for milk pOWder, was tumbling, leaving Australian producers with a huge excess of products which seriously threatened the industry. The price fell so quickly that contracts that we had overseas with buyers were taking our Government and private industry suppliers perilously close to the agreed GATT minimum price of $350 US a ton. In fact, the world price slumped below GATT in April 1976. Despite the fact that the price slumped below GATT in April and the Dairy Corporation was aware of this, Mr Sinclair has said the first time he was made aware of the possible treaty breaches was at the earliest, September that year, vital months later. However, 'P.M.' has now information that Mr Sinclair was approached

Minister for Communications

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3025

well before that date by a private company to approve a con-
tract worth well over $sm which was clearly in breach of the GATT minimum price, and despite his often repeated policy
that the Government totally opposed such arrangements, he
was prepared to take the approach to the Corporation chairman, Mr Webster. The context surrounding these events is important. In April 1976, Australia jointly negotiated with New
Zealand to sell $s.2sm worth of milk powder at a price perilously close and possibly under the GATT minimum because
of deductions being made for freight charges. In any event, the
money returned to the Dairy Corporation was nearly $10 under the agreed world minimum price, but in the desperate
circumstances, it was approved. A report handed to the present Minister for Primary Industry, Mr Nixon, last month, reveals that recent attempts by the Corporation to investigate
this sale had been frustrated because crucial files are now
missing and those left behind, have, in the words of the Corporation's General Manager, Brian Norwood, been deliberately falsified to demonstrate that the GATT minimum pricing
arrangement had not been breached. At that time, one of the Corporation's board members was the managing director of
one of Australia'S largest dairy companies, Murray Goulburn Co-operative, Mr Jack Macquire. As Mr Macquire recalls it, on the very same day the Corporation approved the Mexico
deal, his company applied for approval to export another
huge pile of skim milk powder at least as big as the Government contract. The price offered to Murray Goulburn was
$340US, in breach of GATT, but returning to Australia almost exactly the same as the corporation contract at a time when the industry was facing a crisis situation. Despite this,
the corporation refused to give export approval because of the GATT breach, leaving Mr Macquire furious. He told the board of management he was left with no option but to raise
the sale with the Minister. Soon after, a meeting with Mr Sinclair was arranged for Macquire by Canberra lobbyist, Mr
Peter Cullen. It took place late at night at approximately 11.30 after the Minister had finished in Parliament. Reports of
what took place at that meeting varied, but what is clear is that Mr Macquire pushed strongly to have Murray Goulburn's offer approved, using the Corporation's Mexico con-
tract to support his case. Despite the fact that Murray Goulburn's offer breached GATT, Mr Sinclair was sympathetic. So
much so, that despite the late hour, he agreed to reach Mr Webster and discuss it with him while the meeting continued.
Mr Webster was woken up at a Canberra motel, and on a conference phone so everyone present could hear, Mr Sinclair
enquired from his chairman as to why approval had not been granted. At least twice during a substantial conversation, Mr
Macquire recalls Webster telling the Minister that the contract could not be approved because it would infringe the Government's GATT policy. Mr Macquire does not believe
that Mr Sinclair was directing the Corporation's chairman to breach GATT, but it raises serious questions as to why, in the
light of the Government policy, Mr Sinclair pursued the matter. Also, in the light of the Minister's evidence to the Senate
enquiry that he was not aware of GATT breaches by the Corporation until late in 1976 the matter of the Corporation's
Mexico deal being raised also becomes significant at this meeting took place months earlier. Mr Macquire has agreed to talk to 'P.M.' about what happened that night in Mr Sinclair's
office.

Mr Macquire: We had an enquiry and a firm offer for

powder that was less than the GATT price, and as is normal,

the general manager of our company, I think it was, that sub-

mitted this to the Corporation,

inaudible

, it came up. I am not sure, exactly sure, if it was

the same day or around about that time, for discussion and it

got agreed to. The Corporation did not agree to make that sale

on the basis that it was under GATT.

Question: But on the face of it, it was on terms that would have been very similar to the Mexican deal.

Mr Macquire: Well, that's true. It would have returned SOc

a ton more to the pool than the Mexican deal, and I was a bit

concerned about it because I had watched a lot of powder

from Australia because of prices that I felt were set higher

than world prices come down from, say, $600, right down, and

I was concerned that this was a sale that as it returned to the

pool this amount, and I could see in the next few months it

was going to go low, and it finally did go lower

inaudible

powder was finally sold,

disposed as stock food. I think for around about $180. Yes. I

was concerned about it.

Question: You must have been pretty worried. The industry
itself was going through a whole lot of turmoil at the time.
Here was a deal-even if it was 15,000 tons at the GATT
minimum, it was worth $s.2sm, to you. It was a big deal. You were going to get a price, in fact, that returned more, than the Mexican contract.

Mr Macquire: That's true.

Question: It must have worried you

Mr Macquire: It did worry me. It worried me to no end. It didn't really affect our company as a company because what-
ever these prices came, and that view included some sales
made at 6.5, some 6.75, not much, but some, but it was an equalised thing, and we I think were aware the Government
had agreed to underwrite at 300, but it seemed to me it was a shame to miss this sale.

Question: Do you think it was a bit unfair?

Mr Macquire: Well, I was concerned, and I felt it was. I made reference to that at the Corporation meeting, and I did
say, well, I have got no alternative now but to go and discuss it with the Minister, which I came back either that night or the
next morning to arrange an interview with the Minister to discuss it with him.

Question: So, you went to Canberra after that.

Mr Macquire: Yes, I did.

Question: And you hoped to see the Minister.

Mr Macquire: Yes.

Question: Now, I believe that meeting took place quite late
that night because you had to wait for Mr Sinclair to finish his
duties in the Parliament. Do you think he was sympathetic towards your problem? I mean, there was a mountain of skim milk powder in Australia at that time, and this was a deal
worth perhaps more than $sm, it was a way of at least starting to clear some of the backlog. Do you think he was
sympathetic?

Mr Macquire: I think he was concerned of the whole skim milk powder position of which I would imagine he would be
aware about and I think he was concerned, but I had seen fit
from my position in our company to go up and discuss it with him. Sure, I think he was concerned, as we all were. We would
have liked to have seen the skim milk powder flowing out and being disposed of at sensible prices and I expressed to him my concern that it had been sliding continually down. The stock
on hand in the EEC-government stocks, trader stocks-all pointed up to that the price would ultimately go down lower.

Question: Yet the Corporation was able to make a deal, but your company wasn't.

Mr Macquire: Yes, but when we look at this in its true
perspective-the Corporation-I was part of that decision, don't forget. We made what we believe to be a price that was
not under GATT but it only came under GATT by a commission to the trader who organised a sale at this end. Now, that is the difference, really.

Simon Nasht: Before we lost the line, you will recall that the managing director of the Murray-GouIburn Co-operative, Mr Jack Macquire was-discussing the events of a meeting he

3026 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Minister for Communications

had in Mr Sinclair's office in 1976. He was seeking approval at that meeting for a bid contract of skim milk powder which
had been refused by the Australian Dairy Corporation despite the fact that the Dairy Corporation had approved its own contract for a sale of a similar amount of powder to Mexico.

Question: You didn't think it was strange at all that the
Minister should discuss a contract that was possibly in breach ofGATT with the chairman of his corporation?

Mr Macquire: No, I don't think so.

Question: But you went there to try and get the contract pushed through, didn't you?

Mr Macquire: I went there to take up our case. What the hell was going to happen to this damn powder. Here was a
chance of selling-yeah, sure, I was aware that the 340 was
under GATT, but I knew every other bugger, countries were doing the same thing and what the hell . . .

Question: You thought it was sound business?

Mr Macquire: I thought it was just common sense that we
should otherwise we would be left on the damn, left behind by
other countries doing these deals and they were doing it by no interest rate and 180 day interest rate at I per cent and some countries-they were doing it by putting it on palettes and
shrink wrapping it and all those damn things which to me added up to what's cost, lands in the warehouse of a buyer overseas. And I felt that this was-the hell with convention.
Those were desperate days.

Question: Do you think Mr Sinclair understood your problems?

Mr Macquire: [ think he understood my problems. He wouldn't have bothered I don't think to have rung the chairman if he wasn't sympathetic towards what I was saying, but-and I think that is why he went to the trouble to ring Webster-I can only summise that.
Question: He did discuss . . .

Mr Macquire: I wouldn't say he overly pursued it. He raised

the matter on my behalf, and a general discussion took place

on powder and the likely possibility of sales of powder

inaudible of Australia and what likely prices they

could be sold at. Derivations were mentioned as a possible

outlet for Japan, for school lunch programmes, stock feed

possibilities in Japan were discussed, I think, with Webster

and the Minister. And it sort of-the conversation finally

sorted of drifted out. , said before when the Minister closed

the phone down, he said, 'Look Jack, you heard what I said.

You heard what Webster said. Nothing much' can do about

it. You appreciate that for me to override the chairman of the

corporation would be something-it would have to be very

grave before one could do that sort of thing'

in-

audible

, said well thanks for trying to do some-

thing, Mr Minister . . .

Question: So, for then, the Minister left the matter, even
though he understood that it was proposing a possible GATT breach, but he left the matter there?

Mr Macquire: He left the matter there and' say again the sale never went through.

Mr KERIN-We will just have a look at what was said there. We already have the situation in
which the Australian Dairy Corporation agreed to the sale of milk to Mexico and on the same day
refused to allow a sale by Murray Goulburn to go
ahead t6 Cuba. The PM interview on the meeting that Mr McGuire had with the Minister for Communications reads:

Question: Now, , believe that meeting took place quite late' that night because you had to wait for Mr Sinclair to finish his

duties in the Parliament. Do you think he was sympathetic towards your problem? , mean, there was a mountain of skim milk powder in Australia at that time, and this was a deal worth perhaps more than $5m, it was a way of at least starting to clear some of the backlog. Do you think he was sympathetic?
Mr Macquire: , think he was concerned of the whole skim milk powder position of which' would imagine he would be aware about and' think he was concerned, but' had seen fit from my position in our company to go up and discuss it with him. Sure,' think he was concerned, as we all were. We would have liked to have seen the skim milk powder Howing out and being disposed of at sensible prices and' expressed to him my concern that it had been sliding continually down. The stock on hand in the EEC-government stocks, trader stocks-all pointed up to that price would ultimately go down lower.
Question: You didn't think it was strange at all that the Minister should discuss a contract that was possibly in breach of GATT with the chairman of his corporation?
Mr Macquire: No, , don't think so.
Question: But you went there to try and get the contract pushed through, didn't you?
M r Macquire: , went there to take up our case. What the hell was going to happen to this damn powder. Here was a chance of selling-yeah, sure. , was aware that the 340 was under GATT, but' knew every other bugger, countries were doing the same thing and what the hell . . .
So the interview goes on. The very drift of the matters that Mr McGuire raised in that interview is quite clearly this: The Minister has always said any breach of GATT would be totally unacceptable. When he learnt of a breach of GATT he took immediate actions to stop it. We have discussed many of these questions before. Now it is absolutely clear that the Minister who sits at the table knew of a potential breach of GATT as early as 1976.
A man who said that it was totally unacceptable for any breach of the GATT arrangement to be contemplated was prepared to ring Mr Webster of the Australian Dairy Corporation late at night, urging a breaching of GATT. The Minister may be able to say that he did not know that the earlier sale had been negotiated that day by the Australian Dairy Corporation, but there is no way in which his previous statements to this Parliament that he knew nothing of the matter until 9 November 1976 can possibly be substantiated. Quite definitely, as people were talking to him about the fact that a sale of skim milk powder was not to go ahead because a breach of GATT would be incurred, there is no way in which this Minister can say that he had no knowledge of any of the problems involving GATT and skim milk powder until 9 November 1976. How can it be believed? How the heck can we believe the Minister when he now says that he knew nothing of the breach of GATT until 9 November 1976? Why did the Minister not tell the Senate Committee of this

Minister for Communications

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3027

matter? Why did the Department of Primary Industry not tell the Minister of this matter?
Of course, as is always a big problem with this Minister, files have gone missing. In previous debate the Minister for Communications has put the blame on Mr Webster of the Australian Dairy Corporation because all the files are missing. But why have they not been found? We will never find out the answer to that question, but copies of all those files went also to the Department of Primary Industry. Again, the files seem to have gone missing. Whenever it is essential to prove this Minister's innocence, files go missing. I think the Australian public is now asking: How many more times can this Minister be proved innocent? The last time the Opposition moved a censure motion in this House the Deputy Prime Minister said that his mate Ian, and not his Department, had been deceived by all those wicked people in the Australian Dairy Corporation and Asia Dairy Industries. The Deputy Prime Minister was very careful about that because if it had been the fault of the Department of Primary Industry it would clearly have been a question of lack of ministerial responsibility.
There was no need for these wicked people not to advise the Minister of the situation because the Minister was told of it on 6 April 1976. He knew then of the skim milk powder situation. In terms of what Mr McGuire said on PM, the fact that officers of the Australian Dairy Corporation went to Canberra to ask the Minister to allow a sale of skim milk powder in breach of GATT is clear and incontrovertible evidence that the Minister cannot say that he knew nothing of this matter until 9 November 1976. He cannot possibly say to this Parliament with any veracity that any breach of GATT would be totally unacceptable. He cannot now say to this Parliament that the moment he knew of the breach of GATT he took immediate steps to rectify the situation. We concede that he did not stand over the Chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation and say that the sale must go through, because the sale did not go through; but it is quite clear that the Minister knew of this affair in April 1976. He has never told the Parliament that. All he has ever told the Parliament is that he did not know of the matter until 9 November 1976. In doing that he has Clearly breached his responsibility and he has misled this Parliament.
Mr SPEAKER-Is the motion seconded?
Mr KEATING (Blaxland) (4.19)-1 second the motion. We have before us a Government

which has no honour. That is the principal objection of the Opposition. The present Prime Minister (Mr Malcom Fraser), when he was Leader of the Opposition and in his election policy speeches in 1975 and 1977, talked about ministerial propriety and ministerial accountability. Perhaps one of the most salient statements is that of the Prime Minister which is recorded in Hansard of 29 October 1981. He said:
It is certainly true that ministers cannot be aware of everything that occurs in their departments . . . But if a major blunder occurred in a department, of real importance to Australia, and if the Minister were unaware of it, that Minister should take responsibility for the mistakes of his department and offer to resign.
We have seen a lot of mistakes on the part of Ministers in the present coalition Government. We remember the days when the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair), who is at the table, and the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon), who is now lying back on the front bench, were like the Katzenjammer kids at Question Time, attacking and humiliating the Speaker of the day at every turn. They attacked and tried to discredit Labor Ministers, attacked their private lives and attacked their propriety. They sent Minister Connor, the former honourable member for Cunningham, to his death. By any standards, the measure of the decline in his health under the brutality of those attacks is clear.
Mr Kerin-And his wife.
Mr KEATING-The hardship which they caused to his family is also clear. The same applies to the former honourable member for Lalor, Dr Cairns. There were attacks upon his private life. The reprehensible circumstances which brought on the 1975 election involved the resignation of Mr Connor on the basis that in some way he had deceived the Parliament by continuing to seek a loan after saying that he had ceased to do so beyond a certain date. That was his crime over which he had to resign. They were the reprehensible circumstances which brought about the defeat of the Labor Government and the whole constitutional crisis of 1975.
But we on this side are beckoned not to dare to challenge the accountability of this Government's Ministers. A Senate committee-a committee of members of both sides of the Parliament-has called into question the motives of the present Minister for Communications when he was Minister for Primary Industry, yet we are supposed to remain silent. Is it not a terrible thing that Country Party Ministers are being attacked? What a shocking thing! The Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Anthony) talked at the National Country

3028 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Minister for Communications

Party conference on the weekend about Australian Labor Party toads attacking National Country Party Ministers. In looking at this question of ministerial accountability we should look at the actions of the present Minister for Primary Industry. He nearly wrecked the major meat trade between Australia and the United States of America.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The terms of the motion are directed against the Minister for Communications. I ask the honourable gentleman to remain relevant.
Mr KEATING-I put it to you, Mr Speaker, that it also concerns this question of accountability. I just make the simple point that there could be no greater blunder in terms of the administration of a department than that which nearly wrecked Australia's meat trade and which, of course, affected it adversely for some period. That Department was presided over by the honourable member for Gippsland, the present Minister for Primary Industry, Mr Nixon. Again, shamefaced, the Minister sat it out on the front bench and refused to resign. He sits back smirking. This is an example of the gangsterism of the National Country Party. The attitude of its Minister is to sit it out and not to be responsible. The same applies to the Minister for Communications. He sat by while an international agreement, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, was being breached. Members of his department, the Department of Primary Industry, sat on the board of Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd and understood all the behaviour and commercial activities of that corporation. Despite the fact that he would have been told often about the matter, he also failed to resign. When he was called into question by a Senate committee we had the Government stonewalling and sitting out the situation.
How can we have any respect for the Government? It has no integrity and no decency and it will not stand up to the standards of behaviour which it supposedly set for itself as a government in the Prime Minister's various utterances from 1975 onwards. Does it not seem to be a joke to honourable members on this side of the House that the Labor Government had Ministers resigning over such trivial matters when the present Government has the meat trade with the United States up for grabs, when the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade is being ripped apart and, need we say, when we learn of the Minister for Communications latest forays? He is a sort of corporate Santa Clauof the Government, giving away things in the telecommunications area.

Wherever we look we find that this Minister's statements do not stand up to scrutiny. We find that he said that he did not know of the GATT breach until September 1976. But Mr Webster, the former Chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation, told the Senate committee inquiry that he had told the Minister of the breach prior to September 1976. Now we find in the latest evidence being given by Mr McGuire from the Murray Goulburn Co-op. Co. Ltd, that he had a discussion with the Minister in April 1976 about attempts by his co-operative to sell skim milk powder on the world market at prices below the GATT minimum. What do we find? The Minister was on the telephone that evening to Mr Webster, pulling him out of his bed in some hotel in Canberra to find out why the co-operative could not sell skim milk powder below the GATT minimum. Mr McGuire says that the Minister stopped short of actually directing the Corporation to allow this contract to go ahead, but what is so clear and so painfully obvious to everybody is that the Minister understood quite clearlythat Australia was selling a product at a price below the GATT minimum. The dogs were barking at the time that sales were being made under the GATT minimum by Australia and many other countries. That was the case. Despite that we had ministerial assurances that there was no selling under GATT where we now clearly understand there was.
The statement by Mr McGuire brings into sharp focus the fact that this matter was canvassed with the Minister in April 1976, months before the Minister told the House that this did not occur. We have here the same sort of problem that President Nixon of the United States got himself into with Watergate. If he had come clean right at the start and said that he was involved in the bugging of the Democratic .headquarters, maybe the nation would have forgiven him. This Minister could have said: 'Look, I was trying to move the skim milk powder surplus. I did what I could for Australia. I know we skirted around the thing in breach on occasions, but I did this and I did it in Australia's best interests.' At least then he would have been judged on the basis of his motivation by the Parliament. But that is not what he said. He said that he did not know. We know he did know.
He did just what Richard Nixon did, he stuck it out for months, for years saying that he did not know and finally had to resign his presidency. The crime this Minister has committed is to have lied to all of us here, to have lied to the Parliament and to have misled the Parliament. His secondary crime is selling below the GATT minimum. From

Minister for Communications

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3029

what McGuire said we understand that every other country was at it. At least the Minister could have put up a reasonable defence of his motivation by saying that he was trying to move the massive store of skim milk powder out of Australia. Hundreds of dairy farmers' walked off their farms when the European Economic Community dropped the massive skim milk powder surpluses on the Western world. We know what that did to the manufactured milk industry of Australia.
I think that honourable members on this side of the House would be prepared to listen to a Government Minister who said: 'I am trying to do the best for Australia. We are not going to openly, flagrantly breach GATT, but will do whatever we can to see that our surpluses are sold.' Instead of that the old National Country Party con men tried to stick it out, to brave it out by saying that they did not know when in fact they did.
I do not think anyone who reasonably looks at the evidence or reads the transcript of the PM interview, or anything which Mr McGuire has said could be left with any doubt about the fact that this Minister entertained breaches of GATT as early as April 1976. He thought it was important enough to ring Webster in his hotel late of an evening. Apart from falling short of directing the Australian Dairy Corporation to agree to the sale of this contract below the GATT minimum, he was certainly well informed and appraised of all the market circumstances which prevailed in the world at that time about the shifting of skim milk powder. I cannot see how the Minister can continue to deny the fact that he knew these things, that he has misled the Parliament and that he has lied to the Parliament. For that reason he should simply resign. That is what would happen in any other parliament in the Western world. That is what would happen in Great Britain or any other place where ministerial accountability occurs.
Let us have a look at this Government. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) two years ago had the Commonwealth Budget made public. The Commonwealth Budget was published in the newspapers a week before the Government delivered it. Yet he is allowed to stick it out. There is no accountability. Would you not think the Prime Minister would say: 'You are in charge of the' confidentiality of the Budget. I am not interested in how it is leaked, where it is leaked or what the circumstances of its leaking were. If it is leaked, you go. You are responsible'. The whole concept of ministerial accountability and. responsibility has just simply broken down. The Ministers now recognise that they have no responsibilities. Anything that happens can be sheeted

home to some poor devil in a department, some Australian corporation or someone in commercial life. The Ministers take no responsibility whatsoever.
We have seen the whole of the Australian meat trade come to a standstill, meat being stacked up in store rooms around the United States and trade stopped in Australia while the Minister sat it out and said that he did not know about all these things. Yet a Labor senator made a speech in the Senate about it 10 months earlier. If it surfaces in this Paliament there is no doubt that everybody knows about it in the trade. Everybody in the trade knew that was going on in the meat business. The Minister for Primary Industry says that he did not know and he sits it out instead of resigning. As he did not have the decency to resign, the Prime Minister should have made him resign. Of course, he is scared stiff of the National Country Party. In fact, he is a surrogate member of the Country Party himself as a sort of rich cocky grazier, and he will not bring them into line.
The Minister for Communications, Jumping Jack Flash, just never will stand up to the accountability of the Parliament and insist upon the standards of behaviour which he himself insisted on from Labor Ministers some years ago. Here it is in these breaches. We have seen this over and over again. No doubt when he moves on from this portfolio to something else, as he wanders like a gypsy through the Cabinet, we will find a whole string of misdemeanours left behind him in the telecommunications area as we have found in others. It is a disgrace that hardly any members of the Government are here in the chamber and that the Prime Minister is not here to listen to a challenge against one of his senior Ministers. To think that this brazen corrupt group we call the Country Party in this Parliament sits here, brazens it out and brave-faces it out against all the standards of behaviour which have come to be recognised in parliaments under the Westminster tradition. The motion is a reasonable motion. It is a motion of censure against the Minister for Communications which should be carried by the House and should be carried by decent members of the Government who are concerned about the standard of behaviour within the coalition parties.
We on this side of the House jeer at the members of the Government over their past behaviour in attacking the Labor Party. The present Prime Minister when in the Opposition insisted upon resignations when he thought that standards had been breached. Yet now his Ministers sit it out, trying to deny the undeniable. This Minister knew all about it months before and he is as culpable as Richard Nixon was in the United States in

3030 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Minister for Communications

sitting it out and trying to deny to the public of that country, as this Minister is denying to the public of this country and to the Parliament, that he knew of things which he now says he did not do. The Government is a disgraceful Government. It is a corrupt Government. It is corrupt because it has no standards of integrity. To try to restore some of the integrity, this Minister should accept the censure and get out, resign.
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Minister for Communications) (4.33)-We grow used to slurs, innuendos and allegations from members of the Australian Labor Party. It would be different if they were backed by substance. The tragedy of their performance, and I do not doubt it, is basically because as I understand it there is presently a takeover offer by the Palestine Liberation Organisation within the socialist left of the Labor Party, trying to usurp some of the seats of the honourable members of this place. I suspect this effort today is largely yet another of the efforts by the Labor Party to try to divert attention from its own sins of omission and' commission. There is no doubt that the allegations made in the other place reflect the tone of morality followed by the men on the other side of the Parliament, morality that so demonstrably was proved in this place--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The right honourable gentleman will resume his seat. The honourable members for Ballarat and Lalor will cease interjecting.
Mr Barry Jones-I haven't interjected yet.
Mr SPEAKER-I apologise. I have misstated the electorate. Honourable members will cease interjecting. This is a motion of censure against the Minister. He is entitled to be heard in his defence in silence.
Mr SINCLAIR-Without doubt the genesis of this motion is the level of morality pursued by members of the Labor Party themselves. The sorts of statements made and the distortions by a senator in the other place which were picked up and extended by journalists bear no relation to fact and are obviously what lie behind this charge.
This afternoon I was interested to hear the speech of the honourable member for Werriwa (Mr Kerin), who was followed by the honourable member for Blaxland (Mr Keating). They gave us the reality of what this is all about. They are concerned that they were found out. We are going back to shades of that Iraqi breakfast and the Khemlani loans. I have no doubt that if we looked behind this charge we would find that it is only because Labor supporters feel that they have to get their own back in some way. Let them look at the

accuracy of the assertions made and see where it gets them.
The honourable member for Werriwa tells us that there are three breaches. The whole substance of the claim is that because I had a discussion in April 1976 I therefore knew of facts that subsequently became revealed in late August or September 1976. Even blind Freddie, to use a phrase that has been used in this place before, would realise that there is a difference between those separate periods-one transaction in April and another transaction in August-September. They were different transactions. Certainly they related to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
The GATT minimum prices for skim milk powder were set down from time to time. It is true that on 5 April 1976 the export price was reduced to a GATT minimum of $US350 free on board. It continued at that rate to the end of the year. In fact, it was 24 December 1976 when the GATT minimum rose to $US400 f.o.b. The fact that knowledge of one contract was held and that there were discussions about whether a sale would be a breach of GATT obviously does not mean that there was knowledge of another sale or a situation in another market that might also have taken place in breach of GATT. All the circumstances and the evidence that has been produced to the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations-I will try to expose in a moment the evidence presented on the PM program-does not prove that there was any knowledge by me of any sales in breach of GATT. Let me say again in this place that the Government did not then, nor does it now, condone sales :n breach of an international arrangement entered into in accordance with GATT. Nor does it condone any operations within any statutory corporation that needs to be investigated. It was for that reason that I instigated the inquiry by the Auditor-General which, progressively, has led to the revelations that were the subject of a report to this House by my colleague the Minister for Primary Industry (Mr Nixon) only a few weeks ago.
Certainly the three charges and areas that have been identified by the honourable member for Werriwa need to be distinguished as to the allegations he made. He has tried in some way to draw a connection between a knowledge related to a $5.25m sale of skim milk powder to Mexico by the Australian Dairy Corporation, which demonstrably the records show had been so doctored that nobody knew it was in breach of GATT, and another sale to the Philippines in respect of Holland Milk Products Inc., HOMPI, when a $25 a tonne rebate was given. As soon as

Minister for Communications

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3031

there was evidence of that having been in breach of GATT there was advice, first of all by telex from Mr Wallace of the Department of Primary Industry and then through a discussion by myself with Mr Webster, to terminate the arrangement. From those two sales there is some connection with another offer made to the Murray Goulburn Co-operative Ltd to sell skim milk powder to Cuba. The fact that I had a discussion with the person responsible for those sales is somehow supposed to link together the fact that each one of them was to my knowledge a breach of GATT.

That sequence of events just does not follow. I want to go through them because I think it is very important that we do so. I also think it is very im-
portant that we realise that the genesis o~much of these lies in inquiries between the Chairman of the Senate Committee, the Rae Committee, and the Australian Dairy Corporation. A letter was written on 9 April 1981 by Mr B. A. Norwood, General Manager of the Australian Dairy Corporation. I understand that it has been tabled in another place and I will not read it all today. It relates to some of the GATT skim milk powder minimum pricing arrangements, in particular, the one related to the HOMPI sale. On page 2 of the letter Mr Norwood concludes:

There is no record of these sales having been reported to either the Corporation Board or to any Federal Government Department.

When we are looking at these facts we need to know that, according to the inquiries made by the Dairy Corporation, there was no evidence of any of these matters that I am supposed to have been aware of having been reported to the Federal Government or to me personally. We are now looking at the degree to which there was evidence of things being reported. Another letter ~rom Mr Brian Norwood dated 5 October 1981 gIVes considerable details with respect to the sale to Mexico. If we look through the record we will find something about the doctoring of the inform~tion. The Mexico sale to which the letter refers involved a number of documents relating to the exporting of the product. The letter states:

effHorotwweavser~addoecutmo epnrteaptiaorne

available shows that a deliberate documents containing incorrect

facts.

There was no knowledge that the Mexico sale was in fact in breach of GATT. Without going into the full evidence-there is no time available for me to do so-it is quite demonstrable that the Federal Government and I certainly had no knowledge that the sale was in breach of GATT. It is interest-
ing to look at one phrase in that letter. It states:

On establishing this information, the Corporation Management have examine~ availa~le Corporation documentation in order to determine the circumstances of these sales.

Unfortunately, at the time involved, on a directive. ~f the then Corporation Chairman, Mr Webster, no Ce~t~al FIlmgsystem was maintained and thus the Central FIlIng records are
reasonably scanty for the period in question.

There is no doubt as to who directed that there would be no central filing system. There is no doubt who ensured that there would be no records. Because allegations have been made in the other place and here that in some way I a~ associated with this matter let me repeat that thiS letter is the result of inquiries within the Australian Dairy Corporation regarding what happened to these missing records. I repeat that the
letter states:

Unfortunately, at the time involved, on a directive o~ ~he then Corporation Chairman, Mr Webster, no Central FIlIng system was maintained . . .

If we look at the PM transcript-it is from this

transcript that much of this allegation

appears-we find that Simo~ Nasht has seen ~t to

extend, again beyond any eVidence that was .glven

to him, the circumstances of the whole affair. He

has come to conclusions about the price that are

not backed up by evidence given by Mr McGuire.

He has made assertions about the quantity that

are not backed up by Mr McGuire. He has made

comments about the degree to which the central

filing records were in some way apparently laid

aside, according to him, largely as a result of r,ny

instigation. In other words, in t~e PM transcn~t

which has fortunately been Incorporated III

Hansard by the honourable member for Werriwa,

we see that the whole of the substance of this alle-

gation has been developed and extended by infer-

eSnicmeos~

not based on Nasht seems

fact but on presumptions that to have developed for himself.

What concerns me is that they were then further

distorted on 12 November in the Senate by

Senator Walsh who sought again to try to extend

the long bow. The whole of the substance of each

one of these allegations is not backed up by the

evidence given.

There are two things I should say about Mr McGuire's evidence. First, I think it is quite apparent that any telephone conversation held so long ago would hardly be in the accurate memory of anyone who had other than a complete record of that transaction. If we look at Mr McGuire's evidence, however, we will see that the allegations made by the Opposition do not follow specificall.y from that particular evidence. Indeed, the genesIs of the interview with Mr McGuire is itself rather interesting. It seems that it was an inquiry that
began from Mr Mackey, t~e sec!etary of the R.ae Committee. At the meetmg With Mr McGuue there were a number of circumstances that I think of themselves need to be seriously considered. Apparently, Mr Ken Baxter, who is now a full time

3032 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Minister for Communications

employee of Philip Morris Ltd, happened also to be in attendance on that occasion at 2.30 p.m., Thursday 5 November. We find that prior to answering questions on that occasion Mr McGuire asked whether any evidence had been given by Mr Peter Cullen who was the former associate of the Australian Labor Party in government and who is now a lobbyist in town. Mr Cullen was said at that meeting to have reported to the Committee. Yet subsequent evidence from Senator Peter Rae and from others on the Committee advised that Mr Peter Cullen had not given evidence. We are relying entirely on Mr McGuire's report of the affair. Because we are relying on his report of the affair, I will refer to a telex which Mr McGuire sent to the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and to me yesterday. It stated:
I refer to the recent reports on the ABC programmes AM and PM involving my discussions in 1976 with the then Minister for Primary Industry Mr Ian Sinclair on the matter of export permits for the sale of skim milk powder.
The ABC reports were based on selective extracts from a taped interview with Mr Simon Nasht which was made on the II th November at his request.
I was concerned to find that the ABC reports were presented in a form which casts doubts on the previous assertions made by Mr Sinclair that breaches of the skim milk powder international agreement, under the GATT would have been totally unacceptable to the Government.
The allegations being made on the basis of the ABC reports are not in accord with my understanding of what transpired at the discussions with Mr Sinclair in 1976.
I interpose to say that they are not in accord with my recollection either. Certainly at no stage did I suggest to Mr Webster or to Mr McGuire that, if the sale were in breach of GATT, it should have gone ahead. In fact it was because we did not know that the ADC sale was in breach of GATT that it had been accepted as being valid. The facts being presented to me by Mr McGuire with respect to the Cuba sale had to be investigated to determine whether they were in breach of GATT and the sale did not go ahead because, of course, they would have been in breach of GATT. So much for the allegations by the Opposition! The telex continues:
During our discussions which ranged over a number of
dairy industry matters r expressed strong concern to the Min-
ister on the inability of Murray Goulburn to secure an export perrnit for milk powder at a price comparable to that being obtained under a joint contract by Australia and New Zealand for the sale of skim milk powder to Mexico after allowance was made for agency commission.
My representations place strong emphasis on the depressed state of the world market . . .
The Minister then offered to phone the Chairman of the ADC Mr A. A. Webster to ascertain the reason behind the Corporation's refusal to grant export permits to Murray Goulburn to allow the proposed sale to proceed.

The Minister was inFormed by Mr Webster that the ADC could not accede to Murray Goulburn's request For an export permit at the price in the case of the proposed contract could constitute a breach of the skim milk powder pricing arrangements under the GATT.
On the receipt of this advice Mr Sinclair then indicated to me that there was nothing further he could do. This was the end of the matter so far as Mr Sinclair was concerned. My company subsequently accepted the Corporation's decision and the proposed sale of skim milk powder did not eventuate.
I seek leave to have that telex incorporated in full in Hansard.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
The Right Honourable J. J. Fraser, C.H. Prime Minister Parliament House Canberra
My Dear Prime Minister,
I refer to the recent reports on the ABC programmes AM and PM involving my discussions in 1976 with the then Minister for Primary Industry Mr Ian Sinclair on the matter of export permits for the sale of skim milk powder.
The ABC reports were based on selective extracts from a taped interview with Mr Simon Nasht which was made on the II th November at his request.
r was concerned to find that the ABC reports were pre-
sented in a form which casts doubts on the previous assertions made by Mr Sinclair that breaches of the skim milk powder international agreement, under the GATT would have been totally unacceptable to the Government.
The allegations being made on the basis of the ABC reports are not in accord with my understanding of what transpired at the discussions with Mr Sinclair in 1976.
During our discussions which ranged over a number of dairy industry matters I expressed strong concern to the Minister on the inability of Murray Goulburn to secure an export permit for milk powder at a price comparable to that being obtained under a joint contract by Australia and New Zealand for the sale of skim milk powder to Mexico after allowance was made for agency commission.
My representations place strong emphasis on the depressed state of the world market For skim milk powder and my company's concern at the ADC's apparent differential treatment in the issue of export permits.
The Minister then offered to phone the Chairman of the ADC Mr A. A. Webster to ascertain the reason behind the Corporation's refusal to grant export permits to Murray Goulburn to allow the proposed sale to proceed.
The Minister was informed by Mr Webster that the ADC could not accede to Murray Goulburn's request for an export permit at the price in the case of the proposed contract could constitute a breach of the skim milk powder pricing arrangements under the GATT.
On the receipt of this advice Mr Sinclair then indicated to me that there was nothing Further he could do. This was the end of the matter so far as Mr Sinclair was concerned. My company subsequently accepted the Corporation's decision and the proposed sale of skim milk powder did not eventuate.
On the 6th November 1981 I was questioned on the above events by two staff members of the Senate Standing Committee on Finance and Government Operations. I made it clear to the two officers that no pressure had been applied by Mr Sinclair to the Chairman of the ADC in relation to the

Minister for Communications

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3033

proposed sale of skim milk powder either from the GATT aspect or from any other aspect.

I am sending a copy of this telex to the Deputy Prime Minister-Mr J. D. Anthony, Minister for Communications-Mr I. S. Sinclair, Minister for Primary Industry-Mr P. J. Nixon for their info.

Yours sincerely, J. J. McGuire

Mr SINCLAIR-I totally reject the charges made by the Opposition. They have no substance in fact. I move:

That the question be no\\, put.

Question put.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

68

Noes

48

Majority

20

AYES
Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume, M. E. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown.N.A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron. Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton,J.J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. falconer, P. D. fife,W.C. fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O-H. Good luck, B. J. Groom, R.J. Hall, Steele Harris,G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.

Hyde,J.M. Jull,D.f.
KaUer, R.C. Killen,D.J. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A. Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Millar, P.e. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P.J. O'Keefe, f. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. f. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M.
Sireet, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Tuckey,C. W. Viner,R.I. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. e.

Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. e. Blewell, N. Bowen, lionel
Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell,G.
Casso M. H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross.M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E.

NOES

Innes, U.E. Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. 'Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R. J. Kent, L. Kerin,J.e. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F.

NOES
Dawkins, J. S. Duffy.M.J. Everingham, D. N. free, R. V. fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. (Teller) Scholes. G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren,T. Wallis. L.G. West, S. J. Wiliis.R. Young, M. J.

PAIRS

Bourchier, J. W.

Johnson, Les

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

Original question put.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

48

Noes

68

Majority

20

AYES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewett.N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Roberl Campbell,G. Cass, M. H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen,B. Cross, M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy.M.J. Everingham, D. N. free.R. V. fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L.
Holding, A.e. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Innes, U. E. Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A.
Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating. P. J. Kelly, R.J. Kent, L.
Kerin,J.C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo
Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. G. (Teller) Scholes, G. G. D. Scott, J. L. Theophanous, A. e. Uren, T. Wallis, L. G. West,S.J. Willis,R. Young,M.J.

Adermann, A. E.
Anthony, J. D. Baume, M. E.
Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Brown,N.A.
Bungey, M. H.
Burr,M.A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. falconer, P. D. fife, W.e.

NOES

Hyde,J.M.
Jull,D.f.
Katter, R. e.
Killen,D.J. Lloyd, B.
Lusher, S. A.
Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLea~, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T.
Macphee, I. M. Millar,P.C. Moore,J.C. Newman, K. E. Nixon, P.J.
O'Keefe, f. L. Peacock, A. S. Porler, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M.

3034 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Sittings a/the Parliament

NOES
Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Sleele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N. J. Hodges, J. C. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J.W. Hunl, R. J. D.

Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D. Shiplon, R. F.
Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Slreel, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.1. While, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

PAIRS

Johnson, Les

Bourchier, J. W.

Question so resolved in the negative.

SITTINGS OF THE PARLIAMENT

Discussion of Matter of Public Importance

Mr SPEAKER-I have received a letter from the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) proposing that a definite matter of public importance be submitted to the House for discussion, namely:

The reFusal of the Government to discharge its national responsibilities as evidenced by its insisting on the early closure of the Parliament.

I call upon those members ,who approve of the proposed discussion to rise in their places.

More than the number a/members required by the Standing Orders having risen in their places-

Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (5.4)-Mr Speaker, four years ago a long-standing--

Motion (by Mr Sinclair) put:

That the business of the day be called on.

The House divided,

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon, Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

62

Noes

45

Majority

17

Adermann, A. E. Anlhony, J. D. Baume, M. E. Bradfield, J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Bungey, M. H. Burr,M.A, Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carlton,J.J, Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Cowan,D. B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.C.

AYES

Hyde,J. M. Jull,D.F. Kaller, R.C. Killen, D. J. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A,
Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M, J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M.
McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.J. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porter, J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller)

AYES
Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B, J. Groom,R.J. Hall, Sleel Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W.

Shack, p, D.
Shiplon, R. F. Sinclair, I. McC. Spender, J. M. Slreel, A. A. Tambling, G. E, J. Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.t. While, p, N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, 1. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewell,N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M. H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross,M.D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free, R. V. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A, C. Howe,B, L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Jones, Barry Kealing, P. J. Kelly, R.J. Kenl, L. Kerin, J. C. Klugman, R. E, McLeay. Leo Mildren, J. B. Millon,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mounlford, J. G. (Teller) Scholes, G. G. D. Scoll, J. L. Theophanous, A. C. Uren,T. Wallis,L.G. Wesl,S.J. Willis,R. Young, M.J.

PAIRS

Bourchier, J. W.

Johnson, Les

Question so resolved in the affirmative.

DISCHARGE OF ORDERS OF THE DAY
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House) (5.10)-1 move.
That the orders of the day, government business, For the resumption of the debate on the motions to take note of the following papers, be discharged:
Schools Commission-Report For triennium 1982-84.
Migrant assessment-Report of Committee of ReviewGovernment decisions-Ministerial statement.
River Murray Waters Agreement-Ministerial statement and paper.
Immigrants-Illegal entry-Ministerial statement.
Nabarlek-Unauthorised release of water-Report.
Community Youth Support Scheme-Ministerial statement.
Air traffic controller shortage-Ministerial statement.
Public Libraries-Policy on assistance-Paper and ministerial statement.
Local govetnment personal income tax sharing-State Grants Commission recommendations.
National Accreditation Authority For Translators and Interpreters-Paper and ministerial statement.
Telecommunications and postal services in AustraliaPublic inquiries-Ministerial statement.
Aircraft accident investigation report.
Defence integrated secure communications networkMinisterial statement.

Discharge ofOrders of the Day

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3035

Migrant assessment-Committee of Review-Report and ministerial statement.
Aborigines of the Northern Territory-Social impact of uranium mining-Papers.
Overseas aid programme-Ministerial statement.
Housing industry-Indicative Planning Council-Paper and ministerial statement.
Insurance brokers-Regulation-Ministerial statement.
I believe that I have identified those matters which are not likely to be wished to be recalled. If any honourable member wishes to have reinstated any of those matters that are being deleted, I am not against so doing.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (5.11)-The Opposition disagrees with the motion that these matters of Government Business be withdrawn from the Notice Paper. It is a matter of great concern to the Opposition that the Government is determined to close down the proceedings of this Parliament early and in circumstances which make it abundantly clear that the Government is concerned about dissidents in its own ranks. It is fearful of confrontation by the Senate and it is prepared to scuttle out from its responsibilities to the Australian community.
Four years ago, a long-standing member of the Government resigned from this Parliament and from the Liberal Party of Australia in total disillusionment with the party he had served in this House for 28 years and with a Prime Minister with whom he refused to serve at all. That was the then honourable member for Mackellar, Mr Wentworth. A few months later, after the elections of that year, Mr Wentworth was asked why he thought the Government had been returned to office. The Government had won, he said, by dodging the real issues. He added:
The Government's strategy in covering up was brilliant.
The House will recall that Mr Wentworth was not the only Liberal Party back bencher who could not stomach any longer the arrogant style of leadership of the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser). The former honourable member for Tangney, Dr Richardson, also resigned from this place and from the Liberal Party at the same time. Dr Richardson said:
We have come closer in this country to a presidential style of Government than ever before in our history.
He should have added that it was a style lacking personal grace and without intellectual elegance. Four years later nothing has changed. It is business as usual and most of it is funny business. The Government is still dodging the real issues and it is still covering up, though not so efficiently. It cannot cover up the Prime Minister's growing list of broken promises. It cannot cover up the record

interest rates, the higher unemployment, the increasing inflation, the falling living standards, the growing poverty or the highest taxes in this country's history. It cannot cover up the expensive debacle it has created in health insurance, the scandal it has made of education funding, the continuing sell-out of our industry and minerals to foreign interests or the cutbacks in spending on public programs and community projects. It cannot cover up the resignation of the former Minister for Industrial Relations or the wheeling and dealing that is going on in the Liberal Party to replace the Prime Minister before the next elections. Certainly it cannot cover up the rancid smell that surrounds the activities of certain Ministers of this Government. That is why the Parliament is being terminated so abruptly and closed down for the year. That is why we oppose the discharge of these business items. It is happening because none of these issues so damaging to the Government are able to be covered up.
Nothing exemplifies this shonky Government more than the spineless manner in which it has decided to shut down the Parliament and run. The Prime Minister's overriding concern now is personal survival. His leadership is under threat and his Government has become accident prone. Ever since the last elections he has stumbled from one crisis to another. It has been a remarkable year made more remarkable by the way in which the Government is now scuttling into the recess after a disastrous 12 months. It started with a public brawl between the Prime Minister and one of his senior Ministers and it is ending on the same note. A year ago the then Minister for Finance, the late Eric Robinson, discovered just how ruthless the Prime Minister can be to a colleague when it suits his political interests, just as Prime Minister Gorton learned 10 years ago to his cost and as you, Mr Speaker, well know from your brief experience as party leader in trusting the Prime Minister. Mr Speaker, as you found out, a public pledge of loyalty by the right honourable member for Wannon (Mr Malcom Fraser) has about as much value as one of his promises at election time.
Mr SPEAKER-Order!
Mr HAYDEN-He shafted John Gorton as Prime Minister; he shafted you, Mr Speaker, as his party leader--
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The motion before the Chair is for the discharge of certain Government business on the Notice Paper.
Mr HAYDEN-I am explaining why it should not be discharged and why the House should not be closed down.

3036 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Discharge ofOrders of the Day

Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman will explain to me its relevance to the motion.
Mr HAYDEN-I am explaining why the Parliament is being closed down. Part and parcel of that procedure is the discharge of business from the Notice Paper. Neither of those should be accepted by this Parliament. I will continue. The Prime Minister shafted Eric Robinson as a loyal Liberal Party colleague-
MR SPEAKER-Order! The motion is to discharge certain business from the Notice Paper. That does not give the Leader of the Opposition licence to traverse these matters.
Mr HAYDEN-Mr Speaker, on the contrary it does. We have the Schools Commission report for the triennium 1982-84. As far as we are concerned, there has been inadequate debate generally on education matters by this Parliament. All debate is circumscribed and ruthlessly truncated. Inadequate attention is given to the major issues which should be commanding the attention of all honourable members in this House.
Mr SPEAKER-What the honourable gentleman is now saying is relevant and he is quite entitled to say it.
Mr HAYDEN-An example is the Community Youth Support Scheme. We have the disastrous behaviour of the Government associated with the gross self-indulgence of the Prime Minister, on the one hand prepared to spend more than $20m on the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting-which lasted eight days at a cost of $2.5m a day-to aggrandise himself and, on the other hand, to scrub one of the few, genuine commitments of the Government towards relieving the strain of unemployment in the community, the Community Youth Support Scheme, at a cost of only a miserable $9m over 12 months.
The argument is that these items are being discharged to clear the Notice Paper and are part of the process of closing down the Parliament early. The purpose of that is to get members of the Government away to the four corners of this vast continent as quickly as possible. The reason is that the Prime Minister works on the simple principle that survival depends on dispersion. The more quickly and the more widely he disperse his friends to prevent their talking to one another, mostly about him, the more secure he will feel. In those circumstances, I believe that is the record of the Prime Minister in all of these matters and many others which I have raised. Mr Speaker, it was injudicious of me to draw your name into it, or I probably would have gone much further before you drew my attention to the procedures before the House. These are the reasons why the

Prime Minister wants to shut down the Parliament.
Mr Speaker, you know as well as I do that the Prime Minister has a long hit list when it comes to his own colleagues. He is now worried about a single person hit list. His name is on that list. A lot of honourable members who sit behind him in this House would wish to carry out the contract against him. The guerrilla warfare has been continuing ever since the last election. Mr Speaker, you know as well as I do that it reached a peak two months ago after the new Minister for Industrial Relations-the ever-accommodating honourable member for Stirling (Mr Viner)- tried a crude hatchet job on his predecessor in Parliament. Unfortunately for the Prime Minister he sent out a fumbling boy on a man's errand and the Minister botched it. We are all well versed in the performance of the Minister for Industrial Relations in this Parliament, sliding across the front bench like a slicked-down eel with one hand in his pocket and a lie on his lips to answer the latest question at Question Time. Now we will wait to see whether he gets reshuffled.
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman will withdraw that particular part of the remark about the Minister for Industrial Relations.
Mr HAYDEN-Mr Speaker, which part do you wish me to withdraw? Do you wish me to withdraw the part that he is like a slicked-down eel or the part that he slides across the front bench like a slicked-down eel?
Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman is being provocative.
Mr HAYDEN-Or, Mr Speaker, do you wish me to withdraw the part that he has his hand in his pocket or a lie on his lips?
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentleman is misusing the forms of the House. If he misuses the forms of the House the Parliament will judge him for that performance.
Mr HAYDEN-Mr Speaker, I withdraw.
Mr SPEAKER-The honourable gentl~man knows which part he must withdraw.
Mr HAYDEN-I accept your direction, Mr Speaker. The problem with this country is that the government of its affairs is in the hands of a small clique of subsidy-grabbing farmers; a wealthy pastoralist from the western districts of Victoria-the Prime Minister-in all of his feudal splendour, administering the affairs of the country in association with a hard-boiled, or is it a halfbaked, dairy farmer from the Gippsland area; a pig farmer from the Northern Rivers district of

Discharge ofOrders of the Day

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3037

New South Wales; and the resident handwriting specialist of the Government, the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair). But not one of them understands business and all of them are pretending to be the representatives of business in this Parliament. That is why the country is in such a disastrous condition. The honourable member for Kooyong (Mr Peacock) and his numbers manager in the Senate, another bitter ex-Fraser loyalist with a sore score to settle, are biding their time to settle the scores aga.inst the Prime Minister and his acolytes. Those are the reasons why these matters are being discharged from the Notice Paper of the House. The Government is in a panic and the Prime Minister is in a frenzy. He wants to close down this place as quickly as he can. The further removed his 'friends' can be from him the more secure he feels. Twelve months ago at an election few people thought that the Australian Labor Party could win. They now recognise that not only was it close last time but also it will be a certainty at the next election.
I wish to quote some of the experiences we have had during the course of this Parliament. The celebrated razor gang exercise early in the year by the Minister for Industry and Commerce (Sir Phillip Lynch) has been exposed as a public relations fraud. It was a gimmick to give the illusion of an activist government. It proved nothing except that the Minister should stick to his real estate deals and his Gold Coast investments. Ever since the report of the Lynch committee was announced six months ago the Government has been back-tracking on one decision after another, some for good reason, but most out of sheer funk after heavy pressure from vested interest groups. Its only substantial decisions so far carried through are patently against the public interest. It gave big business a free hand on price increases by abolishing the Prices Justification Tribunal and imposed absurd new staff ceilings on the Commonwealth Public Service without any real rationalisation of departmental functions. The incompetence behind the staff ceilings decision is manifest.
In the area of social security, where there are now far too few hands to service the public adequately, staff union bans are increasing the log jam and the general sense of chaos. In the Taxation Office, the new staff ceilings mean a cutback of 179 departmental officers. That has saved $1. Sm in salaries but it lost the Government an estimated $46.Sm in annual revenue through reduced enforcement procedures. That is the sort of economic wizardry that has got Australia where it is after six years of Fraser Government. Repeated election pledges of tax reform have

been the hoax of the year. In February, the coalition Government publicly fought over the economic nonsense of a flat rate tax system. Then the Treasurer (Mr Howard) went through the gymnastics of floating his proposal of anew, broadly-based retail tax, later promising not to introduce it without offsetting cuts in income tax. That promise was exploded in the Budget in August which cut no taxes at all, forecast a massive 23 per cent increase in income tax revenue and introduced a new range of sales taxes which, when enforced, will add between $4 and $S a week to the household bills of the average family. The Parliament will rise for the year with the Treasurer as stubborn as ever that the outstanding tax increases in indirect taxes will be enforced in the new year. The tax confusion is indicative of the general mess the Government finds itself in with its erratic and contradictory management of the economy.
Let us look at the record of this Government. We have been promised a consumer-led recovery, a resources-led recovery, an export-led recovery and an investment-led recovery. We have even had to put up with the burden of a slogan-led recovery-about the only one that persists. With every change recovery has receded. Now, when the Government is packing off Parliament for the year the major indicators of manufacturing output, building approvals, inflation and employment suggest that recovery is as far away as ever. Employment growth is only half what it was a year ago. Interest rates on bank home loans have increased a full two percentage points since the last election, or an extra $46 a month on the average $30,000 home mortgage. The average family tax burden has gone up another $3.S0 to $6.S0 a week. Health insurance charges have jumped dramatically under the Government's fifth health policy in six years. And I repeat: This is just the last 12 months in a mockery of the Government's solemn election promises in October last year.
The Government is utterly contemptuous of the Parliament. For two years the Prime Minister has been promising a full debate on the Bowen report on pecuniary interests, an issue of real significance in the current climate of the Parliament's debased authority and the Government's refusal to establish a public register of all members' personal financial standing. Like all the Government's promises, it has not been honoured. The same can be said about the need for debate on the triennial report on education of the Schools Commission and the Government's pathetic apology for freedom of iriformation. The most crucial industrial relations issue in the country is wage fixation; yet we have nothing firm

3038 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Discharge a/Orders a/the Day

in relation to a proposition from the Government in respect of this.

Mr Speaker, at every turn, wherever there is the slightest hint of political self interest involved, the Government thumbs its nose at its national responsibilities. That is why it is contemptuous of this Parliament. That is why we cannot ever
get a straight answer from a Minister-any Minister-at Question Time. That is why the Prime Minister runs away from constitutional reform of the Senate just as fast as he runs away from public accountability and public scrutiny. That is why he thinks he can sweep any embarrassment under the carpet, just as he swept the murder of Australian Broadcasting Corporation journalist, Tony Joyce--

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable member's time has expired.

Mr HAYDEN-Out of sight while he strutted the stage at the Commonwealth old boys extravaganza in Melbourne recently. There has been a lot of talk of a double dissolution.

Mr SPEAKER-Order! The honourable gentleman's time has expired.

Mr HAYDEN-We would welcome the challenge; we would like to test the Government.

Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide) (5.27)-W\:lat the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) has trid to do with his resolution is take off the Notice Paper-

Motion (by Mr Sainsbury) put:

That the question be now put.

The House divided.

(Mr Speaker-Rt Hon. Sir Billy Snedden)

Ayes

63

Noes

46

Majority

17

Adermann, A. E. Anlhony. J. D. Baume, M. E. Bradfield,J. M. Braithwaite, R. A. Bungey, M. H. Burr, M. A. Cadman, A. G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewen Cameron, Ian Carllon,J.J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan,D.B. Dean,A.G. Dobie,J. D. M. Drummond, P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D.

AYES

Hyde,J. M. Jull,D.F. Kaller,R.C. Killen, D.J. Lioyd, B. Lusher, S. A.
Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Newman, K. E. Nixon,P.J. O'Keere, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porler,J. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. C. Ruddock, P. M. Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller)

AYES
Fire, w.e.
Fisher, P. S. (Teller) Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall, Sleele Harris, O. McD. Hicks,N.J. Hodges, J. C. Hodgman, W. M. Howard, J. W.

Shack, P. D.
Shiplon, R. F.
Sinclair,l. McC.
Spender, J. M.
Slreel, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J.
Tuckey, e. W.
Viner, R. I.
While, P. N. D.
Wilson, I. B. e.

NOES
Armilage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewell, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown,John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass, M. H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cohen, B. Cross, M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins,J.S. Duffy,M.J. Everingham. D. N. Free,R. V. Hawke, R. J. L.
Holding, A. e. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. e. (Teller)
Hurrord, C. J.

Innes, U. E.
Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Jones, Barry Kealing, P. J.
Kelly, R. J. Kent, L. Kerin,J. C. Klugman, R. E. McLeay, Leo Mildren, J. B. Millon,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mounlrord, J. G. (Teller)
Scholes, G. G. D. Scali, J. L.
Theophanous, A. e. Uren, T.
Wallis, L.G. Wesl,S.J. Willis,R. Young,M.J.

PAIRS

Bourchier,J. W.

-Johnson, Les

Question so resolved in the affirmative. Original question resolved in the affirmative.

CONSTRUCTION OF ADDITIONAL TRAINING AND SLEEPING
ACCOMMODATION AT RAAF BASE, LAVERTON, VICTORIA
Reference of Work: Public Works Committee Act
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (5.34).-1 move:
That, in accordance with the provisions of the Public Works Commillee Act 1969, the following proposed work be referred to the parliamentary standing committee on public works for consideration and report, namely: COl)struction of additional training and sleeping accommodation at RAAF Base, Laverton, Victoria.
The proposal is for new facilities to support an increase of about 17 per cent in the number of staff and students at the Royal Australian Air Force school of radio. The RAAF needs more people skilled in electronics and radio for new equipments being introduced into the service such as the new tactical fighter, The work will consist of the following elements: Two-storey cluster groups of accommodation units for 208 airmen, a threestorey training building and associated external

RAAF Base, Laverton, Victoria

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3039

works, services and landscaping. The estimated cost of the proposed work is $5.6m at August 1981 prices. I table plans of the proposed work.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (5.35)-1 want to make only a few remarks about the matter under consideration by the House. The situation relating to general living standards and the maintenance of accommodation at Defence Force bases throughout Australia is of growing concern to a large number of Service personnel. It is one of the areas about which the greatest number of complaints come from Service personnel, especially
the families of Service personnel. For several years now the maintenance and the provision of what are basically decent standards of living for persons who are required to move regularly because of their defence commitments and to live in government provided accommodation have
caused concern. This motion is welcome in that it seeks to improve one of those areas.
I draw the attention of the Minister for Housing and Construction (Mr McVeigh) and the House to the fact that an enormous backlog of unmet and substandard accommodation is being utilised on a regular basis by members of the defence forces and their families. Much of this accommodation is obsolete in modern accommodation terms. A good deal of it would be deemed to be below standard by State housing authorities if, in fact, they had the option of condemning government dwellings. I point out also that there are serious problems in a number of areas with the
locations of Defence Force housing accommodation which is quite unsuitable and unrelated to the persons who are expeCted to live in it. There is, as I mentioned before, a serious tardiness in this area. In Darwin, for instance, which is not directly related to this motion, there are still houses which have not been adequately repaired as a result of the damage which was caused during Cyclone Tracy. I think it is unfortunate that this sort of
situation continues. It is causing problems with maintaining the skills and the levels of trained manpower that are necessary in the defence forces. Once a family becomes dissatisfied and if the accommodation that is provided is below the standard which that family is entitled to expect, problems will occur. I raise this matter briefly today because there are very few opportunities to debate this type of matter in the House. I draw to the Minister's attention the very bad state of a great deal of government accommodation in the defence area.
Mr McVEIGH (Darling Downs-Minister for Housing and Construction) (5.37)-in reply-I am grateful to the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) for drawing those matters to my

attention. I just formally advise him that I will bring his comments to the notice of the Minister for Defence (Mr Killen) whose responsibility this matter is.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
INCOME TAX ASSESSMENT AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1981
Second Reading
Debale resumed from 28 October, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (5.38)-The Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill (No.2) deals with two sets of amendments to the Income Tax Assessment Act. These involve, firstly, the taxation of payments made to workers who have been on strike or stood down during a dispute and, secondly, the tax treatment of housing provided at a subsidised rate to workers by their employers. Both matters obviously have important industrial relations connotations as well as tax connotations.
I propose to deal firstly with the set of amendments which seek to provide a more concessional basis for determining the value of employer subsidised housing for income tax purposes. These amendments do so by providing that where certain sets of eligibility criteria are met the value of such housing for tax purposes will be 10 per cent of the market rental value of that housing, less any rent paidby the employee. Taxpayers can be eligible for this concession under one of two sets of conditions. First, taxpayers living and working in remote areas qualify if it is customary in the particular industry for employers to provide free or subsidised housing for their employees and if it is necessary in each case for the employer to provide such accommodation due to lack of suitable alternative accommodation or the need for employees to move frequently from one location to another. Under this legislation a taxpayer will be deemed to be located in a remote area if he or she does not reside or work in, or adjacent to, an urban centre. Under the terms of the Bill this means within 100 kilometres of a town or a city with the popUlation over 130,000 or within 40 kilometres of a town of over 12,000 people-both cases are based on population figures from the 1976 census.
The second set of eligibility criteria was clearly formulated to cover workers in the sugar industry along the north coast of Queensland who also benefit from employer-subsidised housing. These criteria state that where a taxpayer does not meet the remoteness tests I have just mentioned and

3040 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Income Tax Assessment Bill (No.2)

lives in, or adjacent to, an urban centre that taxpayer may also be entitled to the 90 per cent concession if all of a number of conditions are met. Those conditions are: It must be customary in the industry for employers to provide such housing, there must be no suitable alternative accommodation available, the conditions of occupation of the accommodation must be onerous because of proximity to the work place and, finally, at least
six other employees must receive such housing. Finally, just in case there is a chance that any other taxpayer will become liable to pay tax on subsidised housing, the Commissioner of Taxation will have discretion to treat a person who resides or works in, or adjacent to, an urban centre as residing or working outside that area if persons residing or working near to that person are regarded as being in a remote area. These amendments are proposed to have effect in respect of assessments for 1977-78 and subsequent income years and the Commissioner will be empowered to amend any assessments made before these provisions come into operation in order to reduce the value of assessable housing benefits included in assessable income.
My explanation of the terms of this amendment has necessarily been lengthy because this is a lengthy and extremely complex proposal. It is a proposal which, I am sure, officers of the Australian Taxation Office would not have relished having to prepare and it is a proposal which, yet again, will add to the complexity of an alreadyextremely complex and difficult to comprehend Income Assessment Tax Act. Whilst we in the Opposition support the legislation it is legislation which we feel has been necessitated only by the incompetent administration of the tax Act by this Government. Had the Government accepted the attitudes of previous Administrations which, since the mid 1960s, have not taxed such housing benefits, the lengthy and costly disputes in regard to this matter would not have arisen.
In order to illustrate the Government's ineptitude on the issue it is necessary to briefly sketch the events leading up to the amendments contained in this Bill. Since 1967, miners on the central Queensland coal fields, where this dispute was centred, have been supplied with company houses at relatively low rents of around $5 to $16 a week-well below market values. To the miners cheap housing is seen as some compensation for working in remote areas away from established townships with minimal social amenities, harsh climate and much more expensive living costs. Once the mineral deposits are exhausted the mining townships have little future and in such circumstances the miners are precluded from

investing in their own homes which, presumably, most would do in more established townships. In these conditions cheap housing is seen as essential to attracting workers to these areas.
This Government, however, has taken a different view from that taken by previous administrations. In 1978, it was decided to apply the provisions of section 26 (e) of the tax Act to miner's housing. This section is designed to include in a taxpayer's assessable income all compensation given in money or kind as a direct or indirect benefit of employment. Section 26 (e) has to date been enforced in a very inconsistent way by this Government. While attempting to crack down on the miners the Government has ignored various tax free perks and fringe benefits which have been widely employed for many years by high income earners to reduce their tax. Top executives and other high salary earners, unable
to enjoy the delights of the more blatant tax avoidance schemes, now insist that their incomes be based on so-called remuneration packages or some other euphemisticly titled arrangement. Such packages often contain up to one-third of salary in fringe benefits such as company credit cards, entertainment allowances, use of company facilities and other non-taxed perks. An executive who would otherwise earn, say, $40,000 in taxable
income, can reduce his tax by over $5,000 simply by taking $30,000 as taxable income and $10,000 worth of fringe benefits which are not taxed. Although the Commissioner of Taxation has recently implemented a selective crackdown in areas such as expense accounts and the use of cars, it still seems that many benefits remain untouched. The large amounts of tax revenue lost through these perks warrant tough action by the Commissioner to stamp out such abuses. In our view, such a crackdown would be far more justified than attempting to tax the miners on a thoroughly deserved concession which would have yielded little revenue to the Government by comparison.
It is worth pondering why the Government chose to apply these provisions to the miners' housing after it had gone untaxed for such a long period. It is not going too far to suggest that the Government took these steps in retaliation for large pay increases awarded to Utah employees in early 1978. These increases of about $95 a week took average wages for Utah employees from about $19,000 to $23,000 a year and were much criticised by the Government at that time. It seems to be far from coincidental that the crackdown on housing benefits occurred shortly after these wage increases were granted. The Opposition believes that the tax system certainly should

Income Tax Assessment Bill (No.2)

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3041

not be used in such a discriminatory way to cover up for the Government's complete lack of a comprehensive wages policy.
The Australian Taxation Office first attempted to apply this tax in 1978 when a circular was sent to employers in the Queensland coalfields stating that workers should pay the equivalent tax on an extra $1,000 income if they received fully subsidised company housing. This, translated, meant an extra weekly tax bill of about $7. The miners not surprisingly, refused to pay the extra tax and 2,000 workers stopped work for two weeks in an ende.avour to have the operation of section 26 (e) modIfied to take account of the special circumstances of thei~ employment. The miners were joined in their protest by teacJ'iers, rural and constr~ction workers and even, remarkably, by local polIcemen, all of whom received subsidised housing. The Government backed down on the issue and on 12 July 1978 the Treasurer (Mr Howard) announced that the Government had commenced a review of the application of section 26 (e) to these circumstances. He said that the review would be completed as soon as possible and that the Commissioner would not pursue current initiatives in the matter pending the outcome of the review. In addition, according to officials of the combined mining unions, a deputation of union officials met the Treasurer in Canberra and received an assurance that they would not be taxed on housing benefits.
Nothing more was heard from the Government until June I979-virtually a year later-when the Treasurer announced that the Income Tax Assessment Act would be amended by the insertion of section 26AAAA to limit the operation of section 26(e). Under the amendment the Commissioner, when considering the value of housing benefits, would be required to take into account all relevant factors, such as isolation, custom in the industry, the standard of accommodation' the lack of alternatives and the onerous conditions under which the employees were working. Where such considerations applied, the value of the housing was to be reduced as appropriate to the circumstances. These amendments were not debated in this House for a further nine months-not until March 1980. They in no way removed the liability of the workers to pay the tax; they only formally incorporated in the Act matters to which the Commissioner was already giving consideration. However, the miners had clearly been led to believe that this would be the end of the matter and that no further tax would be levied.
In June 1979 the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) visited Blackwater in Queensland and told a deputation of miners that in respect of this

matter they could 'sleep tight at night', to use his exact words. This assurance was given in the presence of various Queensland Federal and State politicians. They were allIed to believe that there would be no tax. In addition, Canberra journalists heard the Prime Minister say that the men would not have to pay tax on their housing. The journalists reported his statements in the Age and the Australian Financial Review on the following day, 15 June 1979. However, when this issue blew up again last year the Prime Minister's Press office, which, I understand, devotedly transcribes every word the Prime Minister utters, could not find the transcript of the Prime Minister's remarks, attributing the loss to a 'failure in the system'. It is more likely, I imagine, that the records were deliberately lost once the Prime Minister realis~d that his assurances were, once again, not being translated into practice. Whatever happened, the miners firmly believed that the Prime Minister, Mr Fraser, had promised that they would not be taxed on their housing. This view was reinforced by a letter dated 26 July 1979 from the Prime Minister to Mr Andrew Vickers, President of the Central Queensland Combined Mining Unions, which letter was reported in the Australian" Financial Review of 8 August last year. The key paragraph of that letter states:

The Government has carefully considered the implications of these long-standing arrangements for taxpayers in relatively remote or isolated areas and is reluctant to see them substantially disturbed.

Most interpretations of that phrase would indi-

cate that the Government would continue not to

levy the tax. Certainly, that was the impression

that was given to those who read the letter. The

Treasurer used the same phrase in his Press re-

lease of 13 June 1979 announcing the amendment

to the Income Tax Assessment Act. Given these

assurances by the Prime Minister and the

Treasurer, it is little wonder that the miners were

incensed Taxation

in June 1980 when indicated that the

tphre~vCisoimonms iossfiosencetrioonf

26 (e) would continue to be enforced and, despite

the earlier amendments, miners would still be

assessed on the value of their housing. This incom-

prehensible decision, given earlier assurances, led

to a prolonged, bitter and costly dispute on the

Queensland coalfields. Almost 4,000 employees

engaged in the mines in the Queensland towns of

Blackwater, Emerald, Dysart, Moura and Moran-

bah were involved in a lO-week stoppage. This

needless stoppage involved massive costs for all-

costs which could have been forgone had the

Government stuck to its earlier assurances. The

Queensland Government lost $3m a week in rev-

enue; the miners lost $2m a week in wages for-

gone; the Commonwealth Government lost $8.6m

3042 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Income Tax Assessment Bill (No.2)

a week in income tax, coal export duty and excise; and the Utah Development Company-the major employer involved-estimated its production losses to be $19m a week. Of great significance also would have been the' damage done to our reputation overseas as a reliable coal supplier. These massive costs were incurred for what was an almost insignificant tax take for the Government. According to one commentator, some $21,000 a week would have been raised in taxes on subsidised housing from the central Queensland coalfields. That is a quite miniscule amount for all the disruption, bitterness and losses involved.
The tax revolt by the miners on this issue fired public imagination. Understandably, the public at large was fed up after five years of increased taxes and broken promises from the Fraser Government and the miners received strong support. In the face of this strong backing for the miners, and only a few months before an election, the Government was forced to give ground. Initially the assessed rental value of miners' housing was put at $45 a week. Before the dispute commenced, this was reduced to $20 a week under the operation of section 26AAAA, to which I previously referred. The miners, .however, would not accept the extra tax of between $6.50 and $9 which would have resulted from the decision. The Government's first backdown-the first of three backdownscame on 11 July 1980 when the Treasurer offered to phase in over three years the tax on the difference between $20 and the rent actually paid, if any. This proposal was rejected and on 6 August 1980 the Treasurer offered to reduce the assessed rental valu!:; to $16 in greater recognition of the remoteness and common practice in the industry. Again, this proposal was rejected. Finally, the Government capitulated on 2 September 1980closer to the election-when it announced that the assessed rental value would be discounted by 90 per cent to $4.50 a week. Because rents actually paid-typically $5 a week-usually exceeded this figure, no tax would be paid on such subsidised housing.
On any view the miners had achieved a resounding victory over the Government. But this victory had been achieved at great cost in lost wages, lost production, lost revenue and deep seated bitterness and division. The Government must bear the blame for the effects of this dispute, which spread over three years and resulted entirely from the Government's intransigence. This disruption need not have occurred had the Government not attempted to overturn long standing arrangements which had been accepted

by successive governments for many yearsmerely, it seems, from a motive of retribution and possibly also from a thirst for extra tax revenue. Had the Government dropped the proposals in 1978 when the miners first expressed their total opposition and had it decided to honour undertakings given at later dates, this entire mess could have been avoided. The Government's use of the tax system in this case deserves to be condemned outright and, while we on this side of the House support the amendments now before the House, we reiterate that in our view they should not have been necessary in the first place.
At this stage, I turn to deal briefly with the second set of amendments contained in this BiIlthose dealing with the taxation of so-called dispute settlement payments. This set of amendments seeks to rectify the current situation in which lump sum payments paid at the end of an industrial dispute to compensate workers for the hardship of being on strike or stood down during a dispute, or simply to induce them to return to work, are tax free as the law now stands. This Bill ensures that any such payment made after 11 August 1981 will be taxable and that pay-as-youearn tax deductions at the rate of 32 cents in the dollar will be deducted from them.
These measures arose out of a settlement agreement negotiated to end a lengthy dispute at the Loy Yang power station construction site in the Latrobe Valley in Victoria last year. The dispute arose when members of the Builders Labourers Federation were dismissed for refusing to lift an overtime ban on concrete batching imposed because of wage demands and a demarcation dispute with members of the Australian Workers Union and the Federated Iron workers Association of Australia. Following the dismissal of the Builders Labourers Federation members, 600 other workers were dismissed by site contractors unable to continue working without reliable concrete supplies.
One of the key points of the agreement reached to settle the dispute was the payment of back pay to these 600 workers and the members who originally created the dispute for the 33 weeks that they were off work. These hardship payments, as they were termed, were calculated on an average of the employees' after tax earnings over the four weeks leading up to the dismissal, less any earnings from social security or other employment during the strike. It was estimated that the payments to employees varied between $10,000 and $12,000 because of the agreement. These payments were exempt from tax because any sums received by way of compensation for loss of the

Income Tax Assessment Bill (No.2)

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3043

opportunity to earn income, or for the abandonment of rights to income under a contract of service, are regarded as being capital payments which are non-taxable, rather than income payments which are taxable. The Treasurer announced on 18 December last year that the Government was concerned at this aspect of the agreement and would examine the use of such lump sum payments. Finally, on 11 August this year he announced that any future lump sum payments made as part of a return to work agreement would be fully taxable.
While the position of the majority of the workers in the Loy Yang case is understandable in that they were dimissed through no fault of their own but rather as victims of a dispute to which they were not a party and the payments they received were calculated on an after tax basis, we consider that the Government is justified in amending the law to make such payments taxable in future. It will still be open to employers to make such payments, but the clear implication of this measure is that payments will have to be much higher in order to achieve an equivalent after tax payment. The Government should understand that this is likely to be the result of the measure which it is now putting through this House.
It is considerations of equity which motivate the Opposition to support these measures. In brief, as we see it, it would be totally unfair to tax employees who receive an amount while still at work, whilst other employees on strike or being stood down could receive the same amount of money eventually tax free. Let us take the case of the Loy Yang dispute. If employees were to receive $10,000 when they had not been at work and were to pay no tax, it seems inherently unfair that other workers who received the same amount of money for working the same time should have to pay tax on the same amount of income. Because of that clear anomaly which exists in the tax law as it presently stands we believe we have to support the legislation which is now before the House in respect of these dispute settlement payments. For those reasons we support the legislation.
Sitting suspended from 5.59 to 8 p.m.
Mr BRAITHWAITE (Dawson) (8.0)-Few Bills that have been presented to this House, would have had such a long pregnancy and such a difficult birth as the Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill. I refer particularly to the part of the Bill dealing with employees' housing. The

pregnancy survived a rather heavy handed approach by the tax officials to the original valuations of sugar mill staff to housing in 1976-77. This was followed by a false alarm that brought out the amendment to section 26AAA on 22 November 1979. There was then a coal miners' strike in July, August and September 1980 and a very concerted case which was put to the Australian Taxation Office by the sugar milling staff. The birth of the Bill occurred in the form of the proposed new section 26AAAB. The Treasurer (Mr Howard) and the Cabinet are to be congratulated on their preparedness to accommodate the views of many members and senators and to have the benefits from the new provisions more equitably spread, without opening any floodgates to tax avoidance. That is very important. Our appreciation is sincere for the result that has been achieved.
For many decades the assessable income aspect of subsidised housing rentals came under section 26(e) of the Income Tax Assessment Act. There are other aspects of section 26 (e) but I want to concentrate on the housing rentals aspect which is involved in proposed new section 26AAAB. The Taxation Office administered section 26 (e) up to 1976-77 sensibly and fairly. Whilst only some industries came to the notice of the officials, rental values were set taking into account the conditions of employment and the nature of the housing provided. In a review of rentals on 30 June 1968 values for sugar mill housing were agreed to and set at about $5 or $6 per week. Apparently few other industries were caught in the tax web at that time. The mining industry development of the seventies came apparently unnoticed to the Taxation Office. But it became traditional for mining companies to offer accommodation in towns set up specially for employees to mine a finite product. Small rentals in the range of $5 to $10 per week were charged by the companies much in line with the sugar industry values then applied by the Taxation Office. In time, some companies escalated their basic rentals while others did not change.
The Taxation Office in late 1976 went about the reassessment of rental values in a manner which was a substantial departure from the previous policy of recognising the disadvantages of living in rental accommodation in industries that require employees to live in close proximity to their work. Assessments for mill employees in employer accommodation where issued for the year ended 30 June 1978 on values sometimes ten times greater than the 1968 values. There was, of course, an immediate reaction with those affected

3044 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Income Tax Assessment Bill (No.2)

taxpayers lodging objections against the assessments as the increases were far in excess of the simplest of indexes, mainly the consumer price index. I believe this approach was heavy handed, not realistic and did not take into account traditional arrangements. The taxation officials then sought other avenues in which to apply the values and collect additional tax. Values were established on the minefields at roughly equivalent values to those in the sugar industry.
This was not a reaction, as the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) said, to the pay increases on the mine fields themselves. It was a follow-on from the assessment of the increased values within the sugar mills. The coalminers struck in 1979 over this issue although the values had not to then been applied in their industry. I must point out that to this time employees in the sugar industry which had been singled out, were expected to pay the additional tax which other, similarly placed employees in other industries, did not. Sugar industry staff, in spite of their objections, never took strike action but received little recognition for their restraint and certainly no gain. They received little recognition from the Opposition. The honourable member for Gellibrand, who led for the Opposition in this debate, did not mention that at no time was the sugar industry involved in the dispute.
After the first strike by coal miners, section 26AAAA was introduced to provide for a discounting of the market value because of certain remoteness factors. The results desired by the coal miners were not achieved under a strict interpretation of that section although an additional discounting factor was established and available. This was followed by the Central Queensland miners strike of 1980, a strike which some commentators suggest resulted in a loss of $200m. The profit on revenue to the miners, the mine owners and the Governmental authorities was delayed to that extent.
Again I pay a tribute to mill staff and mill employees during this time. They did not resort to strike action but were prepared to maintain their representation through the proper channels. Their reward will be that because of the retrospective provisions of this section to 1 July 1977, refunds of overpayments will be made to them and justice long denied, will now be available.
Another example of the ineptitude of the taxing authorities at this time was the fact that at a time when rentals were being reassessed upwards, at a time when assessments were threatened and when strike action had been taken the Taxation Department had available to it, a previously issued undertaking to representatives of a mining

company that values for taxation purposes of subsidised housing for the following ten years would remain at the same relatively low values of $5 to $10. This undertaking had been given, I understand, in the early part of the 1970's.
The withholding of the information, or the fact that it was overlooked, led to the situation of confrontation that was entirely unnecessary. I also mention the inconsistency of some of our Queensland State Government colleagues, some in ministerial positions, who while arguing the case for miners to pay rents at levels no higher than $5 per week, were actually charging their own State employees, school teachers particularly, amounts of $32 per week for married accommodation often inferior to the miners' accommodation.
Yet these people, for their own particular political advantage, added considerably to the difficulties of settlement of the dispute and helped bring about the confrontation that took place.
For many years, the taxing arrangement was administered under the tax law, with an interpretation of the Act that showed a proper and practical understanding of all the issues involved in employer supplied accommodation in particular industries and in remote areas. Taxpayers now fail to appreciate, and so do I, why there is now a necessity to detail the law and provide for legislation, which was not previously necessary when a practical and common sense understanding of the position existed within the Department and was applied in an appropriate manner. Proposed new section 26AAAB provides for the discounting of normal market rental value by 90 per cent in determining its assessable value in the hands of an employee. This amount is reduced for assessment purposes by the amount of any rent paid by the employee. The discount will apply to an employee who resides in a remote area and this is determined by a distance of 100 kilometres or more of the centre of a town or city with a population of more than 13,000 or 40 kilometres or more ora town with a population in excess of 12,000.
The second test is the close proximity to the work place. There are seven main tests for this and these are: The nature of the employer's business is such that employees are liable to frequent movement from one residential location to another; in the area in which the employee is employed there is not sufficient suitable residential accommodation otherwise available; the custom in the employer's industry to provide free or subsidised housing for employees; the employer's industry is one in which it is customary to provide subsidised housing for employees at, or in close

Income Tax Assessment Bill (No.2)

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3045

proximity to, the work place; the employee has no alternative to occupying the accommodation provided because suitable alternative accommodation: is not available at, or in close proximity to, the work place on reasonable terms and conditions or the employee is required by the employer to live at, or near, the work place and to be on call; the conditions under which the employee occupies the accommodation are onerous because of its proximity to the work place; and the employer of the taxpayer provides accommodation connected with the taxpayer's work place for at least six employees.
These values are applied from the year of income that commenced on 1 July 1977 and subsection 4(a) of the principal section, is the authority for retrospective amendments to apply where eligible taxpayers have been assessed on amounts in excess of the values now calculated. As I understand it, this means that those taxpayers who objected, and those who did not but who have been assessed on excessive rental values, now have the opportunity of having those assessments amended retrospectively to the year ended 30 June 1978. Those affected taxpayers should, upon royal assent being given to this Bill, approach the Taxation Office within their State for amendments.
Again I express the appreciation of many constituents of Dawson and remote areas of Australia and in on-locality industries for the Government's legislation on this housing rental issue. I wish to express my own appreciation to other members who assisted in bringing this legislation to fruition. I mention particularly the honourable member for Herbert (Mr Dean), the honourable member for Fisher (Mr Adermann), several senators and also officials within the sugar industry representations of the Australian Sugar Producers Association, the Proprietary Sugar Millers Association and the Co-operative Association. There are many people who assisted in this matter. The rural committee and the taxation committee of the Government backbench were of tremendous assistance in bringing this to the notice of the Government. I also acknowledge the patience and perseverance of those taxpayers in sugar mill housing accommodation and hope that their reward is as sweet to them as this result is to me.
Mr HUMPHREYS (Griffith) (8.12)-It is not very often that the honourable member for Dawson (Mr Braithwaite) and I agree in discussions in this House, but I agree with the honourable member on this occasion. I remember the occasion of a public meeting held by the miners in the town of Blackwater in Queensland.

That town is not in the honourable member's electorate but he had the intestinal fortitude to go to the meeting and to speak to the miners. Before he was allowed to speak, I had to defend him a little and cool the miners. I felt sorry for the honourable member on that occasion because he was defending a policy of his Government which he knew was wrong. I must say that he fought hard for the people in those isolated areas and that he knows the problems that they have to put up with. The members whom he was praising a moment ago did not have the intestinal fortitude to front up at that meeting but he did, so the honourable should hav~ not have given as much praise to those members as he has done. That is all I have to say to him; I agree with him.
As my colleague the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) pointed out, the Opposition supports the amending Bill now before us which deals with the tax treatment of employees occupying subsidised housing. Almost by default the Bill now makes possible a much more realistic and reasoned approach to those employees than was formerly the case. I say 'by default' because in 1978 the Government would probably never have countenanced such a concession. As my colleague the honourable member for Gellibrand also stated, the hard-won concession which was so grudgingly given by the Government enables the Commissioner of Taxation to treat the value of subsidised housing as 10 per cent of the market rental value of housing in the capital cities of the States less any rent paid by the employee.
An innovation in the Bill is the extension of these provisions to employees in industries other than the mining industry if the following conditions are met: The nature of the employers' business is such that employees are liable to frequent movements from one residential location to another; in the area in which the employee is employed there is not sufficient suitable residential accommodation otherwise available; or the custom of the employers' industry is to provide free or subsidised housing to employees. A further innovation is that an employee who lives in or adjacent to an urban centre is entitled.to the concessions provided all the foregoing conditions are satisfied. In addition, the Bill extends the concession to employees who occupy accommodation under conditions which are onerous because of its proximity to the work place and to taxpayers whose employer provides accommodation connected with the taxpayers' work place for at least six employees.
By extending the 90 per cent concession to employers in other industries, the Bill is potentially applicable to a host of other industries outside the

3046 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Income Tax Assessment Bill (No.2)

mining industry. A sample of occupations now eligible would be those connected with building, metal, power, gas, mining, timber, entertainment, postal and telecommunications, clubs and hotels, hospitals, local government, police, teachers, watchmen and Federal and State public servants. As my colleague the honourable member for Gellibrand has also pointed out, the provisions of the Bill permit seasonal employees in the north Queensland sugar industry to benefit from the concessions.
In case there is any lingering doubt in the minds of honourable members opposite that employees in remote areas are not deserving of such assistance, let me briefly describe some of the disadvantages that accompany that lifestyle. I can speak with authority about people living in isolated areas because for many years I travelled in outback Queensland, in the Channel country, through the Northern Territory and through the Kimberleys of Western Australia. The conditions that they have had to put up with over the years are arduous, as you would be well aware, Mr Deputy Speaker. They have to run their cars on dirty and dusty roads and as a result their tyres suffer many fractures. Just the expense of running
a motor vehicle in those areas is astronomical, not to mention having to live in dingy housing. I am sure honourable members are aware of the difficulties of trying to educate children in those areas-how it costs a tremendous amount of money to send children into the city, thus splitting up families and causing hardship. We need those people. out there. Some people say that those people do not have to live there and that they can
live in a city. But what would happen to Australia if those people were not living in those isolated areas? They are wonderful people-I have had a lot to do with them-and they deserve looking after. We in the Australian Labor Party will be looking after them.
Mr Hodgman-Next century.

are of fibro construction and are not insulated; nor are they air conditioned. It is abundantly clear, therefore, that employees in subsidised housing are not living in palaces by any stretch of the imagination.
I hope that the Government's experience arising out of and occasioning this Bill has taught it two lessons. The first lesson I hope that the Government has learned, and which Australian taxpayers made crystal clear during the miners' tax revolt, is the message that came from the taxpaying community that Australians have been taxed enough. A survey conducted in late August of 1980, after the miners' revolt had been running for 9 weeks, indicated that almost 60 per cent of Australians supported the miners. It is significant that the miners' revolt was not a strike in the community's eyes. The miners slogan became: 'Eureka No.2-miners' revolt 1980'. The miners were pathfinders and their struggle symbolised and tapped an undercurrent of disillusionment running through the community.
The second lesson I was hoping that the Federal Government had learned through the bitter experience of the tax revolt-alas, 1 regret to say it has not-is that when the taxpayer says 'Enough is enough', the Government must listen and respond immediately. It has taken three years to get this Bill and the concessions granted in it for people and workers living in isolated areas. There is little point in pouring salt on to old wounds, but the similarity between this and other broken tax promises is too evident to overlook. Just as the Government's intransigence in respect of the miners' revolt cost a high price, that is, the loss of millions of dollars of revenue and export earnings, so will the Government's broken promises-the promises that were made by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in March of this year-ultimately lead to the Government's downfall at the next election.

Mr HUMPHREYS-That is all right; the Mr BAUME (Macarthur) (8.19)-1 share

Minister can look after his Tasmanians and we with the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr

will help to do that too.

Willis) some concerns about this kind of legis-

Mr Hodgman-You were calling me a oncer . six years ago.

lation. I think it is wrong to use the tax Act in this way. I think the Government has in fact given way to the miners in north Queensland whom the

Mr HUMPHREYS-I have never done that. honourable member who proceeded me in this de-

The Minister should go back to the dinner table. bate was defending, whose cause he was espousing

Apart from the isolation, the uncongenial climatic and whose cause was espoused by the Australian

conditions and the high cost of living are, of Labor Party before the last election when it

course, the prime disadvantages. In Mount Isa the assured the miners that there would be no change

heat discomfort level exceeds the critical disin tax reductions for them if Labor won the elec-

comfort levels for 100 or 150 days of the year. It is tion and that no assumptions, in tax terms, would

practically hopeless to live in Mount Isa. In the be made about the value of their housing. 1 much

mining towns of Dysart and Moranbah the houses prefer to hear what the honourable member for

Income Tax Assessment Bill (No.2)

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3047

Gellibrand is now saying. I support him. His remarks are in total contrast to what his leader was saying.
I think what we must recognise is the fact that the kind of assistance encompassed in this legislation, which is theoretically to the miners of Queensland, is in fact not assistance to the miners at all. It is assistance to the multinational coal proprietor and proprietors who will in fact receive the benefit of this reduction in their real costs of production to the disadvantage of the mining companies and the miners of the underground coal mines in New South Wales in particular. It seems to me absurd that the Government, as a result of political necessity, was forced to give way, and forced, I might say because of the political expediency of the Labor Party, which now says that it is opposed to the proposition but which, before the general election, was in favour of it. The reality of this situation is that by allowing an internationally dominated coal mining company to pay wages that are lower than it would otherwise pay, if in fact the full cost of housing was applied to the residences of the miners, and to allow that company to face a lower cost of production is to give it an unfair commerical advantage over the coal mines of New South Wales, for example, and certainly an advantage over the coal miners who live in my electorate.
It is extraordinary that the coal miners in my electorate were conned by their Queensland brethren to provide financial support for the strike of the coal miners in Queensland and that the successful outcome of that strike resulted in a situation in which there would be unfair competition against the New South Wales coal mines from Queensland coal mines subsidised, in effect, by the taxes of the Australian people. It seems to me to be totally improper that those big coal mines in Queensland which have a generally much lower cost of operation and which are earning profits should be benefiting to the competitive disadvantage of south coast coal mines, many of which are suffering enormous losses. I have a great deal of concern about the general principle of using the tax Act in this way, as the honourable member for Gellibrand has now properly expressed. He appears to be in conflict with the rest of his party. I also have a great deal of concern on the simple ground that this legislation is specifically and unfairly to the disadvantage of voters in my electorate.
Mr Hodgman-You always fight for the underdog.
Mr BAUME-Well, the underground dog in this case. I hope that the Government will not

proceed in this way in other matters. I recognise, though, the particular pressures which were imposed by a political environment in which I must say the Labor Party participated. We have heard honourable members from the other side of the House talk in disparaging terms about the general tax situation. This kind of problem is no doubt part of a general situation affecting the tax Act which does need improving. Undoubtedly, there are many hidden pieces of support for various sections of the community which cannot be assessed because they cannot be seen. The size of the assistance cannot be established when the tax Act and deductions under the tax Act are used to provide benefits. This is, I think, the general point that the honourable member for Gellibrand was making, but it seems to me that it is part of the total misunderstanding about the .proper role of the tax Act and the proper role of various kinds of taxes in Australia.
It is most unfortunate that any sensible attempts to discuss tax in Australia are continually frustrated by the actions of the newspapers, in particular, which unfortunately are the major method of communicating the messages from within this place to the general public. There is such a committed view, such a locked-in position, for example, among the newspaper proprietors who see tax particularly through the glasses of a 2+ per cent tax on newspapers-that is, the sales tax-that it is impossible to get across an accurate, reasonable and proper discussion of this vital matter. Some years ago, we even saw sections of private enterprise preventing the proper discussion of the tax system and certainly the indirect tax system when the retail traders of this nation involved themselves in a dishonest and disgraceful campaign to prevent even an inquiry into the proper methods of indirect taxation.
Whenever a government faces those kinds of problems it is inevitable that it cannot publicly discuss things because of the way in which special interest groups whip up massive antagonism. It cannot prepare itself effectively within the governmental structure because of the enormous volume of leaks that take place in discussions with that small, but nonetheless effective, minority of public servants who have a greater sense of loyalty to the political party they support than to the government they are supposed to be serving. Government cannot even discuss in great detail within departments the consequences of specific action it may want to take. This is a problem that confronted the Labor Party in government and which confronts this present Government. It is

3048 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Income Tax Assessment Bill (No.2)

disastrous that there cannot be a sensible examination in great detail within the departments themselves and that there certainly cannot be public discussion either.
It is in that environment, for example, that the people of Australia at present have fallen for one of the most deceptive propaganda campaigns I have seen in my time in parliament; That is, Australians now wrongly believe that the recent Budget sales tax rises represent a big, new and disastrous attack on their living standards. Everyone here knows that the total increase in indirect taxes this year will be the lowest in real terms for four years and will be less than half the indirect tax rise which took place in the last Hayden Budget. In fact it is only one-quarter the size of indirect tax rises of four years ago.. Yet the newsprint media is not prepared to report those facts. I might say that they have never been reported outside this chamber even though they have been said repeatedly by me and by the Treasurer (Mr Howard). No newspaper in the metropolitan areas of Australia has reported those facts-that this is the lowest indirect tax rise in four years and less than half the Hayden rise.
Mr Hodgman-Has the Illawarra Mercury reported that fact?
Mr BAUME-I might say that within my electorate the newspapers are sufficiently sensible to recognise the truth and to print it. However, no major metropolitan newspaper has reported these facts and it is as a result of overt and direct censorship that the newspapers refuse to print these facts. I have written for the Sydney Morning Herald in my role as chairman of the Government members taxation sub-committee an article outlining these facts. The Sydney Morning Herald has chosen not to print that article. It may well be that my journalistic efforts are of a very poor quality and therefore should not be printed, which would be an interesting contrast to the view that that same organisation held when it employed me as a super A journalist as investment editor of the Australian Financial Review.
It is fascinating that as a result of all these curious situations where we have the misuse of the tax Act-and this piece of legislation is another example of the misuse of the tax Act-we cannot have a proper, sensible approach to the whole question of taxation. To that extent, I support the comments of the honourable member for Gellibrand. I regret that so far this year we have not been able to see the sort of discussion of tax and the recognition of the reality of the reduced burden of indirect taxes that we should have seen. I conclude my remarks by pointing out to those

who are obsessed with sales tax that the Budget Papers dramatically show that had ther e not been the introduction of additional sales taxes, real indirect taxes actually would have fallen this year. That is another fact but one which has not been reported and which, I presume even after tonight, will not be reported from the empty Press Gallery.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.
Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Hodgman) read a third time.
CENSUS AND STATISTICS AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 15 October, on motion by Mr Howard:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (8.30)-This Bill seeks to amend the Census and Statistics Act. It relates mainly to the privacy sections of that Act. The main provisions seek to tighten the confidentiality sections of the Census and Statistics Act so that suppliers of information can be assured that information relating to their personal or organisational activities will not be released to the public except in the case of an organisation where there is good reason to do so. It introduces a means by which information relating to an organisation which otherwise would not be publishable because publication would contravene the confidentiality sections of the Act can be published where there is good reason so to do. It also varies some penalties provided under the Act. It rearranges the Act in a more co-ordinated and well ordered way. Of course, it must be understood that this Act is one of the oldest Acts of the Parliament and was in substantial need of some reorganisation and amendment.
I will look in more detail at the provisions of the Bill, particularly at the way in which the confidentiality provisions have been tightened. As I mentioned, that has been done in several ways. I will refer to a couple of them. One is by increasing the penalty for unauthorised disclosure by officers or past officers of the Bureau of Statistics. The penalty is being increased from $1,000 or 12 months imprisonment or both to $5,000 or two years imprisonment or both. This is a substantial increase and particularly so when it is realised that the current penalty in the Act was introduced

Census and Statistics Bill (No.2)

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3049

only in May of this year. Prior to that it was only a $100 fine. Thus, in the course of this year, the maximum fine on Bureau officers for unauthorised disclosure has been increased 50-fold and a possible two-year gaol sentence has been added.
No explanation of the need for such a large rise in the penalty has been given by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) in his second reading speech, which is rather poor to say the least. Indeed, the Treasurer misled the House in that speech by saying:
Maximum penalties incorporated in the Bill are similar to those enacted by Parliament in the autumn sittings.
He went on to make the exception of a deletion of the penalty of imprisonment for another offence. In fact, the penalty for the Bureau officers is not similar to those introduced in the autumn sittings. As I said, the fine is five times higher and the level of imprisonment has been doubled. The Government's cavalier treatment of such an amendment is contemptuous of Parliament in our view. Whilst we understand the intention of the amendment, we are not told why it has been deemed necessary to apply such an increase. Such action seems to us to be further evidence of the need to establish a sentencing council, as recommended by the Law Reform Commission in its fifteenth report entitled 'Sentencing of Federal Offenders'. In that report, recommendation 24 called for a sentencing council to be established to standardise penalties for Federal offenders. This seems to be a very sensible recommendation. At present, as in this Bill, the setting of penalties is absolutely on a rule of thumb basis. The Government introduced a penalty in May and then increased it five times in one respect and doubled it in another respect in a Bill in the next session. Where are we going? There has been no explanation to the Parliament as to why that level of penalty has been adopted. Obviously, it has been adopted on an absolute rule of thumb basis.
This is shown also by another amendment to the Act reducing a penalty which was increased only last May. The penalty concerned is that applying to persons who knowingly provide false information. Last May that penalty was increased from $100 to $1,000 or six months imprisonment or both, again without any reason being given other than the need to update the penalties. Now the Act is being amended to remove the penalty of imprisonment, again without reason as to why that is being done. When the Act was amended in May I drew attention, on behalf of the Opposition, to the stiffness of this penalty and expressed the Opposition's concern in regard to that increase. This was the subject of an amendment in

the Senate to remove the penalty of imprisonment. The Government used its then majorityone which it subsequently lost-to defeat that
amendment.
Apparently the Government has had second thoughts on this matter and has decided to do what the Senate amendment sought to achieve. In so doing it is, in effect, conceding that it was acting oppressively in threatening citizens with imprisonment for giving false information which, in some cases, could be rather harmless to the value of the statistics. For instance, someone who gives his name on the census form as Donald Duck or Mickey Mouse or who understates his age by five years or whatever could be under the threat of imprisonment under the law as amended last May. This information obviously does not make a great difference to the standard of the statistics, and threats of imprisonment for such offences seem to be rather oppressive. The Opposition, therefore, is pleased that the Government has decided now to retract this thoroughly unnecessary and excessive penalty.
Another way in which the confidentiality provisions of the Act are being amended is the introduction of a specific provision that statistical information shall not be published or disseminated
in a way which would enable identification of a particular person or organisation. Having specifically provided that prohibition, there is then the problem that, for example, production statistics in some areas, such as iron and steel to take an obvious example, could not be published because it would identify information provided by one organisation, to wit, the Broken Hill Proprietry Co. Ltd, which is virtually the sole producer of iron and steel in this country. So there is a problem clearly in relation to sole suppliers or predominant suppliers in an industry.
The way around that adopted in the Bill is to provide for a ministerial determination procedure authorising the Statistician to release information relating to an organisation but not a person and
for such a determination to be subject to disallowance by either House of Parliament. The determination may allow the Statistician to make such information available to a particular person who may be required to give an undertaking not to disclose any of that information and be subject to a
fine of up to $5,000 or two years gaol or both for breach of that undertaking. SUbject to what I have already said regarding penalties, the Opposition regards these measures as sensible and worthwhile amendments. They have, I understand, been put to and approved by the Australian Statistics Advisory Council, which advises the Statistician on statistical matters.

3050 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Census and Statistics Bill (No.2)

The only concern we have in relation to this procedure is that it does not seem to provide that the approval of the provider of the information is required before such information can be released.
The Treasurer said in his speech that the Statistician will, in making a decision about the release of such information, 'continue to be guided by an overriding concern to maintain the confidence and trust of respondents to statistical collections'. I have no doubt that this will be so, but such respondentswould probably feel more secure if it were specifically provided in the legislation that their approval, as well as that of the Statistician, was needed before a ministerial determination authorising the release of such information could be made. However, despite that slight concern and despite the concern I expressed previously about the increase in the fine without any rule other than that of the rule of thumb for arriving at a particular level of penalty, the Opposition is fully in support of the measures which are being
taken.
I want to make it clear that in approving of what the Government is doing in general in this Bill I am in no way implying that we approve of the way in which the Government has been handling the process of statistics collection in this nation during its period of office. Indeed, its record has been one of reckless unconcern for the quality and quantity of official statistics published in this country. I will refer briefly to some of the ways in which this Government has sabotaged the quality and quantity of official statistics in this country during its period of office. One way in which this is being done is by the application of
reduced staff ceilings to the Australian Bureau of Statistics along with most of the rest of the Public Service. There is no doubt that such reduction has caused a deterioration in the service provided and prevented desired improvements from being made. The Bureau's number of operative staff fell from 3,670 in June 1975 to 3,445 in June 1980, which was a fall of 225 or 6 per cent. Certainly, the number had gone up to 3,505 by the end of June 1981, but it went up because of the census which was held at the time.
So we are concerned at the fact that the staff has been reduced to this extent. Quite obviously
that has impaired the ability of the Bureau to undertake various activities which it would have wanted to undertake had adequate staff been available. In a minute to the Treasurer that became public some years ago the Statistician has made it clear that staff ceilings were having an adverse effect on Bureau performance. Since then I have noted that the Crawford Study Group on Structural Adjustment, the Australian Statistics

Advisory Council, ana the Bureau in its 1980 annual report, have all drawn attention to the detrimental effects that staff shortages are having on the Bureau's ability to maintain essential statistical output and to maintain a standard of accuracy and reliability of that output. As a consequence of the cutbacks in Bureau activity we have seen cutbacks in all types of publications. In 1976-77, the first financial year in which this Government was in charge of this country, it ceased the monthly survey of aggregate import orders; reduced the output of the foreign participation section; excluded unlisted companies from capital raising statistics; reduced the agricultural finance survey sample; reduced the frequency of data collection in some manufacturing production; excluded small business from the survey of manufacturing production; and reduced samples for surveys of earnings and hours, all of which, of course, reduced either the availability or the reliability of statistics.
By 1978 the Statistician was clearly worried and he pointed out in this minute to the Treasurer that many requests for information, especially from the States, had had to be refused which raised the question of whether the Government was abiding by the integration agreements, that is, the agreement by which the Commonwealth agrees to provide the States with adequate statistics in return for the States not running their own statistical service. He also pointed out that various planned surveys had had to be scrapped or postponed, for instance, the household expenditure survey which had been held in 1974 and 1975. It was to be held annually and was regarded as being important particularly as providing a sound basis for revision of the basket for the consumer price index, but it was not held after 1975.
Of course, that is something which is of real importance for this nation because it means that one of our key statistics-the inflation statistic, the consumer price index-is based on information which is inadequate. For us to have the proper information to have a really accurate assessment of inflation in this country we need revisions of the basket base and the weights of items in that basket based on a household expenditure survey. The Government's refusal to conduct such a survey means that we have a consumer price index which increasingly will reflect inaccurately the rate of inflation in this country. In the minute to the Treasurer in 1978 the Statistician said:
Faced with the task of getting required resources down to a level I judged likely to be accepted by the Government, I have excluded the survey--
That is, the household expenditure survey-

Census and Statistics Bill (No.2)

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3051

From these estimates, but draw that omission to your attention, in particular because of the effect on the CPI. In my judgment we will be able to do a patchwork job,-
I reiterate the words 'a patchworkjob'-

1976 in destroying the value of the 1976 survey. Clearly, that appalling decision was made by the
Government and not by the Bureau. That decision is appalling because the census is the basis

Revising and updating the Index in the light of various for many statistical sample surveys. If the census

sources of indirect information, but it will be far less satisfacitself is only a large sample, as the 1976 census be-

tory than if survey r.esults were available. The need for updatcame, then more error creeps into the statistical

ing will probably become urgent in about two years' time.

series based on the information in the census. In

That was a minute to the Treasurer in February addition, in the detailed breakup of the census

1978. We are now well past the two-year limit. there may be substantial sample error.

The consumer price index is being updated on a basis which does not use a household expenditure
survey because none is available and, therefore,
less perfect sources have to be used which, as the
Statistician said, are far less satisfactory. This key economic statistic increasingly wiIi give us an in-
correct measure of the real rate of inflation in this
country.

This decision was condemned unanimously by
the House of Representatives Standing Com-
mittee on Environment and Conservation. In tabling its report in this Parliament on the Com-
monwealth Government and the Urban Environment the honourable member for Petrie (Mr
Hodges), as Chairman of that Committee, was very critical indeed of that decision. I wish to

Another survey which was scrapped was the quote just one paragraph from his statement. The

consumer finance survey which has never been honourable member for Petrie, in his capacity as

held in Australia. It would be an invaluable source . Chairman of this Committee said:

of infOl:mation regarding the debts and assets of The decision--

households. Its scrapping means that no such in-
formation is available. The agricultural finance survey was also delayed. We have had the scrap-
ping of an important series of statistics, for in-
stance, the foreign ownership and control stat-

That is, the decision to make the changes to the census in 1976 in terms of processing and delay-
was short-sighted and taken without proper recognition or understanding of the implications for the efficiency of decision-making at all levels of government and the private

istics. The foreign participation section was finally sector. We believe that it should not happen again.__

disbanded altogether after having been cut back It has not happened in 1981 and I am very pleased

in its output as I mentioned earlier. Now there are about that. But it remains a very black mark

no statistics on foreign ownership and control of against this Government that it happened once in

our industries or resources. The job vacancy series 1976. We have had much more recently the razor

was scrapped and then reintroduced on a quargang cutbacks in which some of the series

terly basis rather than on a monthly basis. It is produced by the Statistician have been scrapped

available but on a less satisfactory basis than preand others are to be reviewed with a possibility of

viously. The publication of civilian employeesmany of them being scrapped. Some of those that

that is, the number of wage and salary earners in have been scrapped, of course, can be regarded as

civilian employment which was regarded as an pretty unimportant, such as rock lobsters in cold

essential statistic for the analysis of the state of storage in Western Australia, or the number of

employment in this country-has ceased since eggs set and chickens hatched. Those statistics,

April 1980. I understand that although those though they seem of obscure relevance to most of

figures are still collected they are not published by us, are of relevance to people involved in those in-

the Statistician, presumably through a political dustries and probably were very inel\pensive to

decision taken to cease such publications. Indeed, collect anyway. On the other hand, some of the

in all of those three cases I have just mentioned series to be scrapped or reviewed seem to us to be

political influence was the predominant reason important, such as theagricultural census.

for scrapping them.

In the minute to the Treasury in February 1978

We had also the postponement of the 1976 cento which I referred previously the Statistician

sus processing for one year with the Government emphasised the importance that attached to the

processing only half of it to save $6m in 1976-77, agricultural census being held every year. Now

and to save $2m eventually by such halfthat census could be scrapped totally because it is

processing. This wa~ a quite appalling decision one of those that are up for review. I hope that

and, I quickly make the point, that it was one this Government will not make a decision to scrap

which was not repeated in 1981. I am very pleased that census totally but obviously it has that possi-

about that. Nevertheless, that does not allow this bility attaching to it. As I understand it, that sur-

Government to escape from the criticism which is vey is important not only for Government

rightly placed upon it for its scandalous action in decision-making in agriculture, but also for the

3052 REPRESENTATIVES 18November 1981

Census and Statistics Bill (No.2)

Bureau of Agricultural Economics in conducting its survey. Others that seem to be of importance to us which are at risk at present are the real estate statistics, the life insurance statistics, private pension fund statistics, those related to the stock of dwelling, and the production of minerals and mineral products. Furthermore, we had the lowering of staff ceilings in this latest round-the 3 per cent reduction-which, as I understand it, is to be additional to the staff reduction through the reduced functions announced by the razor gang in respect of the Bureau.
Finally, of course, we have had the destruction of the non-Bureau statistical sources, such as the scrapping of the Commonwealth Employment Service unemployment figures which were first scrapped on a seasonally adjusted basis. Also we have had the delay in the publication of figures and no tables have been announced. We have also had the series stopped altogether. This record, I believe, is one of which this Government should be totally ashamed. It has quite clearly severely damaged both the quantity and the quality of the official statistics published by thisnation. I believe that in so doing it has done a great disservice to the nation. It has made it .a great deal more difficult for all of us who are concerned with social and economic analyses of this country to undertake those analyses properly. It has made it more difficult for itself to understand properly what is happening in the economy. I believe that it is a very black mark against this Government. Although we support the measures being taken in the legislation now in respect of privacy, I believe that that only slightly restores the margin back towards equilibrium. Overall we must regard the Government's handling of statistics of this country as very deficient indeed.
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (8.51)-1 will not delay the House very long but I want to raise two matters which are, I think, of importance. The first one is in regard to privacy. I took the matter up at the time of the collection of the last census, but I think it is appropriate to raise it again in this House. In the statistical section rather than the identifiable individual section of the census there were sections which required the owner-operators of businesses to identify themselves. Whilst I am assured that this information would not be able to be interpolated or available, it was a different standard to that which applied to the normal community whereby the statistics section of the census material was separated from that section of the census form on which names and addresses appeared. In respect of this item, a clear identification requirement on the owner-operator of a small business was included in the form. He was

required to name the business which he operated and state its address. No greater form of identification or invasion of privacy could exist. That requirement was included in the last census. I raised the matter at the time. Whilst I accept that it would be almost impossible for that information to be brought forward as identifiable information, it is in a section of the form where, in all other instances, privacy is respected. In the instance of this group, privacy is totally denied.
I also raise very briefly the matter which was mentioned by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis), that is, the collection of statistics and the availability of statistics both through the Commonwealth Employment Service and the census areas for regional planning purposes. In'the specific case of the qeelong area, the Geelong Regional Planning Authority has over a long period been able to carry out considerable projections and to provide information on employment and other statistical information to potential industries and other sources of benefit to the region in what is a very difficult area. It is now not possible for this information to be available because the Government has determined that it will no longer collect that information or, where it collects it, will not make that information available, even on an confidential basis, to the plamiing authorities. So we have a situation in which there is a very serious need for additional employment opportunities and economic activity. But this Government, in what it claims is a cost saving exercise, is in fact denying the wherewithal to the planning authorities to prepare and provide detailed information on which commercial organisations, which would be expected to provide large sums of money for the establishment of industry or other commercial activities, can base their forward projections in regard to their labour requirements and the availability of that labour. Those statistics are no longer made available. It is almost as though the Government is seeking, through a number of areas, to limit development in Australia to the central business districts of the capital cities.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer) (8.54)-in reply-Mr Deputy Speaker,.in replying to the Opposition in this debate, I firstly quite firmly reject the charges made by the honourable member for Gellibrand (Mr Willis) regarding the Government's handling of the collection of statistics in Australia over the last five years. We have not done the damage to the statistical collections of this country that the honourable gentleman alleges. We have not undermined their efficacy. I do

Census and Statistics Bill (No.2)

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3053

not accept for a moment the sweeping and unsubstantiated charges that he has made against the Government in this respect.
This area brings very much into focus one of the problems that any government faces, that is, balancing conflicting principles and conflicting priorities. I daresay that if we carried out a survey of a cross-section of the Australian community and we said to those people: 'Do you believe that governments should be well informed and should have available to them a wide range of information about the habits, the wants, the desires, the assets and the capabilities of the Australian community on which to base, in a sound way, government decisions?' the overwhelming majority of the people surveyed would simply say yes to that proposal as being self evidently valid. I suggest that if we asked an equally representative group of Australians this question: 'Do you believe that governments should ask a lot of questions about your life, should ask intrusive questions, should pry into what you do, should want to know more and more about what you do?' the answer to that question would be an equally resounding no. That in a sense is the problem that any government has in this area.
What we have tried to do is to balance those two aspirations as much as we possibly can. Of course we need information. Of course governments have to ask questions, whatever political persuasion they are. Of course we need sound statistical data on which to base our decisions in whatever area those decisions are. But equally there is a growing and legitimate community resentment towards over-intrusive government. A growing number of people ask 'why' when governments ask them questions. I think that is a healthy trend. I think it is a trend that we ought to encourage. It is a trend which indicates a healthy scepticism towards an automatic acceptance that just because the Government wants something it happens to be correct. I think we will find, as a thread running through all the decisions that the Government has made in this area, an attempt by the Government over the last five years to strike a balance between those two conflicting principles.
The Australian Statistician is to be complimented on the efforts that were made and the results that were achieved in bringing about a simplification and a rationalisation of the most recent census form. I think it represented very significant concessions, and proper concessions, towards the desire for greater protection of privacy. I am glad to have the support and the acknowledgement of the Opposition on this matter. Indeed, the honourable member for Corio (Mr

Scholes) in talking about a couple of things a moment ago was concerned about privacy aspects, and quite properly he should be. But we have to understand, Mr Deputy Speaker, that we can take concern for privacy only so far without it running foul of the desire for information because in order to provide sufficient information in certain areas it is sometimes necessary to ask questions that some people would regard as invasions of privacy. When that occurs, we have to make a decision as to whether the right to privacy is a superior claim to the necessity for information. To many people that might appear to over simplify the matter but I do not think that it does because this is an area in which governments have to try to strike this very difficult balance.
We have cut out a lot of unnecessary surveys. We did it as part of the Review of Commonwealth Functions exercise and we do not make any apology for doing that. A lot of surveys that previously were carried out were unnecessary and did not justify the resources that were committed to them. But, equally in a number of others areas, particularly in the labour market, we have expanded the collection of certain statistics,-and of course we are ready to do so in those areas that we regard as important. Let me make it quite emphatic that the Government rejects the claims made by the honourable member for Gellibrand. I do not accept that just because there are criticisms from 'people in this area towards decisions that governments have made that those criticisms are valid. They, of course, have to be judged on their own merits. Given the conflicting objectives and given the goals that we have iil the area of expenditure restraint, I believe that the Government has achieved a very effective balance in this area over the last five or six years.
I just conclude my response to the Opposition in the debate at the second reading stage by taking the opportunity of recording my appreciation for the commitment and dedication of the Australian Statistician and his staff and to the Australian Statistics Advisory Council for the work that all of them do in this very exacting and on occasions lonely area. There is nothing quite so final for all of us on occasions, particularly in economic and other debates, than cold hard statistics. I believe that the Statistician and his staff have very effectively and very faithfully discharged their duties under the Act of this Parliament.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
Bill read a second time.

The Bill.

In Committee

3054 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Social Services Bill (No.2)

Mr HOW ARD (Bennelong~Treasurer) (9.2)-1 move:
Clause 10, page 6,line 7, omit 'and obtaining information'.
The simple purpose of this amendment is to delete three words, namely, 'and obtaining information', in clause 10 of the Census and Statistics Amendment Bill (No.2). The purpose of moving this amendment is to put beyond all doubt that the words might be construed as enabling information to be gathered from records held on premises without consent being given. This is a technical amendment. I move it because concern has been expressed by the Australian Statistics Advisory Council that there is a possibility that the words, if they are left in the Bill, could give rise to that possibility. That is not the intention of the Government. Therefore, I am very happy to move an amendment that the words he deleted.
Mr WILLIS (Gellibrand) (9.3)-This amendment has only just become known to me. Although I understand that it was circulated yesterday, it somehow escaped my attention. It seems to me that the reasons given by the Treasurer (Mr Howard) for moving this amendment are reasonable. I note that section 19 of the Census and Statistics Act as it stands, prior to this legislation, gives the Australian Statistician powers of entry for the purpose of making any inquiries or observations. It does not refer to the obtaining of information. This would have made the power more sweeping. I accept the point made by the Treasurer. The Opposition will not oppose the amendment.
Amendment agreed to.
Bill, as amended, agreed to.
Bill reported with an amendment; report-by leave-adopted.
Third Reading
Bill (on motion by Mr Howard)-by leaveread a third time.
SOCIAL SERVICES AMENDMENT BILL (No.2) 1981
Second Reading
Debate resumed from 17 November, on motion by MrHunt:
That the Bill be now read a second time.
Mr HOWARD (Bennelong-Treasurer)-Mr Deputy Speaker, may I have your indulgence to suggest that the House have a general debate covering this Bill and the Social Services Amendment Bill (No.3) as they are associated measures. Separate questions will, of course, be put on each of the Bills at the conclusion of the debate.

Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Drummond)-Is it the wish of the House to have a general debate covering these two measures? There being no objection, I will allow that course to be followed.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython) (9.6)-Three weeks ago this House passed the Social Services Amendment Bill (No.1). The Social Services Amendment Bill (No.2), the first of the two Bills we are dealing with tonight, clears up one of the problems with the Bill that we passed. The Social Services Amendment Bill (No.2) deals with the problem of the proper definition of refugee child. It is perhaps a comment on the somewhat bumbling nature of the way in which this Government handles its legislation that tonight we are amending a Bill we passed three weeks ago. I alluded to this particular problem of the definition of the refugee child at that time in my speech at the second reading stage. I want to make it quite clear that the Australian Labor Party supports this aill which, in fact, amends the refugee child definition which in the original Bill of three weeks ago was far too narrow. Many children are admitted to Australia as refugees but do not get refugee status. The purpose of this Bill is to ensure that all children who come into Australia in the general sense as refugees will be covered for the double orphans' pensions provisions. We therefore support the Social Services Amendment Bill (No.2). I briefly make that criticism on the way in which the legislation was handled.
However, I must say at the outset that the Labor Party will oppose the Social Services Amendment Bill (No.3) and will continue to oppose it in all the fora that are open to the party. The objectives of this second Bill are to deny the single rate of unemployment benefit, first of all, to the spouses of trade unionists involved in industrial action, secondly, to the spouses of unemployed persons denied benefits under the work test, and thirdly, to the spouses of those who are classified as voluntarily unemployed or dismissed for alleged misconduct. One would not gather, in fact, from the second reading speech of the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt) very much about the second and third of those categories; that is, the spouses of the unemployed denied benefits under the work test and the spouses of those who are classified as voluntarily unemployed or dismissed for misconduct. Those people are scarcely mentioned in the second reading speech of the Minister. In fact, despite his protests his speech is almost entirely a thinly veiled diatribe against the legitimate right to strike. This is a point to which I will return.

Social Services Bill (No.2)

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3055

One thing that can be said about this Bill is that the contemptible nature of its substance is almost equalled by the contemptible nature of its history. Let me just go over that. First of all, these provisions were originally included in that large omnibus Bill I have already referred to this evening; that is, the Social Services Amendment Bill (No. 1) which included all the social service legislation flowing from the Budget. The somewhat cavalier attitude of the Government to that legislation was seen when it was presented to this House on Tuesday and was required for debate the next day-on Wednesday. It was extremely difficult for the Parliament to give it a proper and a considered response. It was quite clear from the amendment that we have already had to move to that Billthe first of the Bills we are debating tonight that even the Government found it a bit difficult to cope with the problem given the speed with which the Bill was dealt. These clauses were originally included in that omnibus Bill. When the Government encountered trouble with these clauses in the other place it first tried blackmail. It said that unless the Bill were passed in to to certain payment provisions for the unemployed without dependants would be delayed. However, the Senate called the Government's bluff on this point and the Government then proffered a humanitarian explanation for its surrender. The Minister (Mr Hunt) said:
The Government has no intention of allowing vulnerable sections of the Australian community to suffer because of the failure of the Senate to accept one aspect of the Government's proposals.
I think the best comment on the sincerity of that profession of concern is"illustrated by the fact that on Tuesday the Government introduced a Bill which provided for payments to be made from the following Sunday. It suggests an enormous amount of concern, or perhaps a very low view of the Parliament, that it could introduce a Bill on a Tuesday authorising payments from the following Sunday. I think that sort of attitude suggests the depth of this Government's concern for the vulnerable.
Now the Government has introduced the rejected clauses as Social Services Amendment Bill (No.3) 1981. I simply repeat what I said in the House on 28 October. The Opposition will oppose these proposals as they are totally abhorrent and totally inappropriate to our social security system. The Australian Labor Party will oppose the Bill in this House and in the other place. We are confident that the Government does not possess the authority in this Parliament

to use the social security provisions to impose destitution on families in pursuit of industrial discipline. If the Government seeks to .use this measure as the trigger for a double dissolution, so be it. The Labor Party and, I am confident, the Australian people would welcome the earliest opportunity to render judgment on this Government.
Let me discuss the issues raised by the Bill and utterly ignored by the Minister in his attack on the right to strike. First of all, this Bill punishes the spouses and families of those who fail the work test and who are allegedly voluntarily unemployed or who have been dismissed from their employment. First of all, let me repeat again that an enormous hammer is being brought to bear but it is a miniscule problem in statistical and financial terms, although, of course, for the few families involved it is a massive problem. At the moment, according to the latest statistics available, there are something like 1,000 postponements a month of unemployment benefit payments. Some 70 per cent of these postponements concern people without dependants. Therefore, about 300 families a month are the object of the savage clauses in this part of the Bill.
These 300 families a month have to be punished for some failure on the part of the breadwinner. He or she may be dismissed for misconduct, which is always a debatable notion; he or she may be allegedly voluntarily unemployed, which is again a very debatable notion; or the spouse of the person being attacked by this Bill may fail the work test.
In many cases the failure will not even have been the breadwinner's fault but the fault of the social security system. Last year, according to the latest statistics available, which are for 1980-81, approximately 50 per cent of all appeals with reference to unemployment benefit payments were upheld; that is, something like 50 per cent of the decisions in unemployment benefit cases were in some sense made in error. But such people will be punished for their error first of all by simply having their unemployment benefit withheld from them until this error is discovered. If this Bill is passed-I hope that it will not be-not only the individual concerned will be punished but also the spouse of that individual will not be able to collect unemployment benefit even if she or he is entitled to it. Some weeks later it will be discovered that an error has been made in at least 50 per cent of the cases.
As I have said, the notion of voluntary unemployment is an extremely difficult notion to prove. As we all know, or should know, people in the work place may be harassed in many conceivable

3056 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Social Services Bill (No.2)

ways into resignation. Probably all of us know of incidents in which authority in the work place has been used to harass people who have been forced into resignation. Again, I say that it is a difficult and frequently unfair assessment of these individuals which will lead to the punishment outlined already in the social security legislation and to be increased under this Bill.
Indeed, already the penalties for being voluntarily unemployed, failing the work test or being dismissed are peculiarly harsh. At the moment a suspension period of a mandatory six weeks is imposed on these people in relation to the receipt of unemployment benefit and, at the authorities' discretion, the period can be extended to 12 weeks. A full period of suspension means a fine of something like $600 for a single unemployed person and something like $1,000 for a married unemployed person. As one of my colleagues, Senator Grimes, pointed out in another place, such fines already are greater than those imposed often and frequently on drunken and dangerous drivers. These penalties for these work place infringements in the form of denial of benefits for up to 12 weeks represent financial penalties that in many cases are more severe than the penalties the courts impose on drunken and dangerous drivers. It seems to be totally absurd to penalise more harshly than drunken drivers people who allegedly leave a job of their own free will or who are fired for alleged misconduct. Seeking to punish the wives and families of the individual concerned seems simply to compound this absurdity. Indeed, it seems to me that the Government issimply piling one absurdity on to another with this measure.
The other objective of the Bill-indeed the only one on which the Minister wished to speak at any length:-is to use the social security system as a weapon to impose industrial discipline. The clauses in that part of the Bill embody what I called earlier the latest Liberal Party principlefamily destitution as a system of industrial discipline. Once upon a time even Liberal members who are sitting in this House today displayed a certain conscience about these issued and, as this kind of tactic was developed year by year by the Government, objected to it. I refer to, amongst others, one of the honourable members present in the House at the moment-the honourable member for Casey (Mr Fa1coner)-who, to give him credit, when the initial steps were taken four years ago, protested about this way of using the social security system. I hope that he will take an opportunity tonight to protest at the even greater breaches that have occurred. The honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall), in his

more independent days when he used to express vigorous and distinct opinions on the Liberal side, equally condemned this type of development. But perhaps, living with the collection that surrounds those honourable members every day, their consciences have become stunted.
We have to see this problem in perspective. Only about 60,000 workers annually are involved in disputes extending over seven days. That is an average pattern. I talk of disputes extending over seven days because the people involved in those disputes are the people who will be effected by these amendments. Of course, the amendments will not apply simply to the people who are directly on strike but also to the members of unions stood down, often in other States or in other industries, simply because they are members of the same union and have suffered the impact of a decision elsewhere. The amendments will not affect just those who actually make a decision to strike; it will affect all members of the same union who are affected by the action, whether they are in the same State or another State, and whether they are in the same industry or another industry. We have 60,000 of these people. However, roughly one-third of this number would not be affected because they are single and this Bill deals with spouses. Of the remaining 40,000 a significant proportion already have a working spouse, so they would not be entitled to unemployment benefit in those circumstances. We are probably down to an average of 500 to 600 families a week. We have all this double dissolution strutting, all this performance, over 500 or 600 families a week in this category and perhaps 300 or 400 families a week in the other category.
This is the great measure which is to be the basis of this Government's double dissolution activity. Yet this Government, year by year, has expended enormous legislative resources on this small group. First of all it denied unemployment benefits to actual strikers, then it broadened the provision to include those involved in industrial actions. Last year it reduced the benefit to spouses of these people from the married rate down to the single rate. That was another form of punishment. This year it goes the full way,by the usual dripping process that this Government uses with the public, drip by drip, and erodes their rights and claims. So this year we finish up with denying even the single rate to spouses. The spouses who are otherwise eligible for benefit are to be denied even the single rate; not the married rate, because that was denied to them in the past. It is now not to be even the single rate.
The Minister constantly argues that the social security system largely insulates-I use his

Social Services Bill (No.2)

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3057

words-trade unionists involved in industrial disputes from the financial effects of their actions. That is simply untrue. I ask honourable members to examine the single rate as it stands now for unemployment benefit, even allowing provision for children, and to compare it with minimum wages and see the minimal insulation provided. There is no entitlement to that benefit in the first week of an industrial action and payment is not usually made until three weeks after the industrial action has begun. It is a pretty ineffective insulating device, particularly for a family which has had regular wages coming in.
Again I think it is important to get rid of the myth that somehow a decision on industrial action is usually carelessly or thoughtlessly arrived at, which is clearly the suggestion in the Minister's second reading speech. Very few trade unionists lightheartedly enter into industrial action, particularly action likely to be prolonged. That is the sort of action we are discussing in relation to this measure. The reason for careful consideration is that industrial action is costly and unemployment benefit for the spouse at the single rate does very little to reduce the costs.
It may stave off family destitution. I accept that. But it will do little to relieve the family of' the host of difficulties that follow a dramatic fall in weekly income. I simply ask honourable members on the Government side of the House to use some imagination about the effect on families whose income suddenly falls from average or slightly below average per week down to the single rate of unemployment benefit, which is a severe enough fall and causing enough family problems, and then to contemplate a situation where even that benefit will disappear because under this Bill there will not be even that minimum level of benefit. For a government which is concerned with the family, thi~ is a direct incentive to get unhitched because one of the ways round this problem would, in fact, be separation in these kinds of situations. For a spouse attached to a husband who is involved in industrial action, this is the penalty.
That brings me to a basic and fundamental objection in principle to this measure. The whole of the Australian social security system is based on the principle of individual entitlement qualified by spouse income. We have a basic system which entitles every individual to the social security benefits for which he or she has a claim, qualified only by the extent of spouse income. Yet this change sweeps that basic notion away because it says in particular cases that this individual entitlement will not be there. So it seems to me that we have really a fundamental attack on the

basic notion of our social security system which is that individuals are entitled to benefits. It is true that that is qualified by spouse income considerations but in this case where the spouse, for whatever reason, has no income the wife-or in a few cases it may be the husband-will not be entitled to any benefit. So we have changed this fundamental principle on which our social security system has been based.
In this way we are punishing the innocent, the families, the wives of men involved in industrial action or people who have got into strife with the work test or were dismissed from their work allegedly for misconduct or who allegedly voluntarily left their work. They are already penalised but under this BiII their wives and their families are to be punished for those faults. Again, this is a deliberate contradiction to the way the whole of the social security system has been organised. Again I refer to Liberals in the days when they showed some real consideration and understanding of these problems. I refer to the honourable member for Boothby (Mr Steele Hall) who, when he was a senator, said:
The Government was making the innocent do its dirty work for it.
More than ever that is being done now.
Mr Scott-Who said that?
Dr BLEWETT-The honourable member for Boothby.
Mr Sainsbury-Rubbish.
Dr BLEWETT-The honourable member had better take it up with his colleague and discuss his views to see whether he has amended them. In fact, I would be interested to hear whether he still stands by the principles he had when he was a relatively independent Liberal and was prepared to make these statements four years ago.
Mr Sainsbury-We are capable of talking independently in our party.
Dr BLEWETT-We look forward to an expression of an independent view.
Mr Shipton-We don't get sacked if we do.
Dr BLEWETT-I invite the honburable member for Higgins to stand up and express his views. This supposedly important measure has not attracted, as far as I know, a single Liberal to speak on it. It shows the concern they have for the sort of issues raised.
Finally, let me make the point which I made some time ago that we are dealing with a relatively small group of families. The estimate-this is probably a fairly generous one-on average would involve one thousand families a week and,

3058 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Social Services Bill (No.2)

taking a generous consideration of what they would be paid, about $5m a year. What we are involved in with this legislation is something like $5m a year. I ask honourable members to contrast that $5m which is being saved by the Government with the kinds of benefits, the kinds of underwriting, the kinds of concessions, the kinds of subsidies given out by this Government to its friends. Indeed honourable members would probably be able to identify some particular friends of this Government who get an amount equal to all that is being saved by these measures.
Let me say, therefore, that when this legislation is examined it is certainly found to be legislation that we would be perfectly prepared to fight on. We will oppose it here in this House. We will oppose it in the Senate. We believe, as I said before, that there is no majority in this Parliament for this measure. We welcome the threats to take this issue to a double dissolution. When we get through the Government's anti-strike rhetoric and see what the Bill actually does to individual Australian families, we are confident that we can win that battle.
Mr LEO McLEAY (Grayndler) (9.28)-1 have much pleasure in joining in this debate tonight to expose the utter hypocrisy of this Government in bringing in this iniquitous legislation. The previous speaker, the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett), has said that the Opposition will oppose this Bill with all its might. I hope that this Bill will be defeated once again in another place. The Government's view, as expressed in the second reading speech by the Minister for Transport (Mr Hunt), is something over which any political party in Australia would be willing to go into a double dissolution and defeat the Government. The Minister showed in that speech when he introduced this Bill that he is indeed a very heartless man representing a very heartless government. Who else but this present Government would be so obsessed with strikes and strikers that it would attempt to penalise the families of people who are indulging in legitimate industrial action? It is iniquitous to use the social security provisions to try to curb strikes and to try to force people to take a point of view that they would not like to take. We have to look at who suffers in these proposals. The Government in a dishonest and disgraceful manner has, in both the second reading speech and in the explanatory .notes, referred to the application of this renewed Bill to only the spouses of strikers or of persons involved in industrial action. There is no indication from the Government that it includes in the Bill as strikers people wh" may have been opposed to the dispute that is being caused, as were the Geelong

Ford workers who voted against joining the Broadmeadows Ford workers on strike, but were stood down just the same. Likewise, it includes as strikers people in a union whose counterpart branch in another State has closed the works, a decision that those people had absolutely nothing to do with. But they and their families will be penalised for it. These close-downs have resulted in their being stood down due to a shortage of essential parts. I feel that some unionists do not even know why they are being penalised when they are stood down through actions such as this. But the Government will use the social security legislation against those people. The Government has perverted the definition of the word 'striker'. In this legislation, and particularly in the Minister's speech, it has tried to whip up an emotional climate of hostility to the trade union movement.
While we look at the Government's rather wild claims about strikes in this country I think it is important that we should look at some of the statistics that relate to strikes. If honourable members and the Minister look at the Australian Bureau of Statistics survey released last August which relates to 1980 they will find that in that year 65 per cent of all industrial disputes lasted two days or less. They involved 79 per cent of all workers in industrial disputes. Only 21 per cent of workers were involved in disputes lasting longer than two days. Honourable members will be aware that the provisions of this legislation occur only if people are on strike for more than seven days. Only 8.9 per cent of all strikers were involved in disputes that lasted 10 days or longer. Sixty-one per cent of strikes were settled without negotiation. The major cause of many disputes was directly attributable to management. In 39.7 per cent of the disputes managerial policy was given as a prime cause and 19.6 per cent occurred because of physical working conditions. Only 21.5 per cent of the disputes in Australia in 1980 occurred because of wage negotiations. What provisions will the Minister invoke to ensure that employers have safe working conditions for their employees? What provisions will he invoke to prevent employers from indulging in action which could cause stand downs? None, of course, because the Government cannot see past the end of its nose. It is interested only in penalising women and children. I would have thought that even this Government would not have sunk to that level of absurdity. Let us return to the Minister's second reading speech and see what he says he is trying to do. He said:
The Government has decided, however, that if a person is precluded from receiving unemployment benefit and special benefit, in the case of extreme hardship and where there are no other means of support, his or her spouse may be eligible

Social Services Bill (No.2)

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3059

for special benefit at the single rate, with additional benefit for any children.
One might say that maybe the man really does have a heart after all and that the Government is trying to make some provision. But one has to look at what the Government means by extreme hardship. I put it to the Parliament this evening that there is no departmental definition of extreme hardship although I imagine in some cases it relates to the provisions for immediate hardship which are roughly defined in the Department of Social Security's manual of instructions on unemployment, sickness and special benefits. It will be up to some delegate of the Department to make a decision on what extreme hardship will mean. That will cause delays in the payment of benefit and will probably ensure that in most instances people do not get their benefit at all. We must look at the people who will be involved. I think the last example we had in this country of a major or a very important strike was the Victorian power dispute in October 1977. The Minister in his speech, and other spokesmen for the Gov;rnment have said that this legislation is to have an effect on strikers and that they must pay the penalty for the results of their actions. One must consider the horrendous penalty that many people will be paying.
I would like to incorporate in Hansard-I have sought the Minister's concurrence on this-some extracts from a document compiled by the Victorian Council of Social Service entitled 'Too Little, too Late' which is a review of the effects of that strike and of the Government's refusing to allow unemployment benefit for the spouses of strikers during the dispute. Some of the examples in that report indicate that the people in very dire circumstances were those who, in the past, had not needed to seek any assistance from the Government. Because they were placed in a circumstance in which they would not usually be placed and because they had very little cash, they found themselves in dire economic circumstances. Some were confronted with eviction, some with virtual starvation of their families and some were confronted with family breakdowns arising out of that dispute and the Government's continual decision not to allow the payment of unemployment benefit to the spouses of those strikers. With the permission of the Minister I seek leave to incorporate in Hansard examples to show the effect of the dispute on a wide range of families in Victoria in 1977.
Leave granted.
The document read as follows-
Family A Eight children, eldest II years
20.10.77 Last worked 27.9.77

Action

Registered for Unemployment Benefit 4.10.77 - not through yet
$20 in bank-have used balance Own home, no great debts Sick child needing doctor Down to last food. Food grant to value of $50

FamilyB 12.10.77
Action

Four children, eldest 15 years
Last worked 28.9.77 Registered for Unemployment Benefit 10.10.77 Has been out of work for several weeks and had
just been re-employed for a month when stood down No money in bank but owe nothing Children at hungry stage Food grant to value of $20
(subsequently a further grant to value of $30)

FamilyC 18.10.77
Action

Two children, eldest 6 years Last worked 29.9.77 Registered for Unemployment Benefit 5.10.77 Rentdue
No money-spent savings when husband ill recently
Food grant to value of$30

FamilyD 20.10.77

Two children, eldest 12 years Last worked 27.9.77 Did know to register for Unemployment Benefit Rent up to date but no more money left in bank

FamilyE Action

Three children, eldest 10 years Last worked 30.9.77 Registered for Unemployment Benefit-5.10.77 Owe one weeks rent
Used Child Endowment (i.e. Family Assistance) to meet payment on car
Due to finance companies-$I 02 per month Food grant to value of $40

Mr LEO McLEAYI thank the House. Another group that will be severely restricted by
this legislation will be migrants. My electorate of
Grayndler encompasses the largest number of mi-
grants of any electorate in Australia. I am very
well aware of the precarious financial circumstances of many new arrivals to this country. If they are prevented by this Government because
of actions that they had nothing to do with from obtaining unemployment benefit for their families
while they are partaking in indu~trial action they
will be in horrendous circumstances. Many of
them do not own their own homes, many of them have large families and many of them will face
utter ruin and a great fear for their families if the
Government implements this legislation. The migrant community in Australia is probably the low-
est paid group in the economy. Migrants are in the
most fragile economic circumstances. They will
find that they are in an extremely unfortunate cir-
cumstance if this legislation is enacted. Many of the migrants in my electorate work in manufac-
turing industries that are dependent upon receiv-
ing supplies from interstate. Many of them are stood down in industrial disputes of which they
have no understanding and in which in New
South Wales they have no involvement and no

3060 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Social Services Bill (No.2)

vote in what can occur. As I pointed out earlier, the automotive industry is particularly affected by these types of shortages. The people involved have nothing to do with what has occurred.
The Minister also talks about trade unions in the impersonal sense in his second reading speech. I ask the Minister and the Government: What about the trade unionists themselves? Why do we not look at the responsible attitude that most unionists and trade union officials have taken in Australia in their attempts to achieve justice for their employees? No one takes lightly the decision to strike. No one wants to ensure that he causes his members great harm and disservice. As I pointed out earlier, the statistics point to the fact that many strikes are caused by ~mployer actions about which the Government will do nothing.
Mr McVeigh-What about Norm Gallagher and his seaside house?
Mr LEO McLEAY-I will finish by stating, as the honourable member for Bonython, who spoke previously, did, that all the Government can do here tonight is to make some rather frivolous interjections, as the Minister for Housing and Construction and long speeches has done this evening, and run across the chamber putting rather pointless little notes on people's tables. What is the Government doing for the people who are forced into dire economic circumstances because of the absolute obsession with strikes of some of the cretins in the National Country Party? They are absolutely terrified of the rights of Australians and trade unionists to exercise their democratic rights. We are supposed not to worry when they decide they will jack up the price of commodities or livestock by withholding them from the market.That is legitimate business! But if an employee withholds the only thing he has for sale, his labour, this Government says: 'We will get square with you. We will penalise your wife and your children. If you want to go on strike your children and your wife can starve'. I do not see how anyone with a conscience could have the gall to propose such legislation in this Parliament.
I join with the previous speaker in saying that I am pleased that this legislation will receive the discussion that it deserves in another place and will be defeated. If the Government wants to call a double dissolution on this sort of legislation, the Opposition is quite happy to oblige it. It is rather interesting to see that the Government cannot put up one speaker in support of this iniquitous legislation. All the men of principle have fled the chamber tonight. The people who four years ago said that they had a number of things to say and who were going to stand up to the Government

are not here to stand up to the Government tonight because they have been quickl~ pulled into line. I complete my remarks by saymg that the Government will see this legislation fail. The Australian people will applaud its failing.
Mr FALCONER (Casey)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)- Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
Mr FALCONER-Yes, I do.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER-The honourable member may proceed.
Mr FALCONER-Thank you, Mr Deputy Speaker. Earlier this evening, the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) referred to me and to some attitudes which I allegedly took four years ago on a matter, he said, that was related to the matter now before this House. He said, I think, that I had a flexible conscience, or words to that effect, on this. I take the opportunity to point out to the House that the matter which I was concerned about four years ago and which received some coverage in the Pressalthough I am not sure that it involved very much in the way of statements from me in the House, if indeed it involved any statements in the Housewas a different matter. It was a matter which involved suggestions that unemployment benefits be withheld from those who were stood down as a result of union action and who were not involved at the work site where the union action took place. In other words, it involved strike action which then resulted in other workers at other sites being stood down and those who had been stood down as a result of that union action being denied unemployment benefits. I opposed that at the time because it meant that people who did not have some direct control or influence over the union action concerned would be penalised. The measure before us tonight is a different matter.
Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (9.44)-The two previous speakers have attempted to portray a scenario of people innocently placed and far away from the scene being the ones who would be affected by this legislation. Not once did they mention the people who may have taken a deliberate vote to go out on strike. The legislation is such that, if somebody is placed in a loss or difficult situation, a discretion still lies with the Department of Social Security to grant a benefit.
Mr Leo McLeay-Only in extreme cases.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-Yes, in extreme cases. I read in a newspaper that the honourable

Social Services Bill (No.2)

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3061

member is in some danger in his electorate. As somebody who has survived in my own party, I give the honourable member this bit of friendly advice: If he stopped, listened and learnt, he might not be in so much trouble with his own party. My background is this: Prior to becoming a member of parliament I was an industrial officer on the Brisbane waterfront. The unions with which I dealt ranged from the Federated Clerks Union to the Waterside Workers Federation. In the mid-1960s, there was no more militant group in this country than the waterside workers. I think my friend the right honourable member for Lowe (Sir William McMahon) might have been the Minister responsible for industrial relations at about that time and it was he who appointed Mr Justice Woodward to inquire-
Sir William McMahon-I was Minister for nine years.
Mr DONALD CAMERON-For nine years. The right honourable member knows what I am talking about. This was a time when the wharfies would stop work at the drop of a hat. In those days I had a quiet admiration for the fact that when the wharfies went out on strike-I am not canvassing the wisdom or otherwise of their reasons for going out-what they were saying was: 'You can whack your job. I believe so strongly in this, whether or not I am misguided, that I am prepared to lose income to establish a point of principle'. That is what they were saying. Indirectly they were also saying: 'I am also making this decision on behalf of my family'.
With great respect to the honourable member for Bonython and the honourable member for Grayndler (Mr Leo McLeay), who preceded me in this debate, they have painted a portrait which suggests that, when people go out on strike and things get a little tough, they have an automatic right to say to the Department of Social Security: 'Okay, I have forgone my income in this area but I want my spouse to help support me and thus allow me to continue this industrial action'. I know that, in this place, a lot is spoken about politics and that there is a lot of appealing to electorate councils at a time of dire need and a lot of appealing to the electorate from the Senate. But I wonder what this country is coming to when members of the Opposition espouse that it is a God given right for any man who is part of an industrial action and who meets with difficult times to have an automatic entry into the taxpayers' pocket. That is taking their example to the other end of the line. They have chosen to speak about one feature, the emotional side of this question, with which I have some sympathy. But they have

gone to the other extreme and portrayed that God given right to which I have just referred.

So often the taxpayer who is supplying the

money is the person who has been tormented and

who is suffering most of all. The honourable

member referred to electricity stoppages. What

about the women who are totally reliant on elec-

tricity at night and who have small children for

whom they have to heat up milk when, suddenly,

bang go the lights for two hours or even for 24

hours? There are two sides to the coin. When

members opposite portray the Government as

harsh and without feeling, I would like to believe

that their intelligence level is such that at least

they recognise that there is another side but that,

because they are who they are and because of

whom they represent in politics, they are in the

position of having to belt the Government with a

big fat stick. If the burgeoning social security bill

of this country is to be contained, I ask members

on both sides of this House to adopt a more re-

sponsible attitude to what is right and what is

wrong. The social security bill is now $11 billion

out of a total Budget of $40 billion. Ten years ago,

it represented but 17 per cent of the national

Budget; today it represents 28 per cent. To hold

expenditure even at that level requires a mam-

moth effort by government.

-

Mr Campbell-You must be getting old.

Mr DONALD CAMERON-The honourable member for Kalgoorlie is going to get old too, and if he stays here much longer he will be a lot older than he is today. My great concern is that we are eroding and dissipating our nation's ability to take care of tomorrow's aged and tomorrow's disabled and to take care of those people who are really in need of looking after. In the field of education for the generation of tomorrow, our ability to give a proper education is being eroded.

Anyone can stand up in this Parliament and say that money should be spent here and spent there. It is the most popular speech that one can make because there are always some people outside the Parliament who will clap and say: 'Hear, hear! I agree'. A member will build up support in that way. But if members of the Labor Party aspire to be in government, if they aspire to be statesmanlike or even responsible, it is time they abandoned the practice of jumping up and beating the drum every time they think they can pick up a few votes by stretching the rubber band and giving examples of people who are only part of the picture. Honourable members opposite completely disregard those who are part of that deliberate decision to go out on strike. As I said in the earlier part of this contribution, I admire the

3062 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Social Services Bill (No.2)

wharfie who packed his bag and walked off the job saying: 'I will suffer for my principles'. I just wonder how bad things have become when members of the Opposition espouse as a Godgiven right that one should qualify for a government benefit when one walks off the job.
Dr BLEWETT (Bonython)-Mr Deputy Speaker, I wish to make a personal explanation.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Jarman)- Does the honourable member claim to have been misrepresented?
Dr BLEWETT-Yes, Mr Deputy Speaker. The honourable member for Casey (Mr Falconer) suggested that I had misrepresented his views of four years ago. Let me say to the House that I accept the honourable member's correction utterly because I think he made the point I was trying to make with much greater clarity than I could.
Dr THEOPHANOUS (Burke) (9.54)-We have just heard a harangue from the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron). All I can say is that if this is the best the Government can do on a Bill which it has brought before the Parliament as a ploy for double dissolution, it shows the sense of responsibility which this Government has in relation to the way in which the national Parliament is operating. It has been remarked that not much interest has been taken by the Liberal and National Country parties in relation to this Bill. The reason for that is that this Bill is indefensible. It is indefensible that the Government has no arguments for its position except a simple ideological dogmatism and it is this which has serious implications for democracy itself in relation to the way in which the Liberal Party has been moving in recent times.
We in the Labor Party say that our opposition to lnis Bill is based on fundamental principles. We are ready to stand by those principles and to fight hard for them. We will not be intimidated by the Government's threat to force an election in relation to this or any other matter. We are ready to face an election at any time the Government is ready to call it because we are confident that this Government has totally lost the confidence of the people.
What are the fundamental principles that we believe are at stake here? There are two. The first is the democratic right to the provision of social security benefits for people who are not working and who rely on the welfare state for their survival. Let me remind honourable members opposite about the history of the development of the welfare state. The! ~ have been many struggles for the development of democratic rights. One of the

fundamental democratic rights is that we in Western societies, in democratic societies, do not let people starve. The implication of this kind of action by the Government is that it sets in train the beginning of a philosophical development which, if carried further, would lead us back to the bad old days when workers could not find jobs and their families were forced into a situation where they had to beg in the streets. The very development of the democratic welfare state is being eroded by this Government's actions. It is consistent with the pernicious new philosophy which has penetrated what was once a great party, the Liberal Party, but which has now become nothing more than a neo-conservative extremist organisation.
The Friedman philosophy has penetrated the Liberal Party. This very measure could have been taken from the writings of Professor Friedman himself. Professor Friedman argues that we must dismantle the welfare state, that workers have gained too many benefits and that what we ought to be doing is making it more difficult for them to be able to demand their rights in the work place and to demand better wages and conditions and, by that method, force a reduction in the standards of living. That Friedman philosophy is being adopted progressively by this Liberal Party and its National Country Party allies. It is the thin edge of the wedge in that it involves attacks on workers and their families, on people who, in a democratic society have come to rely on the welfare state. If this were an isolated action we might have forgiven it, but the fact is that this Government has shown a tendency to try to take away rights from disadvantaged groups of this kind. In this year alone we saw a situation in which there was a massive attempt to get rid of the Community Youth Support Scheme which assists unemployed youth. It was only after a massive outcry not only from the Labor Party but also almost overwhelmingly from the media, the church and welfare organisations and other bodies that are concerned with the welfare of this nation that CYSS was maintained. This other. measure is being introduced along the same philosophical lines. Let us suppose that the Government gets away with it. It has been mentioned by the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) that it is not only the families of those on strike who will suffer but also the families of those who will be laid off in other places. This situation will mean effectively that we will have a substantial beginning of the dismantling of the rights of people in relation to the welfare system. It is an attack on the principles of the welfare system and it should be rejected utterly.

Social Services Bill (No.2)

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3063

The second set of principles that is involved concerns the undermining of the right of workers to seek increases in their standards of living by withdrawing their labour. We know that members of the Liberal and National Country parties are paranoid about workers' rights to strike. Some members of those parties have even openly said in this House that they want to get rid of the right to strike itself. This is a disgraceful statement in any democratic society.
Mr Good luck-It would be a good thing in Tasmania, I can tell you.
Dr THEOPHANOUS-We will hold the honourable member for Franklin to that statement in Tasmania; he need not worry about that. I will publicise that statement in Tasmania myself. Let me continue my remarks. In other words, those members are not liberals in any sense whatsoever. In fact, their philosophy is indistinguishable from the kind of fascist philosophy that existed in the 1930s when the right to strike was taken away from people. Workers do suffer during strikes. They lose their pay. It was mentioned by the honourable member for Fadden that the families of striking workers receive a small unemployment benefit. This is supposed to mean that they will be compensated for the loss of their full pay during the period when the breadwinner is on strike. The honourable member for Fadden does not even have basic logic behind his position. Recently in my electorate we had a six-week strike, the Ford Motor Co. strike, in which many people suffered. Many people lost-
Mr Ian Robinson-Why did they not go back to work?
Dr THEOPHANOUS-They did go back to work. They were making a very moderate demand which was not met by the company. They had every right to make that demand. We know what honourable members opposite want to do. They want to increase the power of multinational corporations to attack Australian workers so that they do not have the basic right to strike or even the basic right to survive during that strike. The Government is attempting to frustrate the very process involved in-
Mr Good luck-People are starving in Tasmania because of strikes.
Dr THEOPHANOUS-When honourable members opposite have finished making remarks about the various strikes which they have been opposed to I will continue. They have never been in favour of a single strike. If there had been no strikes in this country workers would be starving under this Government and its friends. Let that be perfectly clear. When have honourable members

opposite supported wage increases or supported uions making moderate demands against corporations? They have never done so. We know who fills the coffers of the Liberal Party. Let me go back to the principle involved in this legislation. It is fundamental. It is simply that these people and their families need to survive during these difficult situations. Very often workers are placed in a strike position because they have no alternative. From listening to honourable members opposite one would think that the strike is the first weapon that is resorted to by unions. Anyone who knows industrial relations knows that many union leaders-not all, admittedly-are very reluctant to use the strike weapon unless its use is absolutely necessary and they have exhausted all the processes for getting a fair deal for their members.
We have in this country at the present time a situation in which, through Government pressure, the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission has dropped the wage indexation system. By dropping the wage indexation system, every group of workers now has to make demands of its employers and in many cases where the employers believe that that group of workers has a weak union or is not a very powerful group, the employers simply refuse to give even a moderate increase to improve the standard of living. We have not heard anything from honourable members opposite about the employers who refuse to give even part indexation in relation to wages but who simply say that they will give no increase whatsoever in the present climate because the union concerned is not a strong union. What are workers supposed to do in those circumstances? Are they supposed to cop the situation or are they supposed to exercise their democratic right to withdraw their labour? They are supposed to do the latter. Under those circumstances, they are fully entitled in a democratic society to the same rights as everybody else, which includes unemployment benefit for their wives so that they will have something with which to feed and clothe their children.
Mr SCOTT (Hindmarsh) (10.5)-First of all, I disagree with my colleague the honourable member for Burke (Dr Theophanous) when he said in the latter part of his speech that Liberal Party and National Country Party members have never been in favour of strikes. In fact, they have been in favour of strikes. They are very much in favour of the current strikes in Poland. They are a very convenient argument for them. I ask them to digest that. Returning to the issue, the honourable member for Bonython (Dr Blewett) has laid bare what the Government is currently about. The number of families affected by this social services legislation would be in the vicinity of 300 or less

3064 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Social Services Bill (No.2)

and they would be involved either because of the spouse's failure to qualify for the work test or because of the spouse's involvement in disputes. I will not run away from the issues of disputes, strikes, scabs or industrial relations. They are all part of the real world outside this House and outside Canberra where people have to work for a living. We did hear something from a Liberal Party member who claimed to be an industrial officer previously. No doubt in that time he learned the realities oflife. I was for 12 years Secretary of the Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union. I know what disputes are about. I will not run away from this issue. Let us try to educate the six Government member!> who are here tonight. Very few of them are prepared to get up and defend the position.
The types of dispute that occur in Australia are different from those that occur in the Americas, the United Kingdom and Europe. I will quote the Government's own source-the Australian Bureau of Statistics-in referring to a report of 4 September of this year under the heading 'Unions not main culprits in disputes'. It states:
Unions are not the main culprits for provoking strikes and walk-outs.
About half the industrial disputes in the first three months of this year were precipitated by management, according to the Bureau of Statistics.
And its figures for the previous three years showed management policies had been responsible for between 36 per cent and 40 per cent of the country's industrial problems.
I invite honourable members to check those statistics. They are from the Government's own sources. The kinds of disputes, examples of which have been laid before this House, were exemplified by the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes) in his speech. Because of previous legislation which can only properly be described as union-bashing legislation, additional provisions and penalties have been imposed on unions so that they must have secret ballots to take strike action or to go into dispute with their employers. He laid bare an example of a number of unionists who took part in a secret ballot imd who voted not to go on strike but to return to work. Because of the majority decision, they were put in the position of going on strike. This Government would seek then to punish the families-the children and spouses-of those people who, in fact, voted not to go into dispute. I want to reiterate the point made earlier that in a dispute situation the first penalty is placed on the workers. How many honourable members here have got the guts to say that next week they will go into a dispute situation, that they will not work and will not receive any pay? Are they prepared to lose about $1,000? That is the kind of thing in relative terms that

workers decide when they put up their hands or put their marks on a ballot paper to go into dispute. The decision is not taken lightly. Union officials do not make those decisions. The rank and file, the members of those unions, make those decisions. Honourable members opposite should not come in here with that crap unless they understand what industrial relations are all about. When they do know what industrial relation are all about, I will be prepared to debate the subject with them.
Let us look at the types of dispute that we have in Australia. Because of the unique situation with the Conciliation and Arbitration Act, with its many faults, the disputes in Australia are noted for being shorter than those in Europe and in the Americas. But what kind of disputes do we have? I just want to reiterate briefly the type of dispute that it was said was holding the vehicle industry to ransom at that time. This is the kind of thing that happens. I will be generous and say that perhaps honourable members opposite do not understand these things. I will try to explain them to honourable members. This was a situation involving a company that had the monopoly for manufacturing shock absorbers for cars. Ten of the workersall of them shop stewards-were in a dispute situation. A decision was taken that they would not work any more overtime. The company selected these 10 workers and sacked them. This was proved in court. The eviden<:e is there and I would be more than happy to bring it before the House to prove the point that I am making. Because those 10 workers were sacked the rest of the work force went into a strike situation. But their demand was not that the 10 workers be re-instated. Their demand was that the company agree to go before the courts and have the case tested there. For 14 days over 300 workers were in a strike situation demanding the right to go to a court to have their case tested. That is the kind of situation that is occurring continually outside in the real world.. Honourable members opposite do not want to know about it. I suggest that some honourable members know what is going on but, because of the position that their party takes, they have to toe the line and obey the Whips and their Caucus.
If we have a situation where the right to strike is taken away-as it can be through this type of legislation-then workers become nothing more than slaves. Australia has a tremendous history of members of the working class establishing the standards of living that we all enjoy and everyone of them got it through struggle. This Government and previous governments of its ilk have continued to heap penalties on the workers. It is a

Social Services Bill (No.2)

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3065

well known fact that the Conciliation and Arbitration Act is the most horrendous legislation in the statute books directed against workers. Now the Government seeks to impose penalties on the families of those workers. If it is doing it for the sake of a double dissolution I say: 'Good on you. We will have you on any time you like.' The Government might try to make a smoke screen out of this issue which involves perhaps 300 families in a month, and several million dollars. But we will be taking it to the people on other issues too. If the Government wants a fight on interest rates, sales tax legislation, unemployment, health, pensions, education and the destruction of the manufacturing industry, we will have the Government on tomorrow.
Mr CAMPBELL (Kalgoorlie) (10.13)- Tonight I want to address a few remarks mainly to the contribution made by the honourable member for Fadden (Mr Donald Cameron). The honourable member said that he was an industrial officer. I am sure that this would have made him aware of some of the problems that confront industry. It would have made him aware also that strikes are not generated by one side. Indeed, I remind honourable members opposite of the words of Roderick Carnegie who said: 'In any protracted strike situation I look to, and blame, management'. This is one of the realities which is brought about because workers' demands are usually fairly simple and fairly just. The honourable member made this rather emotive statement about people who are on strike: 'Why should the taxpayer support the wives of people who are on strike'? Of course, this overlooks the fact that workers are also taxpayers. Many of them pay a substantial amount of the tax in this country. Anyone on pay-as-you-earn tax does not have the ability to avoid tax in the way in which a lot of other people do-people who largely would be supporters of the Government parties.
However this is a valid point. There is a very substantial and rising cost in social security. It is no wonder, when we see the performance of the Government in the area of unemployment that it has added substantially to the social security cost. One way in which the social security cost can be reduced is to get the economy working again and to provide more jobs. We have been through all th~ various economies. We have had the miningled economy and the investment-led economy. I expect that in the new year we will be getting into the new leader-led economy. Maybe this one will be better than the last. It certainly would need to be. This business of costs shows a certain naivety on the part of the honourable member for Fadden. Obviously someone will have to pay. In the

long term, one of the ways in which we could handle this high cost of social security would be to increase productivity. It would be naive in the extreme-I am sure that the honourable member for Fadden would agree with me-to believe that we could increase productivity without the support of the union movement. It cannot and will not be done. But the union movement has shown itself very eager in many areas to increase productivity. With goodwill on both sides I am sure that much can be achieved.
Let us get back to this emotive issue of the person who is on strike and where somebody has to pay. The truth of the matter is that if no funds are made available to the family of the person on strike that family still has to live. Inevitably, what happens, is that it makes calls on charities and on community welfare resources of the States. Once again we see this Government transferring a national responsibility to somebody else-the States or to charities. It is a very simple observation that somebody always pays. I do not think there is any escaping that. I have been confronted a lot with this situation because I have an area in my electorate which is very prone to industrial trouble. This has been brought about in large measure by unrealistic expectations generated by companies that were all too keen to give out concessions when they wanted productivity but then they try to draw them back when things get tough. I am sure that the honourable member for Fadden would know that in reality in the field of industrial relations, it is very hard to take back what has been given. In the industrial field it is unrealistic to expect that there could be Indian giving without causing industrial turmoil. I would like the honourable member for Fadden to reflect on that simple point.
If a family is without resources it has to live. It cannot go into limbo or into deep freeze. Somebody has to pick up the bill for those people. I have been often involved in getting community welfare payments for these sorts of people in my electorate. In many cases the cost to society is farhigher than the very meagre amount of unemployment benefit. If any honourable members think that living on unemployment benefit is a laugh or a good time. I suggest that they try it themselves, particularly in areas where the cost of living often is substantially higher than the cost of living that is enjoyed by the great mass of people. In conclusion I point out-I was going to make this more of a point of order but I think I can include it jn my speech-that during the speech made by the honourable member for Burke (Dr Theophanous) the honourable member for Franklin (Mr Good luck) muttered, that in fact

3066 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Social Services Bill (No.2)

the honourable member for Burke was a communist. Not only was that in very poor taste but also it is kicking-
Mr Good luck-Mr Deputy Speaker, I take a point of order. I did not say that.
Mr DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr Millar)- Order! If the honourable member for Franklin seeks to contest that matter by way of interjection, he can make a personal explanation at a later time.
Mr CAMPBELL-I would be happy to rephrase that. He interjected and said something which sounded very like the word communist. This assertion was most uncalled for and most churlish. It is one that the honourable member for Franklin knows to be untrue. If he said that I think he really should apologise.
Mr CUNNINGHAM (McMillan) (10.20)-1 will take just a little time to participate in this debate. I believe the area that I represent, which takes in the Latrobe Valley, possibly is the area which was first tested by the type of legislation that this Government brought in to attack trade unionists and the recipients of unemployment benefits. It was back in October 1979 that the Government first had the audacity to bring in legislation providing that if a unionist was involved in a dispute, no matter where in Australia, and was out of work because of it he was ineligible for unemployment benefits even if he was not directly a party to the dispute. But what we have, of course, in the Social Services Amendment Bill (No.2) is an extension of that provision.
If anybody wants to know just what the effects of this type of legislation are, I remind the House, as I did on another occasion, of just what happened in that dispute in the Latrobe Valley. It will happen again; there is not much doubt about it. Nine men, concrete hatchers, were stood down at 1.30 one afternoon, and at 5.30, because of a conspiracy between the State Electricity Commission of Victoria and the major contractors employed on that large project in Victoria, the Loy Yang site, 600 further employees were stood down. We saw that incident develop into a standoff for some seven months. Possibly the greatest obstacle to resolving that dispute turned out to be this Government's legislation. The legislation denied to those unionists the, right to unemployment benefits. Innocent parties-men who had been sacked; men who were unable to get another job-were denied work and were denied unemployment benefits.
Families were coming into the trade union offices to collect food vouchers. I never thought I would ever see it. I read about it and I heard about

it occurring in the depression days but I witnessed it only 12 months ago because of the Government's legislation. Families were absolutely destitute and were dependent on handouts. After seven months, the situation gets to be rather serious. This legislation now proposes to deny the few bob that were available to some of those people in that dispute. This legislation will bring about starvation.
Of course, members of the Government are saying that someone has to do something about the strikes. This legislation certainly will not solve the strike situation. Bad industrial relations cannot be solved by this type of legislation, and there will be a cost to be borne. I would imagine that the Victorian Government is shuddering at present as this legislation goes through this House. Anyone who knows what happened in the Loy Yang dispute will know that it finished up costing the Victorian Government millions of dollars to get the program back on course again. There was no way in which ordinary people were prepared to come back and work on that job because of the imposition caused by the legislation passed in this House. The men, in their rightful position, said: 'We no longer want to work on that job'. A lot of them went to other parts of the State or interstate and found employment. The Victorian Government found that, because of that legislation, it could not even get the program going again. That will happen again, except this time the Government is asking for more trouble.
I cannot understand the logic of the Government's action and why the Government is not prepared to learn from that one lesson. If it thinks there is any political mileage in the legislation, let me say that if there was one factor that brought the total community together in that part of the world it was the action of this Government when those people were clearly put in that position. It drew together the shopkeepers. The honourable member for Franklin (Mr Good luck) talks about small business in Tasmania. He should come to the Latrobe Valley and talk to small business people about what this type of legislation did to innocent people during that dispute. These people will very quickly tell him what they think of this type of Government legislation. This is a straight out attempt to try to starve unionists back to work. Innocent people, people who have no rights whatever and with no responsibility for disputes will be penalised because the Government wants to get at an odd one who perhaps may be on strike. Nothing in this legislation will penalise an employer who causes a problem-nothing whatsoever. It is simply a one-sided attack for political purposes. I can guarantee that there is no way in

Social Services Amendment Bill (No.3)

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3067

the world that I will be frightened to go to an elec-

tion on this issue.

.

Truckies in the Latrobe Valley got together and formed the largest convoy ever seen. Independent truck owners, not working men, ganged together and took the longest run of trucks-the highway was blocked with trucks-down to the Victorian Government to plead with it. When they got into the Premier's office-I was with them-the Premier said: 'The greatest obstacle we have are those idiots in Canberra'. The Government has extended those provisions today. Honourable members should not think for one minute that there is any political mileage in the legislation for them because there is none. I can guarantee that. I am prepared to fight an election at any time in the Latrobe Valley area on this very issue. Honourable members should chuck out this legislation and the 1979 legislation and get back to some decent legislation that will create proper industrial relations and stop this type of draconian measure that penalises ordinary Australians by trying to starve ordinary workers back to work when there is no possible hope of doing it. It is a disgrace that it could be happening in 1981. If it happens in 1982 that we get a chance to take this issue to the polls, we will win on it every time.

Question resolved in the affirmative.

Bill read a second time.

Message from the Governor-General recommending appropriation announced.

Third Reading
Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith.
Bill (on motion by Mr Hunt) read a third time.

SOCIAL SERVICES AMENDMENT BILL (No.3) 1981

Second Reading

Debate resumed from 17 November, on motion byMrHunt:

That the Bill be now read a second time.

Question put.

The House divided.

(Mr Deputy Speaker-Mr P. C. Millar)

Ayes

66

Noes

45

Majority

21

Adermann, A. E. Anthony, J. D. Baume, M. E. Bradfield,J. M.

AYES

Hyde,J. M. Jarman, A. W. Jull,D.F.
Kalter,R.J.

Brailhwaite, R. A. Bungey, M. H.
Burr,M.A. Cadman,A.G. Cameron, Donald Cameron, Ewe" Cameron, Tan Carlton, J. J. Chapman, H. G. P. Coleman, W. P. Connolly, D. M. Cowan, D. B. Dean,A.G. Dobie, J. D. M. Drummond,P. H. Edwards, H. R. Falconer, P. D. Fife,W.e. Fisher, P. S. Giles, G. O'H. Good luck, B. J. Groom,R.J. Hall,Steele Harris, G. McD. Hicks, N.J. Hodges, J. C. Hodgman, W. M. Howard,J. W. Hunt, R. J. D.

AYES

Killen,D.J. Lloyd, B. Lusher, S. A.
Lynch, Sir Phillip MacKellar, M. J. R. MacKenzie, A. J. (Teller) McLean, R. M. McMahon, Sir William McVeigh, D. T. Macphee, I. M. Newman. K. E. Nixon, P.I. O'Keefe, F. L. Peacock, A. S. Porler, 1. R. Robinson, Ian Rocher, A. e. Ruddock, P. M.
Sainsbury, M. E. (Teller) Shack, P. D. Shipton, R. F. Sinclair,l. McC. Spender,J. M. Street, A. A. Tambling, G. E. J. Tuckey, C. W. Viner,R.1. White, P. N. D. Wilson, I. B. C.

NOES
Armitage, J. L. Beazley, K. C. Blewelt, N. Bowen, Lionel Brown, John Brown, Robert Campbell,G. Cass,M.H. Charles, D. E. Child,J. Cross, M. D. Cunningham, B. T. Darling, E. E. Dawkins, J. S. Duffy, M.J. Everingham, D. N. Free,R. V. Fry, K. L. Hawke, R. J. L. Holding, A. C. Howe, B. L. Humphreys, B. C. (Teller) Hurford, C. J.

Innes, U. E. Jacobi, R. Jenkins, H. A. Jones, Barry Jones, Charles Keating, P. J. Kelly, R.J. Kent, L. McLeay, Leo Mildren, J. B. Milton,P. Morris, P. F. Morrison, W. L. Mountford, J. O. (Teller) Scholes, O. G. D. Scott, J. L.
Theophanous, A. C. Uren,T. Wallis, L.G. West, S. J. Willis,R. Young, M. J.

PAIRS

Bourchier, J. W.

Johnson, Les

Question so resolved in the affirmative,

Bill read a second time.

Third Reading

Leave granted for third reading to be moved forthwith,

Bill (on motion by Mr Hunt) read a third time.

SPECIAL HUMANITARIAN PROGRAM
Ministerial Statement
Mr MACPHEE (Balac1ava-Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs)-by leave-I am pleased to be able to inform the House of a decision taken by the Government to establish a new

3068 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Special Humanitarian Program

program for the entry of members of minority groups fleeing substantial discrimination or avoiding significant violation of human rights in their homelands. This program has been developed within the broad philosophy of the Government's refugee policy. It will enable Australia to provide a humanitarian response, outside formal refugee programs, in instances of substantial discrimination or human rights violations against oppressed minorities anywhere in the world by governments irrespective of their political persuasion. The program was foreshadowed by the Government at the time of the last election. Oppressive regimes and governments whose policies have little regard for basic human rights inevitably cause an outflow across national borders of members of minority groups at risk. We are becoming increasingly aware of the plight of such people, whose numbers are increasing also. Often, these displaced persons are unable to satisfy the internationally accepted criteria defining refugees. Yet, their relatives or compatriots in Australia, recognising the plight of these people, have asked the Government to provide some means of assistance.
The Special Humanitarian Program will focus on the individual members of oppressed minorities. Those accepted will generally be able to demonstrate a personal claim on Australia by virtue of having close relatives settled here, close former ties with us or, for a small number, a strong and well established community here which is well organised and able and willing to provide all necessary settlement support. Those eligible for consideration under the Special Humanitarian Program will generally be living in temporary asylum outside their own countries, be unable to return there for fear of substantial discrimination and have no comparable claim to another country's settlement resources. In considering who should be eligible for the SHP, the views of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees will be taken into account. Needless to say our heads of missions in the countries concerned also will play an important part in the acceptance of persons under the program. Many such people have formerly been debarred from admission to Australia as they are unable to meet either normal migrant selection criteria or the eligibility requirements of existing refugee programs. Whilst our refugee programs and other resettlement commitments must act as something of a brake on our ability to respond to the needs of displaced oppressed minorities we will be able to provide, through the sympathetic consideration that the

SHP will permit, places for people formerly unable to come here. The Governmeat would naturally expect that those entering under the SHP would contribute to the development of a socially cohesive, multicultural Australia.
As the program is addressed to quasi-refugees with close relatives or ties in Australia, it will not represent a significant burden to the taxpayer. Sponsors of the successful applicants will undertake to provide all necessary settlement support. Applicants will need also to satisfy normal character and security requirements and medical standards consistent with humanitarian considerations and any legislative requirements. Officers of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs will shortly be receiving instructions on the procedures to be followed. Nominations from Australian citizens and other permanent residents anxious to sponsor close relatives under the SHP should be lodged at a regional office of my Department.
Community agencies wishing to sponsor unrelated members of the group could also lodge nominations at a regional office. Eligible nominations will be referred to the appropriate overseas post so that the nominee can be interviewed and assessed. Individual applicants claiming close non-family ties with Australia can, of course, lodge their applications at an overseas post. I should foreshadow that inevitably applicants will outnumber many times the places available under the program. I would counsel against undue expectations being raised by potential sponsors. Officers of the Department can, however, be relied upon to ensure that priority is given to those in greatest need of compassionate entry subject, naturally, to the extent of their claims on Australia. I commend the program to the House.
Mr YOUNG (Port Adelaide)-by leave-The Opposition welcomes the statement by the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (Mr Macphee). I do not think it is necessary for me to say that the statement lacks much of the detail that we would like to be given by the Minister at this stage. He has assured me that a further ex'planation of the operation of this scheme will be given in the next few weeks. We have believed for some time that it is necessary to give some elasticity to our refugee program in relation to oppressed minorities. Questions have been raised by me and by my colleagues in relation to certain oppressed minorities who were not proscribed as refugees by the United Nations but who nonetheless have been putting up with circumstances similar to those of people in other parts of the world who have been designated as refugees.

Special Humanitarian Program

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3069

It is a very welcome sign that the Minister has recognised the point that we have been making over the last few months and has included in his statement the assurance that, irrespective of the political persuasion of the people in these circumstances, consideration will be given to their entry into Australia. As they will be part of the total refugee program that will operate in Australia over the next year or two, we are unaware of the number of people who will fit into this category. Nonetheless, each of us would be well aware of the minorities in various parts of the world of whom we are talking. It is of concern to some honourable members particularly those on this side of the House-that being a member of a trade union in some Latin American countries can make a person a member of an oppressed minority. There is no doubt that some people in the Spanish speaking world will be eligible under this system to seek entry into Australia whereas under the refugee system they would not have been eligible to enter this country.
The only point I make to the Minister about this statement is that it appears that the people who are considered will generally be people who are domiciled outside their own country. It is not always true that people who are part of an oppressed minority are domiciled outside their own borders. Many people who make up oppressed minorities are within the borders of their own country. I hope that the Government will not rule out consideration of these people should they want to make their way to Australia. As the Minister has pointed out, obviously the number of people who would like to come here will far outweigh the number that we will be able to settle successfully. Nevertheless, it will be an enormously important step in giving the elasticity that is required to our refugee program if we can successfully view oppressed minorities, whatever their political persuasion may be, and add them to the list of people who live in Australia. In the case of the Spanish speaking people, as there are 22 Spanish speaking countries there does not seem to be any difficulty in the communities that are already well establisi:led in this country in looking after those people who want to come to Australia. Similary, many of the other communities that are already well established in Australia will be able to" look after the people who apply to come here. I ask the Minister to look very carefully at this question. He said that the people who will be considered will be generally living in temporary asylum outside their own countries. It seems to me that many oppressed minorities are certainly within the borders of their own country.

The other important feature of this program is that many of the criteria that apply to others in the general migration area will apply to these people. The necessary settlement support will be required from the various organisations or, in some cases, from the family, and applicants will have to satisfy the normal character and security requirements. As I have said in this House on so many occasions, we have always to keep in mind the fact that we are doing this with the approval of the Australian people. That is the sort of thing that they would insist upon from this Parliament in bringing down a program of this nature. Whilst we give our support to the Minister's statement, I reiterate what I said at the outset: It will require greater elaboration by the Minister in terms of how the system is to apply. The field work in terms of the general migration system which will be carried out between now and April 1982 could be well applied to the scheme which has been announced in the Minister's statement. I hope that some of the complaints which have been received from individual members of parliament about applicants who have been knocked back because they have not been designated as refugees but are members of oppressed minorities, in whatever part of the world they live, will now be given consideration by this Government.
AUSTRALIAN COASTALZONE
Ministerial Statement
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-by leave-This statement is given in response to the report of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation on management of the Australian coastal zone. As honourable members are aware, Australia has one of the world's longest coastlines. The coastal zone has particular significance for Australians since urban development and productive activity are clearly concentrated along much of the narrow band of land bordering the sea, particularly near the major cities. The coast's wide-ranging and valuable resources are subject to the continuing effects of both natural processes and man's activity. It was appropriate, therefore, for the Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation to investigate the management of the Australian coastal zone, and to report to this House.
In its natural state the coast is subject to cycles of erosion and accretion which is a process that must be allowed to continue essentially unimpeded. The sometimes damaging effect of these natural forces can, however, be exacerbated by pressures to use the coast for urban development, mining, tourism, agriculture, forestry, transport

3070 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Australian Coastal Zone

and communications. There are also demands to leave parts of the coast in the natural state for purposes of recreation, nature conservation, education and scientific study. Given the importance of Australia's coastal areas, wise planning" and management of the varied and often competing uses is required if future damage by man's activities is to be reduced.
As many agencies have responsibilities relating to coastal zone management, the Committee has drawn particular attention to the need for collaboration among all levels of government. Local governments have responsibility for urban development, generally under State planning guidelines, and for dealing with the immediate problems of coastal management. I note particularly the questions of litter control, beach sand replenishment, building safety, and protection of essential vegetation cover. State governments exercise their wide responsibiliti~s for mangement and preservation of the coastal zone through agencies such as planning departments, environment protection authorities, soil conservation agencies, maritime services and ports authorities, fisheries agencies, public works authorities and national parks services.
The Commonwealth also has responsibilities in the coastal zone. It owns a significant area of coastal land, generally for purposes such as (~e fence, communications and maritime purposes. In addition, the Commonwealth has a role in such matters as informations assembly, research and weather forecasting. The Commonwealth must ensure therefore that its activities are compatible with those of the States and that Commonwealth activities do not lead to further adverse effects. A further existing Commonwealth involvement in the coastal environment arises in consideration of the National Conservation Strategy which the Commonwealth is currently developing in consultation with the States and with the involvement of the Australian community.
Honourable members will recall that the report of the Standing Committee recommends that the Commonwealth Government should, in consultation with the States, develop and prpmulgate those policies and objectives which will conserve and preserve the Australian coastline; an Australian Coastal Management Council be estabc lished to encourage collaboration, assess information requirements and establish research priorities; conferences and workshops be conducted to stimulate information exchange; the Council have a full time secretariat; a central information register be established and a newsletter circulated; the Council establish criteria for the funding of research; the Council determine

guidelines for the allocation of Commonwealth funds for State programs concerning coastal zone management. The Government is sympathetic to the thrust of all these recommendations. After careful consideration, however, the Government does not consider that a completely new Council is needed. This is a practical administrative matter, for as honourable members are well aware, unnecessary proliferation of public agencies must be avoided.
The Government intends to respond to the Committee's report through existing machinery, as already there are several consultative bodies which provide for consultation between the Commonwealth and the States on coastal environment matters. The most relevant is the Australian Environment Council of which I am a member, together with my State and Territory counterparts. Already the Council is involved in areas of environmental concern which are compatible with the thrust of the Standing Committee recommendations. Accordingly, the Government will be seeking the agreement of States and Territories that environmental matters of common interest relating to the coastal zone be carried forward, in the first instance, through the machinery of the Australian Environment Council, and in particular, the Council be invited to consider in collaboration with the other councils the best way in which it might promote the wise management of Australia's coastal resources.
Mr WEST (Cunningham)-by leave-I am extremely disappointed that the Government today has rejected the major recommendations of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation with regard to the management of the Australian coastal zone. The Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson) agrees in principle to them. He acknowledges their importance but then disregards them. He states the importance of proper management of our coast whose wideranging and valuable resources are subject to the effects of natural and human activities. The report recommends that the Commonwealth, in consultation with the States, develop and promulgate policies to conserve and preserve the coastline. It recommends that the Australian Coastal Management Council be established to encourage collaboration, assess information and establish research priorities.
The Minister rejects this proposal which is instrumental to effective coastal management. There is a clear need for such a council as found by the Committee and for a national policy to be developed to counter the damage occurring to such a strategic area of our country. The term

Australian Coastal Zone

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3071

'coastal zone' is a necessarily vague one since no Federal legislation specifies the exact area to be covered by a coastal zone. I turn to the report itself for a definition. It says:
The coastal zone must include estuaries, their associated wetlands and catchments, shallow bays and shallow i,nshore waters. All these environments are part of one interconnected system which includes not only the water and sea bed but also the associated flora and fauna
The Minister briefly sets out the wide area which he says falls uncleI' State Government responsibility for management and preservation of this zone including planning, environment protection, soil conservation, maritime services, fishing, public works and national parks. He really acknowledges Commonwealth responsibility only in such matters as weather forecasting, defence and communications, but he completely ignores the unanimous findings of the Committee. It stated:
Management of the coastal zone must encompass all coastal resources within both the territorial sea and the exclusive economic zone. Exploitation of resources within these areas will have an impact on the coastal zone (offshore drilling, pipelines, seabed mining, provision of extensive coastal support and/or processing facilities for major extractive industries. The Committee believes that it is imperative that national coastal objectives be specified and accounted for in negotiations prior to the Commonwealth relinquishing any further control to the States.
Further, the Committee-this was a unanimous finding of a joint committee of this House-quite rightly said that although it acknowledges State responsibilities there is still a very great role to be played by the Commonwealth. Most States have actually asked the Commonwealth for greater involvement and to develop policies to provide guidelines for State initiatives in coastal planning. They have actually asked for more Commonwealth involvement. The Opposition demands to know why the Minister has ducked these requests from the States and ducked his responsibility. He acknowledges some Commonwealth involvement and then rejects the very reasonable mechanisms set out by the Committee to handle these problems through the establishment of an Australian Coastal Management Council, particularly when the Minister's own Department gave this evidence to the Committee. The Department recommended that:
National objectives be established for the conservation and preservation of the Australian coastline through Commonwealth-State consultation;
A co-ordinated approach to coastal management be developed by Commonwealth authorities;
Arrangements for improved Commonwealth-State collaboration on these issues be developed; and
Suitable processes at a national level be developed for disseminating information on coastal research and management activities.

All of that led us on the Committee to the inescapable conclusion that a national council for coastal management should be set up as set out in the report. Why did the Department make these recommendations to the Committee only to see the Government and its own Minister renege on them?
I now refer back to the recommendation that no more of the coastal zone should be handed back to the States lInU these objectives have been achieved. Already we have had the Coastal Waters (State Powers) Act which was part of the scandalous sell-out of the Commonwealth responsibility last year and which handed back control of the territorial sea out to the five-kilometre limit to the States, with the remainder out to the edge of the continental shelf to be administered as a joint Commonwealth-State responsibility. I make the point that all the nonsense we have heard from State governments, particularly from the Queensland Premier about Commonwealth intrusion into State rights regarding the coastal zone and the territorial sea, is fallacious and misleading. There is no reason why the Commonwealth should not control the territorial sea from the low water mark for the issue of mining and 'exploration licences and no reason why the States should not retain their constitutional rights for those matters raised by the Minister tonight; that is, ports, public works, fishing and so on.
The best example of the confusion and acrimony created by the Commonwealth's two-faced attitude is the current power struggle between the Federal and Queensland Governments over the declaration of the Cairns section of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park. There is no reason why the Federal Government cannot declare to the low ~ater mark the whole of the Cairns section, mdeed, the whole reef area as marine park as designated in the 1975 Great Barrier Reef Marine Park, and then involve the Queensland Government in the preparation of zoning plans for the various sections of the whole park and continuing arrangements for public works and sea ports but taking away all rights to issue mining and drilling licences as signified in the original Act.
By weakly declaring only 30 per cent of the Cairns section along the western perimeter to the low water mark the Minister and the Government-'-we warn them on this-are simply creating conditions for future clashes between the Queensland Government and any future Federal government of any political colour, given the state of mind of the present Government in Queensland. Make no mistake, a Federal Labor Government will terminate this situation by declaring the Barrier Reef to the low water mark

3072 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Voluntary Conservation Organisations

in its entirety and by reasserting-this is even more important in the long run-Federal control over the territorial sea.
A further example-I will conclude on this note-of this Government's contradictory attitude to the control of the :lea and the coastal water zone was the autumn session amendments to the Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act which placed the whole of the Coral Sea under FederalState control for the admitted purpose of allowing oil drilling in proximity to the Barrier Reef. Coupled with this is the statement by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) that current research may show that future oil drilling may be possible on or near the reef. These statements and attitudes cast a grim shadow over the reef's future, despite the Prime Minister's recent welcome, albeit partial, declaration of the Cairns section. I consider it an insult to the Department of Home Affairs and Environment, to the Committee and to this House that the Government has not picked up the recommendations in the report. It is a dangerous rejection of sound environmental policy and a receipe for disaster for the future management of one of Australia's most valuable assets, our national coastline.
REPORTS ON GRANTS TO VOLUNTARY CONSERVATION
ORGANISATIONS PROGRAM
Ministerial Statement
Mr WILSON (Sturt-Minister for Home Affairs and Environment)-by leave-This statement is a response to the report of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation on the grants to voluntary conservation organisations program. This program was established in 1973 following the report of the Committee of Inquiry into the National Estate. In 1979 Senator Webster, the then Minister responsible for environmental matters, instigated a review of the program.
As part of the review Senator Webster invited the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation to comment on the program. The Committee did this most expeditiously, tabling its report on 15 May last year. The Government, like the Standing Committee, strongly supports the grants to voluntary conservation bodies program. It is, I believe, a healthy sign of democracy in action when groups of publicly interested citizens are assisted by government to watch over the state of the Australian environment. These groups perform an important function in representing the interests of

environment and conservation and stimulate public debate on what is really a finely balanced relationship, the interdependence of environment and the use of our physical resources.
The recommendations of the Standing Committee are mostly concerned with additional funding or the relaxation of funding conditions.
In the framework of the 1981-82 Budget it was not appropriate to provide additional funds for the program. The case for additional funding, as presented by the Committee, will be considered in the context of the 1982-83 Budget.
The Committee also recommended that the dollar for dollar matching requirement be relaxed. The Government's intention, in applying a matching condition, was to decrease the dependence of conservation groups on government. It was also expected that in obtaining funding support from the public, conservation groups would foster close links with the community they sought to serve, and hence be responsive to general public attitudes and needs. Whilst the Government considers that these aims are being achieved, it believes that continuation of a matching arrangement is appropriate to encourage voluntary groups to cultivate othef'Sources of funds.
The Standing Committee has also recommended additional funding for conservation groups to enable them to undertake special projects, to obtain technical assistance, and to undertake research. As well as the general need to constrain additional funding, the Government has difficulty with the practicability of establishing three separate funding schemes for the purposes recommended by the Committee. The schemes would be relatively costly to administer and determining priorities would be difficult. The Government proposes, therefore, that no special fund be established, but that the purposes of the grants be widened beyond that of administration to include approved technical assistance and research.
The Committee made two recommendations which did not relate to funding. One advocates the broadening of eligibility criteria for funding under the program. The present guidelines require that, to be eligible, an organisation must 'have nature conservation as its primary objective or one of its primary objectives and its actions must be consistent with those objectives'. While this definition is capable of broad interpretation, the Government recognises that environment protection and nature conservation are closely related and are both addressed by many of the voluntary organisations which are assisted. Accordingly, the Government has agreed to adopt the recommended criterion, that 'an organisation

Voluntary Conservation Organisations

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3073

must have the protection and enhancement of the environment as its primary objective and its actions must be consistent with that objective'.
The other non-funding recommendation relates to the manner in which the Minister seeks advice on the allocation of funds each year. While there are a number of bodies which might be consulted, I do not consider it proper for advice to the Minister to be so constrained.
In conclusion, I wish to thank the members of the Committee for the detailed attention they have given to this important matter. I regret that unavoidable circumstances have delayed the Government's response and that, on this occasion, it has not been possible to meet the recommendation for additional funding. However, the Government will keep the matter under review. In this regard the report of the Standing Committee will continue to provide a valuable source of reference.
Mr WEST (Cunningham)-by leave-Once again, the Government has refused to pick up a recommendation of the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Environment and Conservation. I find it incredible that the Government has ignored that Committee's call for increased funding for voluntary conservation organisations, particularly when one considers that this financial year a surplus of $1.5 billion is predicted in the Budget. The voluntary conservation groups perform an essential function by raising issues and acting as a watch-dog over private and public developments. In the present climate of environment assessment, in which the States lack uniform environment legislation and the Commonwealth requires few environmental impact statements and no public inquiries, the importance of the voluntary groups in promoting proper pubIlcawareness and input is very obvious. I am sure that even the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment (Mr Wilson) accepts that fact.
Despite that, the present Government has progressively cut back on funding for those groups. Since 1975-76 funds have been cut by 48 per cent in real terms. Nevertheless, the Minister tells the House that the Government strongly supports those groups but will not consider any increase in funding until next financial year. That is the case, despite the fact that the funding of those groups has been cut back by nearly 50 per cent in real terms in the past few years. How are those groups expected to continue their work?
The Committee recommended that the matching funding requirements for environment centres be dropped because those centres provided a valuable information facility to a wide variety of users,

which facility, if provided by Government, would be infinitely more expensive to the taxpayer. But the Government rejected that recommendation also. It wants to force those centres to spend more time raising money-this is the key-and less time in examining the environmental effects of resource development.
I cannot overstate the importance of the voluntary conservation movement to Australia's environment. It publicises important environmental issues and raises the level of public awareness. It makes submissions to people making environmental impact assessments and preparing statements and to public inquiries in the States, when they are set up-mainly in New South Wales. The voluntary conservation movement carries out research and investigation that very often the authorities at a Federal and State level either cannot or, will not do. The voluntary conservation movement plays an important role in all States, but especially in those with minimal environment laws, such as Queensland. Lack of uniform legislation is a major problem in the States, as the Government and the Minister well know. It is a problem which the present Government has ignored.
The Commonwealth is opting out of proper environment assessment, leaving the field open to the ill-prepared State governments. Only in New South Wales and Victoria is there adequate environment assessment legislation. Except in New South Wales, public inquiries are unheard of, despite continued calls by the environment groups. They are concerned that issues are getting short shrift from the States' assessment procedures. Important environmental issues sU,ch as south west Tasmania and sandmining on Moreton Island have been raised in public and on the parliamentary scene, prompted by groups such as the Tasmanian Wilderness Society and the Moreton Island Protection Committee. The issues that they have raised are of such importance that they require public inquiries under the Commonwealth's 'Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act, but this Government has refused to call such inquiries. Two groups which are deserving of funds but which did not get even a mention or a piece of the present tiny cake are those I have just mentioned-the wilderness societies in Tasmania and in the mainland States and the Moreton Island Protection Committee. They clearly ought to be funded but are not.
The Australian Conservation Foundation, the largest and most respected conservation organisation in the country, has had its funding cut by 75

3074 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Privilege

per cent in real terms in the last five years. As a result, this Government must be seen as meanminded. All the Minister's fine words about his sympathy for the groups and about the good job that they do will not alter the fact that the Government has attempted to muzzle the envir:onment movement by restricting funds and by requiring full matching funds to be provided by the organisations themselves. This has not stopped the groups, but it has made things very difficult for them at a time when rapid resource development is placing increasing stresses on the environment and the States lack the capacity and the will adequately to examine projects as they are put forward.
As I said, only New South Wales has the legislation on the statute book to assess new projects adequately by requiring environment impact statements and the capacity to put them to public inquiry if the Minister and the Department so declare. The Federal Government has that ability also under the present Federal Act, but there have been only two inquiries-the Ranger inquiry into uranium mining in Kakadu National Park and an inquiry into sand mining on Fraser Island. Both of those inquiries were set up by the Whitlam Labor Government and acted upon in one way or another by the present Government. It is about time this Government picked up its responsibilities in that area and ordered inquiries not into every little project but into projects which affect the major and significant environmental areas in Australia. Of course, it is not doing this. What I am saying is that, in the absence of the Government's acceptance of these responsibilities, these voluntary groups, which consist of many conscientious and concerned people throughout Australia, are picking up those responsibilities in situations in which the Federal Government and most of the State governments.are refusing to act. Were this Government genuinely concerned about the environment, it would have substantially increased funding to these admirable voluntary environment and conservation groups.
NATIONAL HEALTH AMENDMENT BILL
Bill returned from the Senate without amendment.
PRIVILEGE
Suspension ofStanding Orders Mr SINCLAIR (New England~Leader of the House)-I seek leave to move the suspension of so much of the Standing Orders as would prevent my moving a motion which has been distributed and'which is intended to provide for references to

the Committee of Privileges when the House is not sitting. I should explain that the reason for seeking leave is that the desire of the Government is that there should be as soon as possible a full debate on privilege, but it felt that this motion needed to be pa~sed before the House rises. If I can have leave perhaps I can briefly address myself to the matter.
Leave granted.
Mr SINCLAIR-Those honourable members who have had a chance to look at the motion will know that it fits in very much with one of the recommendations of a recent examination by the Committee of Privileges. The concept is that when the House is not sitting there should be a capacity for a member to bring to your attention, Mr Speaker, as Speaker, a matter of privilege which that member proposes should be referred to the Committee of Privileges. Then if you, Mr Speaker, are satisfied that a prima facie case has been made out and the matter is one upon which urgent action should be taken, you would be in a position to be able to refer it forthwith to the Committee of Privileges, provided that any referral in accordance with these provisions is reported to the House at its next sitting whereupon the member who raised the matter shall be required to move forthwith, without notice, that such referral be endorsed by the House.
There are quite a number of outstanding issues on privilege. In view of the late hour I felt that it would be preferable if we opened up debate on this matter to give those members who may wish to make a contribution an opportunity to do so but, at the same time, give an undertaking to the House that there will be a full opportunity for a privileges debate to be held early in the next session. There are a number of outstanding reports. There is the Privileges Committee report on Laurie Oakes and the report in relation to Preston Motors both of which have been presented to the Parliament during the Budget session. A recommendation came out of the Privileges Committee report on the Berthelsen matter that a parliamentary witnesses protection Act should be constituted. Perhaps it might be wise, as I go through, if I mention the Government's reaction to each of these matters. With respect to the report on Mr Laurie Oakes and the report on Preston Motors the Government did not feel it was necessary for any further action to be taken.
With respect to the recommendation of the Berthelsen matter for a parliamentary witnesses protection Act, there are a number of issues that concern the Government although at this stage the Government does not feel disposed to accept

Privilege

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3075

the recommendation for a parliamentary witnesses protection Act. However, there are a number of areas that concern the Government that I believe need to be debated in this place. Quite obviously a number of parliamentary committees are placed in a position in which they cross-examine public servants. Those pnblic servants are not given the protection that is available within a court oflaw. While parliamentary papers to examine the question of witnesses have been prepared there has to this stage been no action taken by the Parliament to pick up those matters. As the matter would be expected to be examined on our return, perhaps I should put into Hansard the references so that those members with a particular interest can turn to them. There is a particularly good parliamentary paper, No. 168 of 1972, which is entitled 'Powers over and Protection afforded to witnesses before Parliamentary Committees'. This paper was prepared by the then Attorney-General, our former colleague the late Senator Ivor Greenwood, and the then Solicitor-General, Mr Bob Ellicott. This picks up some of the matters which I believe members in this place do need to examine and consider with respect to the protection of parliamentary witnesses. It may be that as a result of that debate some other course of action might be decided on. Certainly, the Government has reservations about the recommendation for a parliamentary witnesses protection Act which emanated from the Berthelsen report.
Another matter that concerns the Government is the question of unsubstantiated allegations. On a number of occasions statements of a damaging character have been made in both chambers. Quite often they are made on either unsupported or minimal evidence. There seem to be difficulties when parliamentary privilege is used in such a way as to throw discredit on people when the charges themselves are not backed up. We all recognise the very essence of parliamentary privilege is that members need to be in a position to canvass matters that they may not outside the Parliament. Yet the abuse of privilege is one of the difficult areas in the manner and form by which parliamentarians perform their duty. It is certainly true that this is a matter which deserves adequate attention in the Parliament. I raise it now not to canvass the substance of the issue but to suggest that it, too, is a matter which the Government would like examined and would wish to make some comment on in a more meaningful way and in a more adequate debate than is possible at this hour at this time of the sitting.
The other matter which has come out of the more recent Privileges Committee report is the

recommendation that a joint committee be established between the other place and this place to examine privileges. I notice that the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes), in General Business Notice No.4, has in fact picked up this recommendation. The Government has a number of matters which it would wish to examine before this motion is considered and before a motion is moved in this place or is debated in this place, whether it be a motion moved by the honourable member for Corio or a different one to be moved by the Government. The two particular issues relate to the fact that the Senate has expressed some views about joint committees. There is little doubt that the question of privilege is a parliamentary question; yet it is also a question which needs to be examined in relation to either chamber. It is not much use our just going down the track of looking at these things where there is a common privilege, for I think that in each House there are matters which honourable members and honourable senators may wish to pursue where there may be differences between us. The question of a joint committee, I believe, needs to be considered in conjunction with the Senate and it would be the intention of the Government to discuss these matters with the Leader of the Government in the Senate (Senator Carrick) and with honourable senators prior to the resumption of parliament so that a meaningful consideration can be given to that part of the recommendation.
There is also the question of the terms of reference. It would be my proposal that the Government should submit draft terms of reference to this place so that we could consider them. The Committee should be constituted in accordance with the recommendation of that Privileges Committee. It certainly, therefore, is not the intention of the Government to delay this process unduly but rather to ensure that the matter is brought before us and can be debated with some idea of where we are going. So it is that I move the sessional order which I have just introduced into the Parliament. It is a sessional order-
Mr SPEAKER-I hesitate to interrupt the right honourable gentleman but he obtained leave to suspend Standing Orders. I will allow him to interrupt his remarks to move the suspension of Standing Orders. He can then move his motion.
Mr SINCLAIR-I move:
That so much of the Standing Orders be suspended as would prevent the Leader of the House moving a motion for the adoption of sessional orders relating to privilege.
Question resolved in the affirmative.

3076 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Privilege

Motion
Mr SINCLAIR (New England-Leader of the House) (11.23)-1 move:
That, unless otherwise ordered, the following standing orders be adopted for the remainder of this Session:

was not in session. That flowed, of course, from the fact that in the Berthelsen case certainly a
question of privilege arose but, because the Parliament was not in session, there was some delay in
dealing with it.

Privilege matter raised when House not sitting

There are other matters of which the Minister

'97A. During a period when the House is not sitting and is has spoken, concerning which I find the Govern-

not expected to meet for a further period of at least 2 weeks, a Member may bring to the attention of the Speaker a matter of privilege which has arisen since the House last met and which
he proposes should be referred to the Committee of Privileges.
If Mr Speaker is satisfied that a prima facie case of breach of

ment's view somewhat disappointing. Without being personal about it, the Berthelsen case did
clearly indicate that a person had suffered dam-
age. The Committee of Privileges went to a lot of

privilege has been made out and the matter is one upon which urgent action should be taken, he shall refer it forthwith to the
Committee of Privileges: Provided that any referral by Mr Speaker in accordance with the foregoing provisions of this standing order shall be reported to the House by Mr Speaker

trouble, after examining witnesses, to indicate
clearly that something should be done about that.
I draw to the attention of the House the fact that the Committee recommended the enactment of a

at its next sitting whereupon the Member who raised the matter shall be required to move forthwith, without notice, that such referral be endorsed by the House; should such motion be
negatived, the Committee of Privileges shall take no further action in respect of the matter.

Parliamentary Witnesses Protection Act, which would provide for the prosecution of persons who tampered with, intimidated or discriminated against persons who had given evidence before a

Power to send for persons, papers and records

parliamentary committee. It was clear that that kind of thing had indeed happened.

978. Where a matter is referred to the Committee of Privi-

leges by Mr Speaker in accordance with the provisions of standing order 97A, the Committee of Privileges shall have

I do not think that we are breaking new ground

power to send for persons, papers and records relating to that in a hurry. I remind the House that the House of

inquiry'.

Commons has the Witnesses Public Inquiries Pro-

This sessional order is of some difference from any
which have been moved before but I commend it
to members of this House because I believe it is a worthwhile step. I do recognise that there may be
some difficulty in a Privileges Committee meeting

tection Act 1892. It has been in force since that year but we still seem to be struggling to do some-
thing about privileges-not so much for ourselves
but in this case for citizens who have suffered
damage.

taking place during the parliamentary recess but I believe it is a justifiable step and one, therefore, that deserves the support of the members of this place.
In closing, I reiterate that it would be the Government's intention to return to the debate on those matters of privilege which are outstanding, which stand on the Notice Paper and which, of course, were listed in the blue sheet early in the resumption of the Parliament in February 1982.

If honourable members examine the proposed
Witnesses Protection Act they wi1l find that it provides that people who obstruct or intimidate
witnesses can be dealt with. It states clearly that
compensation can be awarded to the party who is aggrieved and makes the point that no legal pro-
ceedings are to be taken against persons who give
evidence. Those requirements are pretty elementary and public opinion would expect that if this
Parliament is to continue its effective work as a

Mr LIONEL BOWEN (Kingsford-Smith) democratic institution-committee work is part

(11.24)-The Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) . and parcel of its function~it is important that

has referred to a number of matters. Let me take witnesses who appear before its committees not

them perhaps in the order in which he would like suffer any damage whatsoever as a result. In

them dealt with. He raised the question of a Berthelsen's case damage certainly was sustained,

motion being required-he, in fact, moved such a and that kind of thing can continue to happen.

motion-so that a matter of privilege can be

raised when the House is not sitting. The OppoIt is of significance that in these days the Parlia-

sition supports that motion. In fact, I might rement works very well in bringing to light matters

mind the House that it was the recommendation that the public feels should be aired, but if we

of a Privileges Committee on which I served-it study the Berthelsen case we find that in the De-

dealt with the Berthelsen case-and which partment of Defence there is quite a lot that is

reported to a previous parliament back in Sepwrong. One can identify it from the sort of evi-

tember 1980. We recommended that there be a dence that was given, from the way in which

mechanism whereby matters of privilege could be people contradicted themselves and virtually con-

referred for examination when the Parliament nived in certain circumstances at bringing about a

Privilege

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3077

situation which might have deluded the Committee into making the wrong finding and certainly would have affected the career of one man.
I turn to a matter raised in the House this week. It concerns the Public Service Board and the Department of Transport and relates to a reclassification claim by the Professional and Electronics Radio Institute of Australia. There has been an indictment which, of course, has yet to be established, concerning how the Public Service Board and the Department of Transport carried out their functions in respect of a particular matter. It all relates to the question whether evidence has been properly given or some attempt made to delude the Parliament. It is important that committees have free and unfettered ability to investigate these matters. It would be of great value to a Parliament to know that it had such protective legislation.
I close by saying that it is disappointing that although we have had all this discussion on the subject over such a long period-I am not now adverting to the recent privileges report but to the matter with which I was associated some time ago; the Berthelsen case took virtually two years to complete-so little has been achieved. In the previous Parliament, on 17 September 1980, the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) proposed a motion, which we would still applaud, in these terms:
That-
(I) this House, recognising the need for extensive consideration by the House of the report from the Committee of Privileges . . . is of the opinion that the report should be considered early in the 32nd Parliament . . .
We are now a third of the way through the Thirtysecond Parliament. That resolution simply got lost. I remind the Minister and the Government that they promised in the previous Parliament to deal with the matter early in this Parliament and that they might well now be able to deal with it very soon indeed.
Mr Jacobi-They are great ones at moving things, but not too good at debating them.
Mr LIONEL BOWEN-That is right. My point is that a lot of work has been done, but I have no objection to a joint committee of privileges being established; that is fine. We are dealing with the question that people's rights have been affected. I cannot see any objection to introducing legislation that would protect witnesses. It is very important that that be done early next year. Having said that, and being aware of the other pressures on the House at this late hour, I merely record that the Opposition supports the motion.

Mr DONALD CAMERON (Fadden) (11.30)-As Chairman of the Privileges Committee, I feel that I should make one or two observations about the procedures which have been introduced into this House tonight. There is a possibility that the Committee might like to give consideration to these matters. Neverthless we are pleased that the Government and, indeed, the House, with the agreement of both sides, have recognised the need for an inquiry. I do not propose to keep the House sitting beyond the middle of the night. Perhaps other members wish to add one or two comments.
I take advantage of this opportunity to make brief observations in relation to the last hearing, which is known as the Oakes case. I have been a member of the Privileges Committee since about 1969. I have been its chairman for a number of years. That case would be, without doubt, the most difficult hearing that I have had to conduct in that period. I suppose that that was due very much to the fact that there was some dissension within the Committee about whether the matter should even have been before it. The honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) made reference some days ago when this debate commenced to the quality of the hearing. Members of this chamber may have gained the impression from listening to his comments that he had a very definite view on the subject. When people of firm mind are present at these hearings it adds to the difficulties.
In conclusion, the Committee cannot continue to function properly if such a diversity of views is allowed to exist without being explored by a proper joint committee of inquiry. I compliment those who have recognised the worth of the Committee's recommendations, which, I point out to the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair), were first brought before this chamber in 1978 following the Sunday Observer report, although they were not in as extensive a form as they are now. Let us hope, as we move into next year, that the privileges system of the Australian Parliament will be on a better footing than it is at present.
I remind honourable members and those who are critical of privilege that privilege belongs not only to this Parliament but also to the Press and to the people. Every time the Press reports something about this chamber that is a little out of the ordinary it is utilising one form of privilege in its presentation of that matter. Indeed, often when honourable members stand in this chamber and take up the cudgels on behalf of a constituent, privilege is needed to permit the exposure of a certain matter. Whilst I know that it could be argued fairly that privilege is wide ranging, I would hate a

3078 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Privilege

situation to exist in the community whereby some with vested interests could beat up such feeling and fervour against some aspects of the subject as to lead to the destruction of the entire concept which has existed for centuries..
Mr SCHOLES (Corio) (11.35)-1 want to express some disappointment that we are again deferring consideration of the entire matter of privilege. The motion before us does not deal in any way with the subject matter of the report which was brought into this Parliament in 1978-the Berthelsen report-and which we have been promised the opportunity of considering in this House for over a year, or thetwo current inquiries before the House which 1 thought at least could have been disposed of in substance before the end of this session. I think most members of this Parliament want a joint committee set up to \llake a complete examination of privilege.
1 think it is regrettable that on the earlier occasion the Senate reported back to this House that it was not prepared to co-operate in a joint committee to examine the privileges of this Parliament. I am not sure by what process it was determined that the Senate was not prepared to cooperate. 1 am not sure that the senators were consulted or that the Government representatives in the Senate were consulted. If that committee had deemed that legislation was necessary-I would have thought that that would be the result-then appropriate legislation could be enacted to meet the provisions of the Constitution. I do not believe, as the Minister for Communications (Mr Sinclair) has indicated, that we can reasonably expect the public to accept a situation whereby the Houses pass legislation which provides different forms of privilege and other avenues of protection to the two Houses. 1 think that the public would expect the Australian Parliament to enact legislation which had a degree of uniformity and uniform application. In this day and age the public would expect it to be readily identified by those people to whom it would apply and whom it may affect, including the members.
One of the problems about privilege, contempt of Parliament and the other associated matters is that there are very few people who actually understand what privilege is, including members of this chamber and the Senate. There are even fewer people who appear to understand the difference between a member of the Parliament, a Minister of the Crown and other functionaries and the applications and the limitations of privilege. 1 think it would not do any harm, even at this stage and even if we have not actually got to the stage of inquiring into what privileges we are

going to fix, if some simplified form of the existing privileges could be prepared so that at least the members of this Parliament could understand what privilege is and how limited its application is, in effect, in protecting members in respect of what they do and what they say outside this chamber.
I think it is also essential that any examination be a joint examination. 1 note that the problem has been added to by the fact that the Senate has before it at the moment a private members' Bill relative to contempt which proposes that the whole matter of contempt be taken outside the control of the Parliament and placed under the control of the courts. That may be good for lawyers; 1 am not sure that it will be good for parliament. Certainly, the matter of privilege must at all stages be a matter for the Parliament. But people. must be able to be confident that they know what the law is and where they stand in respect of the Parliament. Mysteries and mystiques are not in the best interests of the Parliament. I see deferral by this House of the commencement of the procedures to set up a joint committee as a negative step. The sooner we tackle privilegeand it is a very difficult problem-and the sooner we seek to resolve the problems between the Houses so that we can have a uniform set of standards under which this Parliament operates the better.
I do not think it does this House or anyone else any good to have long hearings of matters when the Privileges Committee and the House will ultimately make findings that they will take no further action. 1 think the cases on the Notice Paper at the moment are both in that category. I was one.of those members of the Committee who was of the opinion-this is shown in the minutes-that the matter should be resolved quickly and brought back to the House as quickly as possible. 1 believe that we will not be able to avoid the matter of privilege for long with impunity and without loss of dignity to this Parliament. The sooner we settle down to having a proper inquiry the better. The sooner we resolve the problem-we decide either to do nothing or to do something significant in concert with the Senate-the less chance there will be of having a continuing problem with privilege, grandstanding by some individuals and misinterpretation by others.
Mr RUDDOCK (Dundas) (11.40)-1 take the opportunity of this motion and the wider discussion on the matters raised by the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) to expand briefly on my view on the need for a joint select committee to examine the question of privilege in relation to this

Privilege

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3079

House and to the Senate. Some discussion has already taken place on that matter. It has already been mentioned by the speaker who preceded me, the honourable member for Corio (Mr Scholes), that there is a private members Bill in the Senate to deal with the question of contempt of parliament generally. One might argue that, in a sense, it pre-empts the examination of this subject. That may give honourable members some cause for concern. It gives me cause for concern.
I have agonised over the question of contempt of parliament for some time. I have agonised over the question of whether parliament ought to be a judge in its own cause. Some comment was directed at me because I raised a matter of privilege and had it referred to the Committee of Privileges when perhaps some people were aware of the reservations-my thoughts on this matter had been in the process of developing-I had about an extra parliamentary role in determining the question of contempt of parliament. I worked with the procedures that were available at the time. I think the broader question of whether there should be an extra parliamentary role for the judiciary in determining the question of contempt where prima facie cases have been found is a matter to be examined by all honourable members in consideration of all of the issues that need to be raised.
A detailed commentary was made by Dennis Pearce on the question of parliamentary privilege which perhaps was the first article that I read that significantly influenced me. But there has been a new and more recent influence. I draw it to the attention of honourable members because it may give them some cause for concern as it did me when I learnt of the particular events that took place recently in Canada. Recently I was at a Commonwealth Parliamentary Association conference and a paper that was delivered to clerks was brought to my attention. It was a paper by E. George MacMinn, Commissioner of the Legislature Procedure Review Act of the Province of British Columbia. His paper dealt with police powers and confidentiality between a constituent and his member of parliament. The case, of course, concerned the Royal Canadian Mounted Police where certain phone tapping had been going on apparently with some undesirable individuals, with the police intercepting conversations. A member of parliament's name was mentioned relating to an attempt to bring influence to bear upon that member of parliament. As a result, the police sought the authority, under the appropriate legislation in the province of British Columbia-I believe that it went to the Supreme Court for the authority-to tap the

member's personal phone, the phone in the legislative buildings and also, I understand, in a Minister's office. That order was given by a court without any consideration of whether the parliament or parliamentary privilege was likely to be
affected by it.
Some people assume that judges might be better able to judge these matters than members themselves. But I think when one knows of circumstances like that, one appreciates that there could be circumstances where judges would not have the same regard for the privilege of the parliament, and there may be circumstances where they would not even give consideration to that question. I think that particular case ought to be looked at and this matter needs to be considered by a joint parliamentary committee. The matter of the particular report in which I was involvedthe report relating to the printed reference to an article published in the Sydney Daily Mirror of Wednesday, 2 September 1981-is another matter to which I would like to advert briefly and make three short points. The points are these. There was some implied criticism from some members who reported this matter of the fact that the article by Mr Oakes was written in the Sydney Daily Mirror and was also published in some other newspapers but the reference in other newspapers was not referred to the Cominittee of Privi,leges. I would like to make it quite clear that I raised this matter at the first available opportunity, and at that time. I was only aware of the Daily Mirror article. Of course, the opportunity having passed I did not think it was appropriate for me to raise the question of the other articles although if other honourable members had seen them they may have thought it appropriate and could have done so.
Secondly, there was some implied criticism of the article in the Australian Financial Review which dealt with similar material but which, as I said in an explanation to this House, was not precisely the same material and was not referred to the Committee of Privileges. I made my position clear on that matter. When I spoke to it at the first available opportunity, I indicated that if other members had a different view to mine, they should also consider referring the matter to the Privileges Committee. It was for them to consider, and members had that opportunity.
One other matter I would like to canvass briefly is why I moved that this matter be considered by the Committee of Privileges. Mr Speaker, as you know you proposed an alternative course of action when you found the priina facie case. I accepted the fact that there was an alternative and the alternative that was proposed by you was very

3080 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Privilege

similar to the decision that was ultimately reached by the Privileges Committee. I do have a concern that people who are brought before committees of the Parliament ought to be given protection. In a sense I would be very much in favour of legislation to deal with that matter or at least for the Committee to consider it. But I also believe that people are entitled not to have a finding made by the Parliament without some inquiry or opportunity to appear before a committee to explain their position. It was for that reason that I proposed that the matter be referred to the Privileges Committee rather than take the simple course, and the course which the Committee adopted, of making a finding without giving the person the opportunity to appear. I felt that as perhaps there was some implied criticism of myself for having proposed that course of action I should make that explanation at this opportunity.
MrDUFFY (Holt) (11.48)~Tosaytheleastit is unfortunate that this matter has come before the Parliament at this stage in the sitting because the one thing we seem to be able to do is talk a lot about privilege but take no action. The matter should have come on at a time when it could have been dealt with in more detail. As a result of what has become known <,.s the 'Oakes case', the unsatisfactory state of the law of precedent and practice and the law of privilege has received considerable prominence. The difficulties experienced by the Committee of Privileges are demonstrated by the fact that four reports are included in the report of the Committee of Privileges-a majority report and three dissenting reports. The first dissenting report was by the honourable member for Lalor (Mr Barry Jones) and myself. The honourable member for Lalor summarised our report in his speech on 29 October, but I consider it necessary to spend some time on the major objections that we found to the
procedures in privilege cases.
There are three such matters. Firstly, in practice the Committee of Privileges operates as a secret committee. This leads to the absurd situation where accused persons are informed that they are not allowed to communicate the substance of any cross-examination to their legal advisers. Such legal advisers are not present at the hearing but those appearing before the Committee are entitled to obtain legal advice outside the conduct of the Committee hearings. Clearly if people are to obtain any protection from such restricted legal advice they must be able to discuss the matters raised at the hearings with their legal adviser. In my view the absolute stupidity of the current procedures is starkly revealed when people who appear before the Committee are

informed that they cannot discuss the substance of any cross-examination undertaken at the hearing. If those appearing before the Committee comply with this ridiculous direction, it is almost impossible to comprehend what they do discuss with their legal advisers, apart from the obvious criticism of the procedures of the Committee. This matter would, of course, be overcome if they were entitled to full legal representation, and that is the second matter that I desire to deal with.
The denial of legal representation in hearings before the Committee is a matter which should cause all members grave concern. The majority report does indicate the problems experienced by the Committee in the Oakes case and has clearly placed those matters before this Parliament for consideration by a joint committee. However, the majority report, while recognising the need for review and reform on the issue of legal representation, does not make a specific finding. We consider that the right of legal representation is so fundamental that it was necessary to state clearly in a dissenting report that a person appearing before the Committee is entitled to full. legal representation.
A considerable amount of the time of the Committee was spent on the issue of whether Mr Wylie, the editor of the Daily Mirror, was entitled to legal representation. The Committee allowed Mr T. E. F. Hughes, QC. and Mr N. R. Carson to argue the right to appear for Mr Wylie, and Mr Hughes addressed the Committee on 21 September. But the Committee determined that the application for counsel to appear generally on behalf of Mr Wylie is not granted. It is important to determine why the Committee took the decision not to grant legal representation to Mr Wylie. A memorandum from the Clerk of the House advised the Committee as follows:
Persons accused of breaches of privileges or of other contempts of either House are not as a rule allowed to be defended by counsel: But in a few cases incriminated persons have been allowed to be heard by counsel, the hearing being sometimes limited to 'such points as do not controvert the privileges of the House'.
Considerable debate took place in relation to this matter as it will be noted that the advice stated that in a few cases incriminated persons have been allowed to be heard by counsel, the hearing being sometimes limited to such points as do not controvert the privileges of the House. The Committee decided that representation was limited to arguing the right to be heard, which would of course be denied, and possibly on the question of penalty. Apart from the fact that representation has not been permitted before the House of Commons Privileges Committee during the hearing of evidence since the I 770s, a precedent followed by

Privilege

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3081

this House, there is no reason to deny legal representation.
For this Parliament in 1981 to follow precedents set in England in the 1770s is absolute stupidity. The relevance of procedures established by the House of Commons in the 1770s totally escapes me and I hope that its irrelevance will be accepted by the members of this House. It is worth noting that we are pinned down in this matter by archaic precedents established in England in a period when slavery still existed. It was not until Lord Mansfield's judgment in Somerset's case in 1772 that slavery was declared illegal. Civil liberties as practised in England in that period of history is dramatically illustrated by the methods used for the establishment of the colony of New South Wales. Yet this Parliament is still wallowing in precedents of that period in a pathetic attempt to justify denying the fundamental right of an accused person to have legal representation, a right which every member of this Parliament would demand for himself or herself and I hope, for all other Australians save and accept, on our present standards, a person who has injured the dignity of the members of this House. The present situation of denying legal representation to those accused by us is an outrage and this Parliament cannot continue to deny such a fundamental right to those accused by it.
Thirdly, there is a crucial issue of Parliament acting as prosecutor and judge, that is, acting as judge in its own cause. In the Oakes case, it is a matter for regret that our privilege law did not enable you, Mr Speaker, to dispose of the matter summarily by rejecting the accuracy of the article and declaring that the matter was not worthy of further occupying the time of the House.
The law of parliamentary privilege is to protect the institution of Parliament, and I quote from the memorandum prepared by the Clerk of the House at page 69 of the report under the heading 'Contempt in General' from May's Parliamentary Practice, 19th edition, page 136, as follows:
It may be stated generally that any act or omission which obstructs or impedes either House of Parliament in the performance of its functions, or which obstructs or impedes any member or officer of such House in the discharge of his duty, or which has a tendency, directly or indirectly, to produce such results may be treated as a contempt even though there is no precedent of the offence.
It is this type of contempt that should concern the Parliament, while instances of vulgar abuse such as the Oakes article should be disposed of summarily. However, in accordance with modern principles of justice it is our view that the power to punish for contempt should be removed from the Parliament and transferred to a court. It is

fundamental that the victims cannot also take the roles of prosecutor and judges. This is not a new concept. In 1908 a joint select committee on procedure in cases of privilege chaired by Sir John Quick recommended the transfer of jurisdiction to a court. No further action was taken until 1934 when a draft Bill dealing with offences against the Parliament was prepared but never presented to the Parliament.
Members of this Parliament have an obligation to act on the issues raised in the report of the Committee of Privileges and the dissenting reports. In particular the issues of secrecy, legal representation and removal of the power to punish being transferred from this Parliament to a court are crucial issues if the law of privilege is to be taken seriously.
I am pleased that the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman) has come into the House. Before finishing my remarks I think it is necessary to deal briefly with the matters raised in this debate on 29 Oct.ober by the Minister for the Capital Territory who came into this House parading as the great defender of civil liberties. Despite his dramatic and pompous presentation of his own defence, it was most unconvincing. It was pleasing to learn that the Minister advocates full rights of legal representation as that view was not evident during the hearing of the Oakes case. It should be noted that it was the same Minister for the Capital Territory who, at the fourth meeting of the Committee on 21 September 1981 as reported on page 55 of the report, moved that the application by Mr Wylie for legal representation could not be granted and he subsequently supported the amendment which said in effect that the application is not granted.
As indicated earlier this was a matter which caused grave concern to the Committee. It was the issue which caused the member for Hawker (Mr Jacobi) to move the motion, as reported on page 55 of the report, 'That the Committee adjourn its proceedings at this point to seek a directive from the House of Representatives as to whether witnesses should be entitled to be represented by counsel in this particular case'. This motion was moved by the honourable member for Hawker because he was concerned that the Committee was bound by precedents set before the establishment of the colony of New South Wales. It would have been better for the Minister for the Capital Territory to have suppoted a reference to the Holise on this issue as moved by the honourable member for Hawker rather than hide behind archaic precedents to justify his view that representation could not be

3082 REPRESENTATIVES 19 November 1981

Special Adjournment

granted to Mr Wylie and his support of the subsequent amendment that representation be not granted. The attempt of the Minister to whitewash himself and blame members of the Committee for defects in the procedures to be followed by it was a sickening performance.
The establishment of the joint committee to examine all aspects of parliamentary privilege must now be given the urgent attention of this Parliament. It is a matter which 73 years ago caused the Quick Committee to call for reform and it is a disgrace that we have failed to reform procedures established more than 200 years ago.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) agreed to:
That leave of absence be given to every member of the House of Representatives from the determination of this sitting of the House to the date of its next sitting.
SPECIAL ADJOURNMENT Valedictory
Motion (by Mr Sinclair) proposed:
That the House, at its rising. adjourn until Tuesday, 16 February 1982, at 1.45 p.m., unless otherwise called together by Mr Speaker or, in the event of Mr Speaker being unavailable, by the Chairman of Committees.
Thursday, 19 November 1981
Mr MALCOLM FRASER (Wannon-Prime Minister) (12 midnight)-We come to the end of the parliamentary year for the House of Representatives.
Mr Sinclair-It took a long while to get there.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-It might have taken a long while to get there but we got there a little quicker than on other occasions. I think it is important that on these occasions we pay some tribute to those who in unseen and often unheard ways make the working of the Parliament possible. This is the most important institution in the country. We need to understand that the workings of the Parliament are not made possible just by politicians and Ministers but by all those who service this building in many ways and with a great and sincere dedication.
Before we leave the House for 1981 I would like to place on record also my appreciation of the work. done by all of those who serve the Parliament. There is the work that you have done, Mr Speaker. The Speaker's role is important. The proper sense of its dignity which you bring is very valuable to this House, especially at those times when members of the House forget in one way or

another the sense of dignity that they ought to bring to it. Your humour, your understanding and your patience are, I believe, appreciated by all members of the House, no matter what some members of the House might say at odd moments. The Chairman of Committees, the honourable member for Wide Bay (Mr Millar) and his deputy chairmen have also a key role in getting through the business of the House. The Clerk of the House and his officers are vital in the smooth running of the House and in being able to give advice to you, Mr Speaker, to your Deputy or to the deputy chairmen. We thank them for the work that they have done over the past year. Their work is in the high traditions of the Parliament and we thank them for it.
I refer to the Principal Parliamentary Reporter and his staff. Those of us who have been here a number of years will have noticed the change in his staff over the years. This is just part of a changing scene in Australia. Hansard has a critical role in giving the words of honourable members their true and proper sense. I can remember the occasion when the Honourable Norman Makin once made a speech saying that he objected to the way in which Hansard altered his words and altered the sense and the meaning of what he had to say. He objected to the way in which Hansard reporters thought they knew better than he did himself what he was trying to say. He made quite a long speech pleading that he just be reported precisely and accurately as he spoke, with no editing, no punctuation other than that which was plain from hisspoken words. Well, Hansard answered that accurately and precisely. The next time he made a 30 or 40 minute speech-speeches were a little longer in those days-his speech was all one sentence, without any punctuation, without any full stop at the end. I think after that even Norman Makin accepted that Hansard had a role to play in putting our speeches into good order. Mostly the Hansard staff do it without changing the sense. On very rare occasions there is a slight modification to the sense and that can be corrected if there is a need to.
The capacity of the Parliamentary Librarian and his staff to marshal information to assist members of parliament is very significant. The staff of the Table Office deals efficiently with a very large volume of requests. The Parliamentary Liaison Officer works closely with both sides of the House to make sure that the business of the House runs smoothly. The Parliamentary Counsel and his staff give legal expression to practical proposals. It is to be hoped they do it in ways that make plain the meaning of the laws that we intend

Special Adjournment

19 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3083

to pass and that do not unnecessarily lead to questioning in the courts of the laws that we pass. Th.ere are those who look after our everyday reqUIrements courteously and efficiently. We in this place are indeed well looked after. There is a degree of dedication in all the staff in this building. I think that that is impressive.
I would like also to thank all members of the Ministry and their departments and staffs because they have displayed a great commitment to their tasks over the course of the last year. The issues and the volume of business that have been handled is impressive and much larger than would have been the case in earlier years. The Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) has moved through the business of the House smoothly and efficiently, making possible an earlier adjournment of the House than I suspect he might in his own heart truly wish. I sometimes suspect that the Leader of the House would like to be sitting here on Christmas Eve, Christmas Day and Boxing Day. All congratulations go to him for getting us up while it is still November. The Whips, members of the Government parties and their staffs also obviously have a significant role to play in the smooth running of the Parliament, as do the members of the Opposition, their Whips and all who go with them. They are all very much a part of this building and the effective representation of the constituents of each of the members of this Parliament-all the people of Australia. They all make a contribution to the debates and to the workings of the Parliament. I do not want to say much else.
Mr Hurford-Hear, hear!
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-Mr Speaker, the honourable member is not even in his place. He is a stranger in some place where he is not meant to be sitting. I think we can leave this place knowing that ~ 981 has been a good year for Australia, knowmg that the country has moved ahead. In case members of the Opposition are now feeling slightly nervous, I can assure them that I will not read out for 40 minutes the record of this Government, as one of my predecessors read the record of his Government, because I know the record of this Government is well understood and appreciated and it does not need emphasising at this rather late hour on this particular day. I suspect that it is not exactly a rest that lies ahead-- .
Mr Armitage-Stop twitching.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-There is an honourable member whose resignation lies ahead of him very soon. I suppose the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) will go to the Sinai

and the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) will go with him.
Government members-Ha, Ha!
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-That was a serious comment.
Mr Hawke-Margaret hasn't told you yet whether you are going.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-I know what is going to happen. I would like to thank the honourable member for Wills for his commitment to argue the cause of Australian participation, if it should prove necessary. I thought that was a generous statement after his earlier speeches. I would like to offer all members of this House and their families, all those who serve the Parliament, including the Clerks and those who attend to the daily needs of the members and who make the wor~ings of the whole building possible, a happy Chnstmas and a prosperous New Year. I wish them all a happy time over the holiday period. I would like to give special thanks to those members of the Government parties who have supported me and the Government over the last year. I wish the Opposition all good fortune in' the period ahead of it and wish each of its members a long life in the ranks of the Opposition.
Even though Gordon Pike will be here when we come back, I would like to thank him in particular for the work that he has done for many members of parliament over a very long period. He will be remembered for the many services that he has provided .to members of parliament over many years. I do not know how many years it is.
Mr Armitage-,-Forty-two years.
Mr MALCOLM FRASER-It is 42 years. That must be the only accurate thing that the honourable gentleman has said in this House. My acknowledgment that the honoUl:able member could say something accurate is possibly the most charitable remark I have made in the whole year.
Mr HAYDEN (Oxley-Leader of the Opposition) (12.11 a.m)-I join in the convention which has been acknowledged by the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) of conveying seasonal greetings to a range of people who servi~e this House and, of course, of expressing goodwill generally. Thank goodness there is one day in every 12 months when this takes place, and with some felicity. For my part, it is a great honour to serve in this Parliament.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-We have been talking quite a lot lately. It is not just one day.
Mr HAYDEN-I must say that the familiarity and the geniality with which the Prime Minister has been treating me at Question Time have done

3084 REPRESENTATIVES 19 November 1981

Special Adjournment

me a great deal of harm in my own party. I wish that he would stop.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-Mr Speaker, I can afford to do it now that the honourable gentleman's position is secure.
Mr HAYDEN-It may well be true, as the Prime Minister observed earlier, that the honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) and I will be going to the Sinai together. The Prime Minister's problem is that he cannot find anyone to go to the barricades with him. As I was saying, it is a great honour to serve in this Parliament and a great privilege to serve the people of this community. There are many trials and tribulations for all of us. Many problems confront us in the nature of the service that we seek to discharge as members of parliament, but it is a very satisfying service because it allows us to make some contribution in one way or another to the community.
In that respect, I note that the Prime Minister was being extraordinarily unfair to the honourable or, I suppose it is, right honourable-to what extent he is often right and, even less, to what extent he is honourable is a matter of dispute-the Minister for the Capital Territory (Mr Hodgman). I thought it was very harsh and cruel to discriminate against him. The Prime Minister said that the people who were unseen and unheard made the workings of the Parliament possible. I would have thought that the Minister for the Capital Territory made some contribution but one could never say that he was unseen and, least of all, that he was unheard. The Prime Minister said that on this occasion he would be merciful and not subject us to a 40-minute recantation of the record of Government in the past 12 months. We would have welcomed even four minutes of recantation of the record of the Government in the last 12 months. It is a record about which the Australian public deserves to be reminded. The occasion is such that I shall not explore that point further.
As this is a moment of good will, I turn to you, Mr Speaker. You are a man who is loved by all but who, perhaps, is frequently not appreciated. We are disappointed to hear that you are probably about to depart from this chamber to take up an appointment in the service of the community in the State of Victofia on behalf of Her Majesty. We wish you God speed and happy service in that part of Australia. It is not an easy task for you to serve the Parliament. I take the opportunity, should the report that we see in the newspapers be an accurate one and should the appointment take place before. Parliament resumes, of wishing you

well there. Apparently the newspaper reports may be correct.
Mr N. A. Brown-You are a bit behind in the news.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-It has been announced.
Mr HAYDEN-Has it really?
Mr Malcolm Fraser-Yes.
Mr HAYDEN-Oh my God, Mr Speaker, you missed out! I have to say that I am not so happy now that I have found that you have missed out. Once again Malcolm Fraser has let you down. You cannot rely on him. We commend the Hansard staff for the valuable contribution they make here in dissecting, faceting and polishing the priceless gems which we toss their way. Those gems must make their task much easier. The Clerks, of course, we respect highly. Their diaries of the indiscretions of members of parliament are something that they discreetly ensure are never presented to public life. For that we are eternally thankful.
It is, I repeat, a privilege to serve in this Parliament. It is sometimes a test of one's fortitude and even more of one's good will and, I suppose, common.Christian values for those among us who are Chri~tians, and for those of us, like myself, who are humanists our humanist values to serve here. For all that I am pleased to have completed my twentieth year in an environment which is always challenging, which is always stimulating and I trust one in which we all seek to the best of our abilities to make a constructive contribution. We are, as the Prime Minister commented, greatly improved in the work we seek to do by the myriad of people who work in this chamber, outside the chamber supporting the people in it and those behind them in places like the Parliamentary Library, which in my view constitutes the sinews and the sort of arterial system that allows Parliament to function properly. I reciprocate the seasonal greetings that the Prime Minister expressed. I reciprocate them in particular in respect of honourable members on the Government side. I sincerely trusUhey have enjoyed the past 12 months in government. The period ahead of them in government is extremely limited. We can assure them that the cushions on this side of the House are waiting to welcome them in the very near future.
Mr ANTHONY (Richmond-Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Trade and Resources) (12.17 a.m.)-I would like to join the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) and the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) in using this occasion while there is a ceasefire to extend cordial

Special Adjournment

19 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3085

seasonal greetings to all members of this chamber. I wish them a very happy Christmas and a very good New Year. We have performed this little ceremony on many occasions over the years. I suppose to some people it may seem a repetition of expressing appreciation to the many people who make this Parliament perform and fulfil its functions. But all those people give of their very best and so many of them are absolutely devoted to their cause.
I thank the members of this House for their very assiduous work within the chamber and on the committees in seeing that the functions of our national Parliament are fully performed. Of course this year we have had a good many new members come into this chamber. For them it is a unique experience. There is nothing like your first year in Parliament. It is always a bit strange. But I hope that those who have come here this year will by the end of the year be starting to settle down and will realise that there are certain values. I hope as the days go by they will live up to those values and try to sustain them because if we do not as a group sustain them then the place will fall apart. With those new members we have had the addition of three women to this chamber. Of course that is a great novelty because it is many years since we have had any ladies here. I think it has been very difficult for most of us to refer to them as honourable members rather than honourable gentlemen but we are learning and amending our ways, especially you, Mr Speaker. I notice that you do not make many errors in that respect now. I think the addition of the ladies to the chamber has made a marked improvement to the behaviour of us all. I think we have behaved better this year than we have behaved for many years, and no doubt it is because of the ladies.
Apart from the achievements of getting legislation through, time has been spent during the year in expressing our condolences to members of the Parliament who have passed away. During this year two members of the Parliament diedour colleague Eric Robinson and Senator John Knight. Everyone here would like to say that they will be thinking of those families during this Christmas which will be a particularly sad time for them. I will be thinking of them and I am sure everybody else will. Family life is the hardest part of being a member of parliament. It imposes an enormous strain on one's wife and one's children, particularly in these circumstances.
Mr Hayden-We, too, sympathise with Margot.
Mr ANTHONY-I sympathise very much with your wife, Bill. Mr Speaker, I also express

appreciation to you for your unfailing patience and forbearance with the members of this chamber and, I suppose, myself. You have done a very distinguished job, as you normally do. I thank you, the Chairman of Committees and his deputies, the Clerks, the Serjeant-at-Arms, the parliamentary attendants-a multitude of people-and the people up in the Australian Broadcasting Commission who spread our good messages around Australia. I thank them. I thank the members of the Hansard staff who do a remarkable job, as the Prime Minister (Mr Malcolm Fraser) mentioned, in making our speeches legible and intelligent. I thank them very much. I also thank the Parliamentary Library and people like that wonderful institution, Gordon Pike, for whom we all have affection and great respect. It goes further afield. I would even like to pay a tribute to the gardeners around Parliament House. I think that they do a tremendous job. I doubt whether anywhere in Australia there is a finer display of roses at the moment than in the parliarnentary gardens. The honourable member for Wills (Mr Hawke) makes a few comments. We have some finer feelings on this side of the House. It is on occasions like this that we like to display them. The Opposition thinks it has a monopoly even on the roses. I assure it that it has not. Rather than take up the time of the House I again express Christmas greetings to everybody. I hope they re'turn to this Parliament in 1982 in the very best of health having had time to do their electoral chores and also to get themselves fit for another vigorous year of parliamentary activities.
Mr SPEAKER-I would like to make a couple of points. Firstly, I thank the Leader of the Opposition (Mr Hayden) for his good wishes to me! Although the patience required from the Chair can be relaxed on this occasion, I must say to the Leader of the Opposition that the dignity of the place is not added to by the lack of sincerity in what he said. The other point I wish to make is that if one speaks of the dignity of the House, one must look at the commencement of the day's sitting. We have petitions presented and the petitions usually last for 10 or more minutes. In the course of that 10 or more minutes it is natural that honourable members preparing for the day's proceedings talk to each other and the level of conversation in the chamber is very high. It is obvious that the petitions are not being listened to. I think that the Leader of the House (Mr Sinclair) ought to take action for the House to consider the way in which it ought to dispose of the issue of petitions and not submit the petitions to lack of consideration or the House to lack of dignity.

3086 REPRESENTATIVES 19 November 1981

Special Adjournment

The next point I wish to make is that almost all of the members on occasions hear extracts. from the House of Commons in Westminster, and on occasions even from the United States House of Representatives or from the Canadian House of Commons. It is not possible for the radio media in Australia to play extracts from this chamber. I think that is a matter which should be corrected. My observation, or my hearing of what has been done by the radio stations, is that there is a great deal of responsibility in ~he way those extracts are presented.
The next point I wish to make is that from my observation the commencement time of the House of Representatives, 1.45 p.m., is a great difficulty not only for honourable members but also for staff. I hope there will be a change in that commencement time which, I am sure, will enable honourable members to conduct their business in the mornings. As we all know, the mornings are fully occupied by us all. Finally, I wish to take the opportunity of saying that a man I have known for the period I have been in Parliament is about to retire. He is Mr Wally Sharpe, a driver who may be known to honourable members. He is about to retire after almost 50 years' service. He will retire before we come back. I join in the general good wishes to all honourable members. I hope they will have a very enjoyable Christmas period with their families. I hope the break will be very good for them all and that we can come back in February with a great deal of compassion and good will, one to the other.
Question resolved in the affirmative.
House adjourned at 12.27 a.m. (Thursday) until Tuesday, 16 February 1982, at 1.45 p.m., unless otherwise called together by Mr Speaker or, in the event of Mr Speaker being unavailable, by the Chairman of Committees.
NOTICE
The following notice was given:
Mr Porter to move-
That this House-
(I) affirms that decisions about the functions to be performed by a Department of State and the number of people to be employed are decisions for government, not unions or individual employees;
(2) affirms that taxpayers are entitled to have the public servants they employ carry out the work they are employed to do;
(3) deplores the use of bans and disruptive procedures by the Administrative and Clerical Officers Association as an industrial weapon to interfere with the processing of pensions and benefits in the Department of Social Security thereby threatening the welfare of pensioners and beneficiaries, and
(4) calls on the ACOA to lift the bans without delay.

PAPERS
The following papers were deemed to have been presented on 18 November 1981, pursuant to statute:
Australian Capital Territory Supreme Court Act-Rules of Court-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 323.
Customs Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 324.
Dried Fruits Levy Act-Regulation-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 326.
Health Insurance Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981,No.327.
International Organizations (Privileges and Immunities) Act-Regulations-Statutory Rules 1981, No. 325.
Seat of Government (Administration) ActOrdinances-1981-
No. 41-Hawkers (Amendment). No. 42-Leases (Special Purposes) (Amendment). Regu lations-1981No. 24-(Motor Traffic Ordinance).
REPLIES TO REQUESTS FOR DETAILED INFORMATION
Department of the Parliamentary Library
On 20 October 1981, Mr John Brown asked Mr Speaker:
(I) Is it a fact that (a) 104 full-time staff ceased duty in the Parliamentary Library over the 3-year period 1975-77 and (b) the corresponding figure for the years 1978-80 was 148; if so, does this represent an increase of 42%.
(2) On what date did Mr Harold Gibson Weir (a) commence duty as a 2nd Division Officer of the Parliamentary Library and (b) become Parliamentary Librarian.
(3) Does the increase in separations since 1978 pose a serious problem for the Library in terms of maintenance of efficiency and morale.
(4) What reasons are there for the accelerated separation rate.
(5) What action (a) has been taken and (b) is planned to reduce the separation rate to a more tolerable level.
Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) (a) August 1976, (b) August 1978.
(3) Separations arise for a number of reasons but a principal factor is career opportunity. For example, a study conducted in December 1980 of all separations of permanent officers from the Legislative Research Service for the period January 1970-December 1980 indicated that, given the limited promotion opportunities within that Service, many officers regarded employment within the Department as a stage in a general Public Service career. Of the 50 separations in that period, 31 officers transferred or were promoted to other Departments or authorities, while 16 resigned to take appointments in private industry, academic institutions and so on. There were 3 separations for other reasons, e.g. retirement, death. Over the same period, 27 officers transferred into or were promoted to the Legislative Research Service, while 23 were recruited from private industry, academic institutions etc.
Separations cause concern because of limited staffing and existing workloads and because of the delays and expense involved in filling vacancies. As such these can reflect on both efficiency and morale.

Repliesfor Detailed Information

19 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3087

(4) No study has been conducted on a Department wide' basis. However the above study showed that improved employment prospects for economists particularly and lawyers were an influential factor in total separations between 1977 and December 1980. The difficulties experienced in attracting replacement staff bear out this conclusion.
(5) (a) and (b) The matter has been under study and plans have been made for separation interviews to take place in order to provide necessary information. However, a high separation rate appears inevitable given the existing career opportunities.
Department of the Parliamentary Library
On 20 October 1981, Mr Kerin asked Mr Speaker:
(I) Who instituted the practice of including in answers to Requests for Detailed Information relating to the administration of the Parliamentary Departments the amount of time taken to prepare the answer.
(I) Is the intent of this practice to discourage the asking of these questions; if not, what is the reason for this practice.
(3) Will he issue an instruction that the practice is to cease; if not, why not.
(4) Is it the right of all Members to ask Requests for Detailed Information without reservation or exception; if not, why not.
Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The practice was instituted by Mr President and myself as Presiding Officers in May 1981 in respect 'of the Department of the Parliamentary Library.
(2) No. The intention is to provide information concerning the amount of staff time taken to prepare answers. The practice is consistent with that already in existence for other client services of the Library.
(3) No. See (2) above.
(4) Yes.
Department of the Parliamentary Library
On 20 October 1981, Mrs Child asked Mr Speaker:
(I) Was finance provided in the 1981-82 Budget for the acquisition of an additional word-processing unit for the Parliamentary Library.
(2) Who made the decision to acquire this unit and what is iis cost.
(3) Which (a) section and (b) officers of the Library will be using this unit.
(4) What studies have been carried out to ensure the (a) cost efficiency of the unit for its purpose and (b) safety of the unit for the operators.
(5) Who carried out these studies and when were they carried out.
(6) Have the persons intended to operate the unit been (a) advised of this intention, (b) consulted as to (i) the practicality of the unit's use in the intended area and (ii) the unit's safety; if not, why not.
Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) $11,000 was allocated for purchase of word processing equipment for 1981-82 financial year.

(2) The then Parliamentary Librarian decided in the context of Departmen'tal developments in 1981-82 that additional word processing capacity in the Department was desirable and should be provided for in the Estimates. An additional machine will cost approximately $11,000.
(3) (a) and (b) Yet to be determined. Areas requiring word processing capacity include the Technical Services Section, Current Information Section-Transcript Service and the Office of the Parliamentary Librarian.
(4) (a) Cost efficiency studies were carried out prior to the acquisition of the first units by the Department in 1978. In work involving high levels of text editing or repetitive typing, word processors have reduced typist tedium and mistakes and have increased productivity.
(b) Operator safety has been discussed with appropriate sectors of the Public Service Board and their advisers and with union officials. Current reports published in the literature from time to time are also monitored. The Department believes that the units are safe for normal operation.
(5) (a) Members of Library staff in consultation with an officer of the Public Service Board.
(b) Both the APSA and Public Service Board advisers have the results of a number of studies relating to the safety of computer related screens reported in recent years.
(6) (a) and (b) General discussions have taken place but until a decision is made concerning the location of an additional machine specific considerations are delayed.
Department of the Parliamentary Library
On 20 October 1981, Dr Blewett asked Mr Speaker:
(I) Who made the decision to acquire a telefacsimile machine for communication between the Parliamentary Library's Parliament House and former Hotel Kurrajong locations.
(2) What was the cost of this machine.
(3) Was the decision to buy the machine based on proposals to relocate (a) all or (b) part of the Legislative Research Service at the former Hotel Kurrajong; if not, on what was it based.
(4) Where are the 2 terminals for the machine located in Parliament House and the former Hotel Kurrajong.
(5) Who is responsible for the actual operation of the machine at each end.
(6) What is the estimated (a) number of sheets which will be transmitted each year and (b) annual operating cost, inclusive of materials, maintenance and staff time.
Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The decision to acquire a telefacsimile machine was made by the then Parliamentary Librarian and senior officers involved in preparing the Departmental estimates for 1981~82. This was as a result of an undertaking given to a Senate Sub-Committee earlier in the year which was inquiring into accommodation matters.
(2) $607 per month per machine.
(3) The decision to lease machines was based on two major consider a tions:
(i) A requirement to have high speed transfer of documents between Parliament House and the Hotel Kurrajong for the Statistics Group of the Legislative Research Service, Management Services Branch and Systems and Co-ordination Unit, which are all at the Kurrajong Annex.

3088 REPRESENTATIVES 19 November 1981

Replies for Detailed Information

(ii) For some years the Department and the Joint Standing Committee on the Library have been examining systems for high speed transmission of documents between Parliament House and Senators' or Members' electorate offices. Telefacsimile transmission appears to be the most suitable means for achieving this purpose. The present installation will be used to evaluate the suitability of such a service.
(4) The telefacsimile machines are located:
(i) Room Bl4-Hotel Kurrajong (ii) Photocopy area-Basement-Parliament House
(5) At Parliament House the staff in the photocopying area are responsible for sending and receiving copy. At the Kurrajong Annex the person sending the text is responsible for operating the machine.
(6) (a) Initially it is expected that the number of sheets to be transmitted will be moderate, with a rapid increase as the capability of the equipment becomes better known. The estimates for the first two years of operations are:
Year 1-5,000 sheets Year 2-8,000 sheets
(b)Machines-lease plus maintenance, $1214 per month. Consumables-of the order of $0.12 per sheet Staff time-of the order of 2-3 minutes per transaction,
i.e. $0.50 per transaction.
Consumable and staff time will, therefore, add approximately $3,000 to the machine cost in the first year of operation.
Department of the Parliamentary Library
On 28 October 1981, Mr Morris asked Mr Speaker:
(1) Who initiated the current User Needs Survey of Members and Senators which is being conducted on a random basis by the Parliamentary Library.
(2) Was there any consultation with client services staff in the preparation of this survey; if so, what are the details; if not, what is the reason.
(3) How many Members and Senators will be surveyed, who are they, and how were they chosen.
(4) What is the purpose of this survey and will it be a regular occurrence.
(5) Does the Survey specifically relate to current services offered by the Library.
(6) Will the expansion or contraction of existing client services, or the introduction of new services, depend on the results of this survey.
(7) What cognisance was taken of both the debate on the Library's appropriation in Senate Estimates Committee A, and the report of that Committee, in the preparation and conduct of this survey.
(8) Was the joint Library Committee consulted in the preparation of this Survey.
(9) Which Library staff members are responsible for (a) the conduct of the survey and (b) the analysis of its results.
(10) Will the results of this survey be made known; if so, in what form and to whom.
Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable members' question is as follows:
(1) The Head, Systems and Co-ordination Unit. The survey was initiated as a basis for considering improvements to existing systems and services.
(2) Yes. The HeaJ Librarian nominated staff from the Current Information Section and ALERT service to work on

a planning committee. Subsequently advice and assistance was received from the Statistics Group of the Legislative Research Service.
(3) Invitations to participate in the survey were sent to 60 Senators and Members. It is hoped that at least 40 will agree to be interviewed. They were chosen using a table of random numbers from a list of all Senators and Members excluding the Presiding Officers and Ministers. All other Senators and Members will receive a copy of the questions and will be asked to respond by mail. Thus all Senators and Members will be included. A list of the Senators and. Members invited to participate in interviews is held by the Acting Parliamentary Librarian.
(4) The purpose of the survey is to gather accurate data on the current information needs of Senators and Members for news information and current published material in those areas of public affairs in which they take a special interest and wish to keep up-to-date. Similar surveys have been conducted on two occasions in the past II years and may be conducted at periodic intervals in the future. Future surveys may also focus on different aspects of the Department's services.
(5) No. However, the survey is focused on client needs for current awareness services and selective dissemination of information services, both of which are partially covered by existing Library services and are named in the survey questions.
(6) The results of the survey will be used to seek to improve the effectiveness of Library services. The availability of resources will affect the rate or direction of change and other factors, for example, the relevance of new technology, will also be taken into account.
(7) Views expressed on the provision of news information services and current 1jwareness services were noted.
(8) No. Any proposals for changes or improvements to Library services resulting from the Survey would be referred to the Client Services Sub-Committee and then to the full Committee.
(9) (a) and (b) Officers from the Systems and Coordination Unit, Library, Reference and Information Services, Current Information Services and ALERT service.
(10) Yes. Initially in a report to Principal Officers which will subsequently be circulated to staff. See also the answer to Question 8.
Department of the Parliamentary Library
On 29 October 1981, Mr Holding asked Mr Speaker:
(I) With respect to the statement by the Leader of the Government in the Senate (Senate Hansard, 27 October 19in, page 1649) that the cut in the Parliamentary Library's funds is a matter for the Presiding Officers and the Joint House Department to determine what is done, can he state (a) for how long has it been the policy for the Joint House Department to determine internal matters of the Parliamentary Library or any other Parliamentary department, and (b) is this policy a result of recommendations in the Urwick Report.
(2) Are discussions currently proceeding for the amalgamation of the Departments of the Parliamentary Library, Parliamentary Reporting Staff and Joint House; if so, what are the details.
Mr Speaker-The answer to the honourable members' question is as follows:
(I) (a) and (b) There is no such policy.
(2) A meeting has been held with the Permanent Heads of the Parliamentary Departments. Details of that meeting are not available.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3089 AN~.wERS TO QUESTION~,

The following answers to questions were circulated:

Boeing 707 Aircraft: Communications Equipment
(Question No. 165)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 26 November 1980:
(I) Did he endorse supplementary information' supplied to House of Representatives Estimates Committee A (Estimaies Committees A and B Hansard, 25 September to 23 October 1979, page 472) that the two Boeing 707 aircraft used by the Prime Minister would be fitted with secure voice communications equipment during 1979-80; if so, has this fitting been completed.
(2) If the fitting of this equipment has been completed what was the cost of (a) supply and (b) installation in each aircraft, registered Nos. A20-624 and A20-627.
(3) If the fitting of the equipment has not been completed, (a) when will the installation be completed and (b) what is the anticipated cost of installation in each aircraft.
(4) Was this question first asked on 9 September 1980 and did it remain unanswered at the termination of the 31 st Parliament.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) My predecessor endorsed the supplementary information supplied to the House of Representatives Committee on 9 Novem ber 1979.
(2) and (3) The Department of Defence has advised that the installation of the communications equipment incorporating a secure teleprinter facility (in lieu of the secure voice facility originally proposed), to be carried out by Qantas, has not yet started due to components not being available but is expected to commence early next year although some items of equipment will still not be immediately available. It is anticipated that installation will be completed by April 1982.
The Secure Communications element within the project approval of $14.575m for acquisition of the two aircraft is estimated at $662,000.
(4) Yes.
Vietnam: Use of Herbicides and Pesticides
(Question No. 486)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 5 May 1981.
(I) Has his attention been drawn to an article headed 'KRIEGSRAISON GEHT VOR KRIEGSRECHT-The Cause of War goes before the Law of War' (Pacific Defelice Reporter, November 1980, pages 59 to 68).
(2) If so, did the use of herbicides and pesticides in Vietnam follow from the application of the doctrine of military necessity.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Detailed information on Australian use of herbicides and other pesticides in Vietnam is contained in papers I tabled

in the Parliament on 27 March 1980 and in a report coordinated by the Department of Health, entitled: 'Pesticides Used in Vietnam Hostilities and Their Use in Australian Agriculture: a Comparative Study', a copy of which has been placed in the Parliamentary Library.
Migrant and Visitors' Visas
(Question No. 2638)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) How many applications for migration to Australia, and from which countries, were received each year since 1978 and during the period I January to 9 June 1981.
(2) How many applications for visitors' visas were received for the same period.
(3) How many of the applications for (a) migration and (b) visitors' visas received in each country were (i) accepted and (ii) rejected.
(4) What were the major causes for rejecting applicants for (a) migrant and (b) visitors' visas in each country.
(5) What sum was raised through (a) migrant and (b) visitors' visas.
(6) How many persons were employed in (a) Australia and (b) each overseas country to deal exclusively with the (i) migrant and (ii) visitors' visa applications since 1978.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) See Table A.
(2) See Table B.
(3) (a) See Table A; (b) See Table B.
(4) (a) No register of the reasons for refusal of migrant entry applications is maintained.
However other statistics kept indicate that where applications are rejected prior to interview the reasons are usually because either applicants do not fall within one of the eligible categories or, if they do, they would obviously not be able to achieve sufficient points under NUMAS to justify the costs associated with further processing.
The main reason applications are rejected after interview are unacceptable occupational qualifications, unsatisfactory personal and/or settlement factors and failing to meet health or character requirements.
(b) No register of the reasons for refusal for visitor applications is maintained.
Most refusals are where officers are of the opinion that applicants do not intend a bona fide visit but rather intend to remain permanently in Australia. Some refusals are on character grounds.
(5) Neither the application for, nor the grant of, a visitor or migrant visa is subject to the payment of a fee.
(6) (a) (i) 64 persons, on average, were employed to deal exclusively with migrant visa applications.
(ii) 27 persons, on average, were employed to deal exclusively with visitor visa applications.
(b) Not available. The Department does not disaggregate workforce participation in work performed at overseas posts.

3090 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

TABLE A Applications for Permanent Settlement Received, Approveda'nd Refused 1978-79 to 1980-81

Applications received (Persons)

Applications approved (Persons)

Applications refused (Persons)

Country

1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980,81

United Kingdom
Ireland
Austria Belgium Bulgaria Cyprus Czechoslovakia
Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Italy Malta Netherlands, The Norway Poland Portugal
Romania Spain Sweden Switzerland USSR(a) Yugoslavia Arab Republic of Egypt B Iran Iraq Israel Kuwait Lebanon Libya Morocco Saudi Arabia Sudan Syria Turkey United Arab Emirates Canada US America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador
Jamaica Mexico Paraguay
Peru Uruguay Venezuela
Ethiopia Kenya Madagascar Malawi Mauritius Nigeria Seychelles South Africa Tanzania Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Bangladesh Burma China Hong Kong India Indonesia Japan

40,701 69,766 133,320 11,032

805 1,608 3,792

254

1,514 4,164 7,850(h) 444

55

437

693

38

21

13

15

12

639

294 2,016

298

8

16

555

5

590 1,326 2,155

139

658

727

576

136

2,888 3,470 4,792

413

4,942 9,626(c) 20,083 1,168

1,874 2,395 4,450

970

36

29

79

33

4

48

16

5,039 5,095 7,400 2,177

774 1,590 3,560

475

2,296 3,715 4,435 1,020

155

254

299

30

136

194

555

144

5,378 1,196 5,800

466

54

159

576

20

813 3,556 6,898

165

761

918 1,400

151

852 1,414 2,285

336

12

4

36

34

2,967 5,982 15,080 1,332

1,189 3,059 1,902

236

1,493

435

531

38

978

74

95

47(b) 27

290

441 (e)

132

5(e) 311

569

5

3,367 1,220 4,473

916

92

185

249

493

262

70

61

76

585(d) 303

966

66

2,786 1,615 39,586

692

2,196

2,415 2,996 4,355

857

3,767 6,624 9,075 1,285

5,683 2,908 2,475

828

158

128

91

5

1,105

597

834

97

3,173 2,427 3,236

621

680

716

719

77

304

194

246

33

97

135

192

19

12(c) 160

750

8

21

17

38

8

865

798 1,141

102

1,508 1,305

950

417

327

344

335

18

10

20

81

135

320

32

I

I

23

46

3

549 1,226 1,657

56

132

140

75(b)

5

107

139

312

23

6,646 6,789 8,839 3,253

114

100

14

16

5

44

110

174

37

1,879 2,058 3,159

571

103

55

151

40

3,475 1,063

305

62

617

704

730(c) 313

2,511 4,979 5,929 1,455

4,878 4,578 8,146

573

481 1,831

232

354

633

128

24,684 38,426 19,850

505

922

25

2,701(d) 3,452(h) 555

96

179

12

12

II

135

298

147

II

384

452

796

189

198

141

431

624

934 2,098

1,842 3,341 2,652

1,055 1,452

484

25

44

16

9

I

3,022 3,121

1,803

792 1,676

202

1,788 2,481

175

82

89

65

175

384

12

405 1,515 4,016

110

165

6

472

971

258

321

387

475

544

803

227

44

63

I

1,867 1,991

832

146

185

772

40

42

862

35

41

II(b) 22

71

60

23

48

756

652 2,205

3 41
I 92 992
819 1,818
564 21 81 490 57 9 31 30 10 160 275 29 6 47

12 37
II 94 1,057 87 1,152 2,460 391
9 67 357 57 48 70 293
I 116 776 17
2 48

38 316 1,332
808 1,192 4,859
83 1,120 1,674
256 ISS 52
402 1,158
56
33

7 230
4 51 3,319 5
II 561 26 82 461 2,437 578 299 149

222 5(b) 48
3,650
5 36 1,123 18 53 435(c) 2,291 684 1,116 425

16 621 131 46 1,889
14
95 659 45 2,610 174 1,207 3,795
22

13,807 27,681 177 1,228 819 1,824(h)
153 181

53 I 201 385 1,616
3,360 543

1,041
461 251 1,616 8,581 1,691

10 1,444
436 205 107
13 2,666
I 954 403 344

2 2,219
552 505 87
22 2,077
112 2,904
479 751

2,558 2,249
401
15 256 265 514
188 261 28 490 712
_.
1,191 3,025 2,248
76 477 2,308 377 III 72 109
13 512 1,025 160
5 48

8,704 1,248
320 428
2(b)
374 3,757
57 218 185 25 818 1,318 2,449 1,366 3,116 1,845
75 727 2,252 695 227 82 69 32 1,053 195 359
3 83

9 844 142
77 2,501
70 4 20 952 46 1,265 275 1,154 3,796 182 110

1,095 114(b) 114
3,475
2 75 1,408 98 186 39(c) 1,053 6,037 399 SO

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3091

Applicalions received (Peisons)

Applications approved (Persons) I',,~

Applicalions refused (Persons)

Counlry

1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

Korea
Malaysia Pakislan Philippines, The
Singapore Sri Lanka Thailand Fiji New Caledonia
New Zealand Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands Vanualu
All Counlries

I,OI3(c)

2,573

3,297

559

138

9,027 12,961

920

1,508

916

597

389

34

2,441

1,943

146

64

359

295

347

14

38

100

66

143,795 189,834

502

368

4,372

1,260

1,789

610

60

134

26,286

1,473

2,506

2,726(h) 604

546

941

218

206

216(r)

34

3,460

462

474

66

52

38

364

175

210

1,109

259

32(c)

14

23

100

67

26

377,844 39,314 63,093

96

115

426

1,788

1,002

1,824 2,447

249

198

32 277

3,145 10,179 9,527 14,607

642(h) 235

856 1,624(h)

168

507

317 342

14(r)

5

654

1,691

1,309 2,397

66

69

36

169

72

39

61

349

24 469

6(c)

5 12(c)

40

45

17

15

89,653 77,422 77.,830 123,169

(a) Processing carried oUI in Auslralia. (b) 6 monlhsonly. (c) 9monlhsonly.
(d) 10monlhsonly. (e) Excludes refugee processing. (f) 3 monlhs only. (g) 2 monlhs only. (h) II monlhs only. (i) Preliminary /igures for 1980-81.
(ii) The /igures exclude refugee applicalions processed by Ihe special refugee lask force in Malaysia, Thailand and Indonesia.
(iii) 'Application' means official applicalion form lodged. It does not include enquiries on any olher requesls aboul migraling 10 Auslralia. POlenlial applicanls may orten nOllodge a formal applicalion iflhey receive an informal unfavourable assessment allhe enquiry slage.
(iv) The number of migralion applicalions approved and rejecled in a parlicular period does nol necessarily relale 10 the number of applicalions lodged in that period. Applications lodged in a period may be approved in a laler period, and some approvals will relale 10 applications in previous periods.

TABLE B Visit Visa Applications-Visas Refused and Visas Issued, 1978-1981 (Persons)

Calender year 1978

Calender year 1979

Calender year 1980

Calender year 1981 (La June 30) (laLesl figures available)

Country in which applicaLion lodged

Applicalion Visas Visas AppJicalion Visas Visas Application Visas Visas Application Visas Visas

lodged rerused issued

lodged refused issued

lodged refused issued

lodged refused issued

Algeria
Arab Republic of Egypt Argentina
Austria Bahrain Bangladesh Belgium Brazil Bulgaria Burma
Canada Chile China, People's
Republic of
Czechoslovakia Denmark Eire Fiji Finland France German Democratic
Republic Germany, Federal
Republic of Ghana Greece Hong Kong Hungary India Indonesia Iran, Islamic Republic of
Iraq Israel Italy Jamaica

506 1,042 1,612
505 118 898 802 52
19 13,824
830

126 352

61 985

1,612

33 474

13 106

12 874

19 766

I

12

19

71 13,577

156 553

206 377 1,574 1,149 3,391 535 3,665

20 13 1,092
15 302

123 392 1,556 1,198 4,812 514 3,509

185

152

15,204
72 4,505 9,320
513 2,216
4,827 1,278
243 1,158 8,616
27

326
993 2,057
156 *411 *180
63 61 426
I

15,154
72 3,472 7,273
513 2,060 *4,054 *1,130
137 1,221 8,020
27

60 619 1,338 2,547 629 143 1,381 900
93 46 18,246 1,451

13

47

175 374

.112 1,223

14 2,531

36 574

7 136

16 1,338

13 869

46 66 17,928 163 1,269

516 445 2,024 1,802 5,957 590 5,915

21 I
22
10 1,024
7 147

416 461 2,005 2,178 5,526 578 5,430

191

180

29,550 67
5,142
10,909 724
2,705 *4,540
1,633
369 1,776 9,257
109

201
839 1,611
209 *355
973 103 217 427

27,049
67 4,162 9,259
722
2,496 *3,701
660 274 1,508 8,977
109

79 710 1,875 2,832 469 154 1,694 870 80 85 20,997 1,085

31

45

186 498

143 1,732

2,822

21 449

2 152

18 1,676

12 859

85 66 21,018 180 879

905 473 2,439 2,023 7,269 677 5,536

47 776 384
22 2,417 17 2,370 847 6,420 4 653 175 5,612

240

230

34,124
68 5,274 15,597
666 3,058 9,219
n.3. 315 1,853 10,322
95

219
810 1,916
374 461

31,710 68
4,199 14,281
666
2,680 8,758

101 201 246 1,570 343 10,084
95

51 304 1,202 1,109 352 141 878 496 54 42 9,852 352
418 169 1,007 1,019 3,579 338 2,785
108
14,867 41
1,970 8,431
245 1,603 5,134
*99 210 *706 4,521 54

28

23

160 246

42 1,160

15 1,094

3 342

35 106

10 875

10 486

23

4

42

32 9,764

29 323

85 440 148
II 996 I 1,130
577 3,327 I 333
99 2,572

84

125 14,335

48

245 1,759

737 8,242

245

139 1,452

283 4,752

*18 *30

89 120

*24 *657

107 4,440

I

54

3092 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Calender year 1978

Calender year 1979

Calender year 1980

Calender year 1981 (to June 30) (latest figures available)

Country in which application lodged

Application Visas Visas Application Visas Visas Application Visas Visas Application Visas Visas

lodged refused issued

lodged refused issued

lodged refused issued

lodged refused issued

Japan Kenya Korea, Republic of Kuwait Lao, Peoples Democratic
Republic of Lebanon Libya
Malaysia Malta Mexico Nauru Netherlands New Caledonia New Zealand Nigeria Pakistan Papua New Guinea Peru Philippines, The Poland Portugal Romania (a) Saudi Arabia Singapore Solomon Islands South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Syria Tanzania Thailand Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Turkey United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States of America Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics Vanuatu Venezuela Vietnam Western Samoa Yugoslavia Zambia Zimbabwe

19,792 1,162 746
867
6,815 840 497 576
9,784 7,045 7,467
054 481 3,182
73 2,790
861 343 133 0764 8,650 412 6,390 538 608 2,994 3,840 144 146 3,129
115 363 n.3. 75,269 59,867
1,238 731
0;3.
152 4,960

77 19,663 II 1,148 32 738

25,650 1,203
949 293

56 25,520 10 1,213 9 949 19 287

28,672 1,183 1,078 419

13 30,270 59 1,128 68 1,003 36 369

16,395
465 569 231

6 15,719
21 445 24 545
17 189

399 357

609 52
17 48 56 388 1 123 50 13 382 16 78
381 496
3 255 27 73 23 39 69
I 162

6,039 788
477 559 9,983
6,978 6,938
51 304 3,169
61 2,203
744 183
13 420 8,154
405 6,026
511 534 2,933
3,620
63 147 2,679

115 145 218

595 69,747 213 58,627

1,012 56
7,455 993 641 766
14,792 7,503 7,234
194 514 4,427 211 3,789 1,169 346 258 643 9,712 513 8,110 693 769 3,933 5,895 395 143 3,585
673 nil 111,137 73,16Q

4 352
10 46

1,067 255 603

136

67

69

575 6,792

11,910 709

53 940

967

31

I 625 766

838

845

5

82 14,830 16,514

55

29 7,474

8,091

43

255 6,925

8,699 243

5 190

297

2

153 289

447 159

303 4,281

4,680 183

23 193

241

20

492 3,212

4,789 838

45 1,000

1,179

38

105 203

268

74

206

78 575

1,132

71

116 9,926

14,439 324

8 507

577

9

143 7,948

9,074 147

30 663

809

31

106 647

907

75

29 3,852

5,053

48

27 5,611

7,086

22

256 201

410 213

143

175

155 2,992

4,761

207

included with Fiji

post closed

331 342

1,395 618

365

33

437 103,242 110,827 303

266 71,331

82,813 272

11,133 931 838 847
16,476 8,116 8,365
295 287 4,421 211 3,951 1,111 196 22 1,067 13,935 568 8,915 766 825 4,973 6,734 188 175 3,913
778 325 97,903 82,746

388

68 248

Figures included

with Italy

*4,908 271 *4,637

277

II 264

463

33 430

*242

*.. *242

6,867

17 6,440

3,753

10 3,743

*4,261 53 6,547

*36

*36

290

87 203

4,076 "108 2,493

222

20 199

3,078 265 2,821

934

62 820

146

53

96

116

2

32

697

41 656

7,896 132 7,750

222

2 222

4,780

52 4,740

383

26 357

477

10 455

2,080

6 2,066

3,245

II 2,980

168

61

98

*18

*.. *18

2,736 142 2,346

1,503
357 50,735
*39,579

844 672 37 295 165 43,679
*76 *39,508

577

1,452

6 654

826

4 547

6 722

849

3 847

693

22 692

included with Chile

n.a.

n.3.

2 162

77

1 0365

512

512

543 3,419

6,828 614 5,326

5,386 498 5,132

included with Tanzania

71

71

included with South Africa (applications processed in Pretoria)

527 285 541
n.3. 132 2,506 99

5 178 3 283 55 478

132

232 2,107

7

80

 Incomplete figures.
(a) Romania: Cases processed in Australian Embassy, Belgrade, but visas issued by other posts, mainly by British Embassy, Bucharest.
Note: The numbers of persons refused or granted visas in a particular period do not necessarily relate to the numbers of persons lodging applications in the same period, as some decisions in a period relate to applications lodged in earlier periods.

Illegal Entry to Australia
(Question No. 2643)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) Is his Department conducting an inquiry into allegations that many South Koreans have entered Australia illegally; if so, has the inquiry been completed.
(2) If the inquiry has been completed do the results show that South Koreans were being employed in Australia in crafts in which they had no proper qualifications to undertake.
(3) What action has been taken against persons found to be entering Australia illegrlly and/or against those who supplied any false documents to assist their entry.

Mr Macphee-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(1) The Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs began investigations some time ago. In the light of evidence that some South Korean nationals had, through false representations, obtained visas to travel to Australia and that some, when in Australia had obtained residence by false representations, the investigation was continued by the Australian Federal Police. I understand that the Police investigations are virtually completed but that some action as a result of those investigations remains to be taken.
(2) The investigations revealed that some people did not take up employment in the field in which they claimed trade qualifications. More detailed investigations revealed that in some cases those persons did not in fact possess qualifications

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3093

which would permit them to operate within the claimed trade or craft.

(3) Generally the investigations revealed that proper entry and residence permits had been issued although some of them
had been obtained through the use of supporting documents which were false.

As a result of Australian Federal Police inquiries within Australia a number of persons have been charged with offences and it is expected that (a) further charge(s) will be laid.

One of the prosecutions has resulted in a guilty plea and has

been referred to the District Court Sydney for sentence on a

date yet to be established.

.

The immigration status of persons who obtained visas and entry permits by false representations will be considered individually.

Some of the persons concerned were applicants under the recent Regularisation of Status Program and these are being'
considered within the spirit of that Program.

National Crimes Commission
(Question No. 3111)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
(I) Further to my call for the urgent establishment of a National Crimes Commission, has the Attorney-General's attention been drawn to a recent Press article relating to statements made by Mr Fred Sylvester, Director of the Australian Bureau of Criminal Intelligence, stating that (a) petty jealousies between State Police forces were allowing organised crime to gain an increasing national foothold, (b) he had recommended to the Royal Commission the establishment of a Federal Crime Commission, wider powers for his own organisation and more contact with overseas drug and intelligence agencies to allow the Australian Federal Police to fight entrenched organised crime effectively, and (c) organised crime had spread throughout Australia and no individual State could control it.
(2) If so, is the Attorney-General sympathetic to these submissions and will he reconsider my repeated request and take immediate steps to implement the detailed recommendations for a Crimes Commission which have been published by the Australian Institute of Criminology and which would incorporate not merely the need for investigation into scandals of this kind but the more practical planning ahead through economic and social measures to reduce the opportunities for organised and white collar crime.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answers to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(I) A number of the Press reports of the statements referred to in the honourable member's question have been drawn to my attention.
(2) As the Attorney-General informed the honourable member earlier this year in reply to Question No. 174 which raised the same point, the Government does not propose to establish a National Crimes Commission in relation to organised crime but rather to tackle identified problems in the area of organised crime with selective investigative machinery, involving the State Governments as appropriate. For example, the Government, in conjunction with the Governments of the States of New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland recently appointed Mr Justice Stewart to be a Royal Commissioner to inquire into a number of matters including the activities of Terrence John Clark and person associated with him and whether those activities involved a

contravention of laws of the Commonwealth relating to the importation or possession of drugs. Subsequent events have not provided any reason for the Government to change its views on this matter.
Another major initiative in the area of combating organised crime has been the establishment by the Commonwealth and State Governments of the Australian Bureau of Criminal Intelligence as a body to gather and disseminate criminal intelligence for all police bodies in Australia.
Australian-produced Wine
(Question No. 3216)
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 23 September 1981:
(I) What are the regulations governing the use of (a) flavouring and (b) concentrate in Australian-produced wine.
(2) Have there been any occasions when Australian wine has been withdrawn from sale as a result of the use of flavouring or concentrate.
(3) Was a line of traminer riesling produced in New South Wales recently withdrawn from sale because of a breakdown suspected to have been caused by the use of flavouring.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) In Australia standards for wine are a State and Territory responsibility. The relevant regulations are:
New South Wales-Pure Food Regulations. Queensland-Food and Drug Regulations. Victoria-Food and Drug Standards Regulations. South Australia-Food and Drug Regulations. Western Australia-Food and Drug Regulations. Tasmania-Public Health (Food and Drug Standards) Regulations. Australian Capital Territory-Public Health (Sale of Food and Drugs) Regulations.
No relevant regulations are in force in the Northern Territory.
(2) and (3) I am not aware of any case where the State and Territory authorities which administer the relevant regulations have caused a wine to be withdrawn from sale as a result of it containing or having been suspected to contain flavouring or concentrate. Individual winemakers withdraw wine from sale from time to time for a variety of reasons but I am not aware of a New South Wales produced traminer riesling or any other wine having been withdrawn from sale because of a breakdown suspected to have been caused by the use of flavouring.
Woodchips: Export
(Question No. 3303)
Mr West asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 14 October 1981:
(I) Has his Department received an application to export 100,000 tonnes of woodchips from Harris Daishowa Pty Ltd.
(2) If an application has been received are the woodchips to be obtained from Victorian forests; if so, from what areas of the forests will the wood be cut and by which companies.
(3) Has the Environment Protection (Impact of Proposals) Act been invoked; if so, has an environmental impact statement been called for.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.

3094 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) Yes; I am advised that the Victorian Government has granted short term pulpwood licences to 27 sawmillers in the Cann River and Orbost areas to harvest the pulpwood in conjunction with their normal logging operations for a trial period ending 31 July 1982.
(3) Yes; decisions concerning the environmental assessment of proposals are the responsibility of the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment.
Naval Exercises: Western Australia
(Question No. 3345)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 15 October 1981:
(I) Has his Department scheduled naval exercises for the Lancelin Naval Gunfire Support Range of Western Australia for 5 days, 5-10 February 1982.
(2) If so, were these dates arrived at to meet the convenience of United States of America Navy units which will be participating in the exercises.
(3) Will the exercise involve closure of a sea area of 23km by 8km at the height of the Western Australian rock lobster fishing season.
(4) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that the closed area normally would contain some 4,000 rock lobster pots at that time and his Department's attitude of conveniencing the US Navy will mean serious loss of revenue to Western Australian lobster fishermen who earned Australia $60 million in export income in 1980.
(5) Has he previously received letters of complaint from the Australian Fishing Industry Council concerning the lack of consulation by naval authorities in the timing of exercises. .
(6) Will he reconsider the timing of this forthcoming exercise to protect the position of persons engaged in the industry of increasing importance to Western Australia.
Mr KiIIen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Department of Defence has not yet scheduled naval exercises for the Lancelin Naval Gunfire Support Range in February 1982. Proposals have been received from United States authorities to conduct exercises on those dates and these are presently being evaluated by the Department of Defence.
(2) The dates for the exercises were proposed by the United States Navy. The Department of Defence has informed United States authorities of the problems which are caused to the rock lobster fishing industry by the conduct of naval exercise in the Lancelin area at that time of the year. The Department of Defence is continuing negotiations with the aim of either postponing the exercises to a more suitable date, or, by consulation with local fishermen and the Australian Fishing Industry Council, to establish restrictions on exercise activities that are acceptable to the fishing industry. Some meetings have already been held in this regard between the Naval Officer Commanding West Australia Area (NOCWA), the Australian Fishing Industry Council (WA Branch) and local fishermen.
(3) No.
(4) Yes.
(5) Yes, on matters concerning consulation by Naval authorities with the Australian Fishing Industry Council prior to exercise activities at the Lancelin Range. Liaison is now well established between NOCWA and executive Officer of the WA Branch of the /' Jstralian Fishing Industry Council.
(6) Yes.

Exposure of Australian Servicemen to War Gases During Second World War
(Question No. 3349)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice on 15 October 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to claims made in an AAP Wire Service article by correspondent Craig Skehan, dated 14 October 1981, relating to exposure of Australian servicemen to war gases during the Second World War.
(2) If so, is he able to confirm whether these tests took place.
(3) If they did take place (a) how many servicemen or women were exposed to various gases during the tests, (b) what gases were tested, (c) what was the full military designation of the Chemical Research Unit, (d) which officer or officers were responsible for authorising the conduct of the tests, (f) was any medical monitoring of those personnel carried out by Australian military forces, for any period whatsoever after the tests; if so, what are the details, and (g) were the service personnel exposed to the gases acting as volunteers or in some other capacity; if so, what.
(4) With respect to the claim that 50 Australian pilots had taken part in a poison gas bomb experiment on an island off Cairns, Qld, on 21 January 1944, which resulted in the death of a number of American prisoners serving life sentences, is there any substance to the claim; ifso, will he supply all details of the incident.
Mr KiIIen-The answer to the honqurable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) and (3) As is a matter of public record, chemical warfare experiments took place in Australia During World War II. I refer the honourable member to my statement in the House of Representatives on 27 October 1981, which incorporated details. A considerable amount of more detailed information is available to public researchers through Australian Archives.
Work is underway in the Department of Defence to pass to Australian Archives other relevant records which have not yet been cleared for public access. This work is being given high priority, taking into account the need to preserve the privacy of individuals.
(4) I refer the honourable member to the answer to a Question Without Notice asked of the then Minister for Defence on 15 April 1975 (House of Representatives Hal/sard, pages 1579-1580).
Defence Services: Recruitment
Question No. 3351
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 20 October, 1981:
Further to his reply to my question No. 1050 (Hal/sard, 9 September 1981, pages 1123-4) is he prepared to commission an inquiry within his Department to determine whether persons enlisted at the minimium age and for the maximum period of service are more likely to seek discharge before their period of enlistment is completed than older recruits; if not, why not.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No. For 1980 alone a manual search of over 1600 personal files would be required. I cannot see any benefits arising out of such an inquiry that would justify the diversion of resources involved.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3095

P.T. Australian Indonesian Milk Industries Incorporated
Question No. 3398
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Primary Industry, upon notice, on 22 October 1981:
(I) Is the Australian Dairy Corporation to sel1 its 50 per cent shareholding in one of its subsidiaries, P.T. Australian Indonesian Milk Industries Incorporated.
(2) If so, is the money from this sale to be used to undertake further investment in overseas projects.
(3) On what basis does the Government justify the continued operation of the remaining subsidiaries of the Corporation which sel1 products otlier than milk, such as orange juice and biscuits.
(4) As the Government has stated that the aim of the Review of Commonwealth Functions was to withdraw the Government from functions more appropriately handled by private enterprise, why was the sale of Corporation subsidiaries, already the subject of controversy and an example of Government operating in a traditional1y private enterprise area, left untouched.
Mr Nixon-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The chairman of the Australian Dairy Corporation (ADC) announced recently that the Corporation had received an offer for its shareholding in P.T. Australian Indonesian Milk Industries (P.T. Indomilk) and that the Corporation was negotiating the sale of its shareholding.
(2) Proceeds from any sale would be paid into the Dairying Industry Stabilization Fund and would be available for the benefit of the dairy industry generally in accordance with section II of the Dairying Industry Act 1962.
(3) Guidelines are currently in the process of final consideration between myself and the Boards of ADC and Asia Dairy Industries (H.K.) Limited (AD!) which will enable the AD! to participate in ventures al1ied to but not solely invol ved with dairy food manufacture. This was considered by the Government to be desirable as it would widen the base for product development and could result in cost reductions through more efficient use of facilities.
(4) This is a matter of Government policy.
Army Artillery
(Question No. 3401 )
Mr Kerin asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 22 October 1981:
(I) Was the artil1ery discussed in his statement of 20 October 1981 (Hansard, page 2200) previously promised to be delivered to the Army in1981.
(2) When wil1 the artil1ery be delivered to the Army.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Previous statements on Defence planning indicated that replacement of light and medium artil1ery weapon systems was proposed in the early 1980s. In this planning replacement of the medium guns always had the higher priority. Orders for the 155 mm guns have been placed with the United States and deliveries are expected to commence in 1984.
(2) With regard to the I05mm guns referred to in my statement of 20 October 1981, it is now intended to manufacture this type of gun in Australia. The next step is to make two preproduction models for trial in 1985. Subject to satisfactory

production and trial it should be possible to begin equipping the Regular Army with the new weapons in 1988.
Defence Report 1981: Delay in Presentation
(Question No. 3419)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 27 October 1981:
(I) Was the Defence Report 1981 transmitted to him by the Chief of Defence Force Staff and the Secretary of his Department on 18 August 1981.
(2) Did he table the Report on 20 October 1981.
(3) Why was the Report not available for the information of Members during the Budget debate and during consideration of the proposed expenditures of his Department by Estimates Committee A.
(4) What were the reasons for the delay of over 2 months in presenting the Report to the Parliament.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. I first saw the Report, at that stage in page proof, in early October 1981. The Report carries the date of the most recent information it contains, in this case 1981 budget figures: 18 August 1981 was budget day.
(2) Yes.
(3) Publication of the Report, a process not under Defence control, took eleven weeks.
(4) There was no delay in presenting the Report to Parliament. It was tabled the day after receipt from the printer.
Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme: Appeal Tribunals
(Question No. 3430)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 27 October 1981:
(I) What is the process by which tribunal officials are nominated to the Commonwealth Government Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme appeal tribunals.
(2) What are the required qualifications for tribunal officials.
(3) Are there standard procedures for the assessment of student appeals by tribunals; iF so, what are these procedures; if not, on what basis do officials assess an application.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The members of Student Assistance Review Tribunals are not Government officials but part time members chosen largely from the legal and academic communities. The procedure for the establishment of the Tribunals is prescribed by the provisions of the Student Assistance Act 1973 and its regulations. Each Tribunal consists of a Chairman and two members. The Tribunal Chairmen are normal1y selected from former members of the judiciary, the magistry, retired public servants with a background in law and senior academics with legal training. In the case of members, nominations are sought from the principals and registrars of various tertiary institutions including universities, colleges of advanced education and TAFE institutions, and in relation to student members, from the Australian Union of Students.
(2) Chairmen and members of the Tribunals are expected to be conscious of the needs of students, to be impartial and to be wel1 informed on the provisions of the legislation under which the student assistance schemes operate.

3096 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(3) The Tribunal procedures are standard to the extent that they are required to follow the Student Assistance Act 1973 and regulations. For example, the Act provides that proceedings be conducted with as little formality and technicality and with as much expedition as possible and consistent with proper consideration of each appeal. The Tribunal is not bound by rules of evidence. Proceedings before a Tribunal are in public unless the Tribunal gives direction to the contrary. The actual form in which the hearing is conducted is, subject to the Act and regulations, at the discretion of the Chairman and members of the Tribunal. Generally, the appellant personally attends the hearing though he may, if the Tribunal thinks fit, be represented by another person not being a legal practitioner (and the appellant is on occasion accompanied by a member or members of his family). The officer of the Commonwealth Department of Education who was responsible for the decision which is the subject of appeal may be present or is represented.
Tribunal members are supplied with copies of the appellant's application for assistance and of correspondence exchanged with the Department of Education relating to the decision under review, prior to the hearing. An appellant may subsequently lodge a submission in writing to the Tribunal if he wishes. In most cases the hearing begins with the Chairman asking the appellant to give a brief account of his case and the officer of the Department of Education who made the decision, or his representative at the hearing, is invited to explain his decision. Tribunal members then follow up any matters which seem relevant in order to gain a clear understanding of the case prior to retiring to come to their decision.
Children's Services Program
(Question No. 2393)
Mr Armitage asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:
(I) What are the full and precise details of each project approved under the Children's Services Program since January 1976.
(2) What funds have been approved for each of the projects.
(3) In which Electoral Division are each of these projects located.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I regret to inform the honourable member that expenditure information is not compiled in my department in the form that he has requested, and that I am not prepared at this stage to allocate the considerable staffing resources that would be required to compile the data requested.
However, I intend to provide the honourable member with a preliminary listing by Federal Electorate of all services supported under the Children's Services Program which have been funded or approved for funding since 1978, excluding State pre-school and vacation care services. Pre-school and vacation care services are funded via block grant arrangements with the States.
This preliminary listing is still to be refined and therefore is not currently available for general circulation.
Commonwealth Development Bank
(Question No. 2462)
Mr Kerin asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:

(I) Is it a fact that, in March 1981, he and the Prime Minister agreed to 'make available to the Commonwealth Development Bank an extra $20m; if so, why have the funds not been made available to the Bank.
(2) Has the Australian Loan Council rejected the Commonwealth Development Bank's latest application for permission to raise funds commercially; if so, on what grounds was the application rejected.
(3) What has been the monthly rate of lending from the Commonwealth Development Bank, in terms of the number of applications approved and the average loan amount, for 1980-81.
(4) What was the total number of applications received during the'same period.
(5) How many loan applications were (a) received and (b) approved during 1979-80 and what was the average loan sum.
(6) What level of funds does the Commonwealth Development Bank currently have available for lending and what is the source of these funds.
(7) What level of funds has the Bank had available for lending in each of the last 10 years and what was the source of these funds.
(8) Are nationality requirements imposed on individual borrowers or companies seeking finance from the Commonwealth Development Bank; if so, what are they.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) I announced in my statement to the House on 2 December 1980 on the subject of interest rates that the Government proposed to approach the Loan Council for approval to increase the borrowing capacity of the Commonwealth Development Bank for 1980-81 by $20m.1 referred to the matter again in answer to a question in the House on II March 1981.
In the event, the Government decided not to approach Loan Council for such an approval. This subsequent decision reflected our concern at the emerging implications of a rapidly expanding public sector borrowing requirement for pressures on financial markets and the general level of the interest rates. In those circumstances the Government decided that it would not be appropriate to support in Loan Council any additions to the 1980-81 borrowing programs of either Commonwealth or State authorities. However, I mention that, in accordance with Loan Council procedures, I approved the transfer of another Commonwealth authority'S unused 1980-81 borrowing program of $3m to the Commonwealth Development Bank.
(3), (4) and (5) Lending figures for 1980-81 as a whole are now available and these' are shown, together with those for 1979-80, in the following table:

Year

No. of Loan applications
Received Approved

Average monthly rate Average
of applications ,loan
approved amount

1980-81 1979-80

4,738 5,016

2,304 2,722

$
193 40,257 227 42,545

In addition, the Development Bank approved 5,000 new equipment finance transactions in 1980-81 compared with 4,606 in 1979-80. Corresponding average transaction sizes were $12,977 and $12,310 respectively.
(6) and (7) The Commonwealth Development Bank has approval under Loan Council arrangements to raise $45.65m in 1981-82 ($17.0m new loan raising; $28.65m provision for

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3097

redemption of maturing deposits) through the issue of transferable certificates of deposit. In addition, funds generated by
the operations of the Bank (in particular, loa!] repayments and retention of profits), together with usage of the Primary Industry Bank of Australia refinance facility, add significantly
to the Development Bank's capacity to lend. Some of these sources of funds are subject to seasonal industry fluctuations and are therefore difficult to quantify. The Bank has also
entered into an arrangement with the Commonwealth Savings Bank to obtain further funds from that Bank.

The various sources of funds available to the Development Bank should en<\ble it to maintain a lending program in 1981-82 that will at least match that achieved in 1980-81.
The following table, covering the ten year period, shows details of sources of funds as far as they are available. Loan repayments by customers prior to 1977-78 were not recorded in aggregate; it is now impracticable to compile a series of total repayments for those earlier years.

SOURCES OF FUNDS AVAILABLE TO CDB (NET OF REPAYMENTS BY CDB) ($ million)

1971-72 1972-73
1973-74 1974-75 1975-76
1976-77 1977-78 1978-79
1979-80
1980-81

Repayment.s by
customers
na na na na na na 88.2 97.1 112.4 115.1

Transferable deposits
20.0 25.0 25.0 35.0 15.0 11.5

Govt loans
10.0
19.5 19.5 6.5 -2.5 -2.9 -2.9 -2.9 -2.9

Profits retained byCDB
1.5 1.5 1.6 1.5 3.6 9.3 10.2 11.0 12.1 14.3

CSB

PIBA

2.2

-0.7

-0.8

5.0

-1.5

-4.1

-4.1

-4.1

8.3

-4.1

12.3

-4.1

10.5

Total lending (including equipment finance) by the Bank
would provide a broad indication of the available level of funds. Over the ten-year period, total lending has been as follows:

Year

Total ($ million)

1971-72 1972-73 1973-74
1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

76.6 78.9 \07.1
97.2 83.0 134.5 116.5 149.7 173.1 157.9

(8) The Development Bank does not impose any nationality requirements on individual or company borrowers.

National Rehabilitation and Compensation Scheme
(Question No. 2706)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
Will the Minister bring up to date the information which the Minister's predecessor provided on 22 May 1980 (Hansard, page 3170) in answer to my question about
(a) financial aspects of the proposed National Rehabilitation and Compensation Scheme,
(b) discussions on the scheme with the State governments and the insurance industry,
(c) related proposals for the International Year of Disabled Persons 1981, and
(d) increases in premiums for workers' compensation and compulsory third party insurance.

Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(a) On the basis of figures provided in the Office of the Insurance Commissioner's publication 'Selected Statistics on the General Insurance Industry for the year ended 30 June 1980', the updated figures for 1979-80 are:

Workers' Compensation

Compulsory Third Party

Direct premiums
Benefits (including legal, hospital and medical costs) . . . . . .
Administration expenses and commission

$'000 830,211
603,378 119,745

$'000 675,597
468,155 19,205

Separate figures for legal and hospital and medical costs are
not published and must be estimated. If the ratios implicit in the reports of the Working Parties of the National Rehabili-
tation and Compensation Scheme are applied to the actual amounts paid in benefits in 1979-80, the figures for legal and hospital and medical costs would have been:

Workers' Compensation

Compulsory Third Party

Legal (excluding solicitor/ client costs)
Hospital and medical

$'000
54,907 \09,694

$'000
78,182 68,351

(b) There have been no further discussions among the Commonwealth, States and the insurance industry on national compensation proposals to those notified in answer to Question No. 6053 of 22 May 1980.
(c) The overall approach to IYDP which was suggested by the National Advisory Council for the Handicapped and

3098 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

the Standing Interdepartmental Committee on Rehabilitation appears at pages 10 and II of the formet'llbdy's 3rd Report which was tabled in Parliament on 20 MaY!'1980. The Report does not contain any specific recommendation on the subject of a national rehabilitation and compensation scheme, although it does contain some general recommendations on the subject of workers' compensation systems.
(d) Using the same basis as in the answers to Question Nos 1748 (Hansard, 20 October 1977, pages 2301-2) and 6053 (Hansard, 22 May 1980, pages 3170-1) the percentage increases in premiums between 1974-75 and 1979-80 were:

Workers' Compensation Compulsory Third Party

Direct Premiums
% 44.3 120.5

Earned Premiums
% 45.5 182.9

National Publicity Campaign 'Break Down the Barriers'
(Question No. 2933)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 27 August 1981:
(I) What is the total cost of the national publicity campaign 'Break Down the Barriers'.
(2) What has been the cost of (a) printing and (b) distributing material produced for this campaign.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) A total of $1 m was allocated to the IYDP publicity campaign for the financial years 1980-81 and 1981-82.
(2) (a) All the publicity activities, including the television and radio campaign are funded from this $Im, The expenditure on the publicity campaign up to 31 AUgust 1981 is as follows:

$

Printing of Information Kits

Posters . . , . . .

Handbills . . . , .

Purchase of button badges and letter seals

Co-sponsorship contribution to Film Australia for

IYDP Film , . . . . . . . , , ,

Production of publicity material-IYDP Film

Production and development of media campaign

Paid placement, TV and radio ads and associated

post-production costs

.

Miscellaneous

10,716 1,690
770 260
30,000 5,000 34,330
512,516 1,794

Total

597,076

(b) No separate figures are available of the costs of distribution of material produced for the campaign.

Base Rate Pension
(Question No. 2987)
Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(I) When will the base rate of pension exceed the tax free threshold under the present policy in respect of adjustments

to the tax free threshold, and twice yearly indexation of pensions,
(2) What"i~ the difference at present between the pension
and the tax free threshold.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The maximum rate of single age pension from I November 1981 is $69.70 a week. This is equivalent to $3624 per annum, well below the maximum taxation threshold for 1981-82 of $4195. The Government has decided that future adjustments to the taxation scales will be made on a discretionary basis. In making those adjustments, the Government will bear in mind the position of those people whose sole source of income is social security payments.
Tenosynovitis: Department of Housing and Construction
(Question No. 3034)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 September 1981 :
(I) Have any cases of tenosynovitis been reported to date, in the Department of statutory authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction,
(2) If so, will the Minister state (a) how many cases have been reported, (b) in what types of work the affected persons were engaged, (c) of the cases reported how many were in respect of (i) female and (ii) male employees and (d) what age brackets appear to be most affected, in the Department and each statutory authority.
(3) Will the Minister provide similar information in respect of carpal tunnel.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes,
(2) Department of Housing and Construction-tal 3; (b) keyboard and clerical; (c) (i) 2, (ii) I; (d) 25,44,48 years. Housing Loans Insurance Corporation-tal 1; (b) keyboard; (c) (i) I, (ii) Nil; (d) 53 years. Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation-tal Nil.
(3) Department of Housing and Construction-I; plumber; male; 40 years. Housing Loans Insurance Corporation-NiL Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation-Nil.
Parliamentary Liaison Officers under the Treasurer
(Question No. 3038)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
How many Parliamentary Liaison Officer positions have existed in the Minister's Department and each statutory authority under the Minister's jurisdiction in each State, the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory for each year from 1970 to 1981.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
During the period 1970-81, there has been one position of Parliamentary Liaison Officer in the Treasury, This position, which is located in the Australian Capital Territory (ACT), is currently classified at the Class 8 level. There are at present

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3099

six other clerical and clerical assistant positions in the Parliamentary Liais.on Sub-Section in the ACT, the occupants of which assist in the parliamentary liaison function to varying degrees.
There is no position on the establishment -of the Australian Taxation Office with the designation of Parliamentary Liaison Officer, nor is there a position the duties of which relate solely to that function. Since July 1981 there have been three positions of Advising Officer Grade I, Class 7 in the Policy and Legislation Division of the Australian Taxation Office which include as part of their duties a requirement to act as Parliamentary Liaison Officer. However, the occupant of only one of these positions carries out these duties at anr one time. Prior to July 1981 the role of Parliamentary LiaIson, Officer was included in the duties' of a single position of Advising Officer Grade I, Class 7, which was established in March 1973. Until this position was provided there was no position with specific responsibility for Parliamentary Liaison Officer duties.
There have been no positions in the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) formally designated as Parliamentary Liaison Officers from 1970 to 1981. Two ABS officers have been nominated for contact purposes as Parliamentary Liaison Officers and, in addition, three other ABS officers regularly have some involvement with Parliamentary liaison duties. For all five officers, Parliamentary liaison is only part of their total duties.
Kampuchea
(Question No. 3318)
Mr Fry asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 14 October 1981:
(I) Is he able to say approximately how many Kampucheans were killed by the forces of Pol Pot between the overthrow of Lon Nol and the establishment of the Heng Samrin regime.
(2) What approximate percentage of these casualities were Kampuchean civilians.
(3) Have any Australian citizens been killed by the Pol Pot forces since 1975; if so, how many.
(4) Is he able to say whether the Heng Samrin regime carried out any killings of Kampuchean civilians, if so, how many.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No reliable statistics are available and estimates vary widely. The best assessment we can make is that several hundred thousand people lost their lives under the Pol Pot regime. Many were executed while others died as a result of starvation.
(2) No estimate can be made.
(3) The Government is aware that two Australians, Mr Ronald Keith Dean and Mr David Lloyd Scott, are believed to have been killed by the Democratic Kampuchean authorities after their boat was intercepted off the Kampuchean coast in 1978.
(4) No information is available.
Victorian Transport System: Grant of Special Assistance
(Question No. 3340)
Mr Morris asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 15 September 1981:

(I) What criteria were used in the decision to grant the Victorian Government $35m special assistance for 1981-82 and 1982-83 for upgrading its transport system.
(2) To what specific projects are the funds to be applied.
(3) Was similar special assistance granted to any other State government for upgrading of its transport systems; if not, why not.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The decision to grant the Victorian Government $35m special Commonwealth assistance for 1981-82 and 1982-83 for transport purposes was taken after consideration of a request by the Premier of Victoria which drew attention to, inter alia, the need for Victoria to upgrade its public transport system and the special additions to Loan Council borrowing programs approved in recent years for other States.
(2) The funds are to be applied at the discretion of the Victorian Government to transport expenditure.
(3) Commonwealth assistance has been provided to all States for the upgrading of urban public transport systems since 1973-74. In addition, several States-but not Victoriahave previously received special additions to their Loan Council borrowing programs in respect of expenditure on public transport. Examples include the special temporary addition to Western Australia's larger authorities program for the Kwinana-Koolyanobbing railway upgrading and the infrastructure borrowing programs approved for Brisbane Rail electrification and for New South Wales rail electrification projects.
Bank for Small Business Sector
(Question No. 3363)
Mr Humphreys asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 20 October 1981:
(I) Would the Government welcome proposals for the establishment of a bank which would cater expressly for the needs of the small business sector.
(2) Has the Government ever considered, or is it now considering, such a proposal.
(3) What is the nature of any proposal presently under consideration.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) There have been several recommendations to Government relating to institutional arrangements for the provision of equity and long-term finance for small business. In particular the Study Group on Structural Adjustment (the Crawford Committee) recommended in 1979 that consideration be given to arrangements for the provision of equity and long-term finance to small firms by either an extension of the powers of the Commonwealth Development Bank or a new specialised financing institution. The Government decided to refer that recommendation for consideration by the Inquiry into the Australian Financial System (the Campbell Committee) which had then been established. A number of submissions have been made to the Inquiry on this subject on behalf of the small business sector. Thefinal report of the Inquiry into the Australian Financial System has recently been released and the Government will give very careful consideration to its recommendations and findings including those relating to the needs of small busine~s.

3100 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Granny Bond Scheme (Questi~n No. 3369)"'" .
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 20 October 1981:
(I) Is the Minister currently considering proposals to introduce a special Granny Bond Scheme to allow pensioners to protect their savings and still obtain pension fringe benefits.
(2) If so, will this proposal permit pensioners to qualify for a full pension and fringe benefits irrespective of income obtained from investments held in Granny Bonds.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) 'Granny Bonds' schemes are one possibility which will be considered by the Government as part of its ongoing review of retirement arrangements. No specific option, however, is under consideration at this stage.
Access to Satellite Photographs
(Question No. 3379)
Mr Lloyd asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 21 October 1981:
(I) Are any of the United States of America NOAA meteorological satellites orbiting the earth above Australia and sending photos back to the USA.
(2) Does Australia have access to these photos for either meteorological, agricultural or environmental purposes.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. NOAA-6and NOAA-7.
(2) Yes. The photographs are primarily for meteorological purposes but may have agricultural and environmental applications. The Bureau of Meteorology now usually relies on the Japanese Geostationary Satellite as its source of meteorological satellite pictures over Australia and adjacent oceans. However twice daily pictures are received from each of the NOAA-6 and NOAA-7 satellites and are of great value in preparing meteorological analyses over the southern ocean near the Antarctic continent and the central Indian Ocean.
Additional NOAA-6 and NOAA-7 pictures covering the remainder of the southern hemisphere are relayed to the Bureau via theU .S. GOES satellite and are used in preparing hemispheric weather maps. These maps are essential background to the Bureau in preparing its four day forecasts.
As well as pictures, information on upper atmosphere temperature is received from the US. satellites via meteorological telecommunications links from Washington and, more recently, from a direct reception station in Melbourne.
Englisb as a Second Language: Courses at Rivett Primary School
(Question No. 3570)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) Will English as a Second Language (E.S.L.) courses at the Rivett Primary School, Australian Capital Territory, be discontinued; if so, what alternatives are being proposed.
(2) How many pupils are in need of E.S.L. education in the Rivett area.

(3) How many students and teachers were there in E.S.L. classes at Rivett in (a) 1978 and (b) 1979-80.
(4) Did the Chairman of the Australian Capital Territory Schools Authority in a meeting with the Rivett Primary School Board suggest they use political means to achieve solutions to Rivett Primary School needs, as the Schools Authority could operate only within Government staff ceilings and that the most politically sensible and best defined target would be the E.S. L. provision.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No.
(2) The verified number of E.S.L. students currently attending Rivett Primary School is 74.
(3) 1978-no students identified; 1979-40 students I teacher; 1980-50 students 1.4 teachers.
(4) I understand that a delegation from the Rivett Primary School Board, who met with the Chairman of the Australian Capital Territory Schools Authority on 14 September 1981 has attributed such a statement to him. They met to discuss demands for staff additional to the school's entitlement generated by the staffing formula including provisions for E.S.L.
I have been informed that the Chairman advised the delegation that as a government agency the Authority must work within resources made available to it by the Government. He indicated that he could not foresee the Authority's giving priority to the claimed needs of the school over other needs of the Australian Capital Territory government school system. Other than by successful appeal direct to the Government by the school community he could not see how the Authority could be in a position to provide additional resources to the school beyond the currently prescribed formula.

Housing Waiting Lists

(Question No. 2481)

Mr Uren asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:

(I) How many applicants are on waiting lists for (a) rental and (b) purchase of homes with Housing Authorities in each
State and Territory.

(2) What is the waiting period for different types of housing for the different categories of applicants on the waiting lists of
the Housing Authorities in each State and Territory.

Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) (a) The following table shows applications outstanding

for rental accommodation with housing authorities for each

State and the Northern Territory as at 31 December 1980:

New South Wales

37,358

Victoria

13,861

Queensland

5,515

South Australia

19,765

Western Australia

5,271

Tasmania

4,082

Total (six States)

85,852

Northern Territory

1,889

(I) (b) The information set out below was obtained from the housing authority of each State and the Northern Territory:

New South Wales: details are not available.

Victoria: at present, there are 9,800 applicants on the waiting list for financial assistance to purchase a Housing
Commission dwelling.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3101

Queensland: at present, there is no waiting list for financial assistance to purchase State rental houses.
South Australia: at present, there are an estimated 120 applicants on the waiting list.
Western Australia: at 30 June 1981, there were 1895 applicants on the Metropolitan waiting list and 73 applicarits on the country and North-West waiting list.
Tasmania: at 30 June 1981, there were III applicants on the waiting list.

Northern Territory: at 5 June 1981, there were 28 applicants on the waiting list.
(2) The following information was obtained from the housing authority of each State and the Northern Territory.
New South Wales-Approximate waiting periods for the various types of accommodation in the different locations of the Sydney metropolitan area are:

(Months)

Elderly single people Elderly couples One bedroom apartments
Two bedroom cottages Two bedroom apartments
Three bedroom cottages Three bedroom apartments Four bedroom cottages

Outer western suburbs
36 39 49
36 36
34 24 30

Western suburbs
34-46 42
40
36
36
38 42 36

Northern suburbs

Inner city

54

74

45

35

High

36 rise

-36

walk

up

-48

High

36 rise

-18

walk

up

-36

45

38

45

40

54

Eastern suburbs
52 38
40
36
68 39

Victoria-Approximate waiting period for the different categories of accommodation in the Melbourne metropolitan area are:

Months

Elderly Person Unit (bedsitting room)

18

Elderly Person Unit (l Bedroom)

12

Childless couple (I Bedroom)

16

2 BR Flat

16

3 BR Flat

12

2 BR House

18

3 BR House

16

Queensland-In provincial and large towns waiting times for all types of accommodation would generally exceed twelve months. In smaller centres, waiting times are less and sometimes accommodation is available immediately.
In Brisbane, waiting times in the less popular outer areas vary from four to six months. In the more popular better serviced areas, where fewer dwellings are available, waiting times generally exc;ed one year and in some areas exceed two years.
Information is not available on waiting times for different categories of applicants.
South Australia-Applications for rental accomeodation are considered in turn according to the date of application.
The following table summarises waiting times for the three main categories of dwellings.

House4main rooms 5 main rooms
Villa and Walk-Up Flat

Metropolitan

Outer
metropolitan

Rural

(months) (months) (months)

30 to 36
30 to 36 up to 24

14to 38
14t020 about 24 up to 24

Metropolitan

Outer metro-
politan

Rural

Cottage FlatSingle person Two persons

(months) (months) (months)

60 24

30 to 72 30 to 54

about 24

Western Australia-The waiting time for pensioners and families, excluding priority cases, in the Perth metropolitan area ranges from immediate to two years depending on the selectivity of the applicants. Apartments with two and three bedrooms are available for immediate occupation.
In the Country and North-West, waiting time for pensioners and family accommodation ranges from a short period in some depressed rural areas to two years.
Tasmania-The following table summarises waiting times for dwelling types and applicant categories for Hobart and eight major centres.

3-bedroom 2-bedroom

houses

villas

Elderly persons
units

Hobart
New Norfolk Launceston GeorgeTown Scottsdale Burnie Wynyard Devonport Ulverstone

(months) 6-12
12 26-30
18 12 12 18 17 15

(months) 24
24 24-28
18
15 24 28 19

(months)
Single 42
Double 24
18
40 27 24
34 24 33
27

Northern Territory-Waiting time for four categories of dwellings in five major centres are shown over.

3102 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(Months)

I Bedroom Flats
2 Bedroom Flats 3 Bedroom detached dwellings 4 Bedroom detached dwellings

Darwin
12 12 14 20

Alice Springs
21 13 14 13

Katherine
9 14 16

Tennant Creek
18 18 10

Nhulunbuy
25 24 18

Goyernment Departments: Percentage of 1980-81 Outlay Spent in May and June
(Question Nos 2901-2926)
Mr Rocher asked all Ministers, upon notice, on 27 August 1981:
What percentage of total outlays for 1980-81 was spent by the Minister's Department in (a) May and (b) June 1981.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's questions:
The honourable member has asked identical questions of all Ministers, as indicated by the above question numbers. With the concurrence of other Ministers concerned my department has provided the following answer to the honourable member's questions:
The term total outlays for each department has, in this context, been calculated as the department's total expenditure against annual and special appropriations during 1980-81. The percentages of total 1980-81 expenditures undertaken in (a) May and (b) June 1981 by each department are as follows:

Department

(a) % May

(b) %June

Prime Minister and Cabinet
Trade and Resources Industry and Commerce
Communications National Development and Energy Foreign Affairs Primary Industry Treasury
Defence . . . Finance Industrial Relations Attorney-General's Social Security
Education Transport
Health Immigration and Ethnic Affairs Science and Technology Administrative Services Employment and Youth Affairs Business and Consumer Affairs Capital Territory Veterans' Affairs
Aboriginal Affairs (iii) Housing and Construction Home Affairs and Environment

7.7

12.4

12.3

14.9

11.1

13.6

6.6

5.0

4.5 (i) 17.0

5.8

7.0

7.5 (ii) 7.4

8.3

6.2

8.3

13.7

10.2

12.8

7.8

10.4

7.0

10.6

8.4

8.6

8.1

6.8

8.2

9.9

8.8

8.3

7.2

13.3

9.8

9.7

8.8

11.8

10.0

8.7

9.2

11.1

6.6

9.1

7.3

10.6

8.6

7.1

8.4

9.9

8.8

7.6

(i) Includes periodic payments to the Pipeline Authority
and Australian Atomic Energy Commission totalling $llm
and final claims by the States of $14.5m for national water resources projects and other programs.
(ii) Differs from percentage provided in reply of 9 September 1981 (Himsard, page 1145), because payments made

by Department of Finance against Department of Primary Industry appropriations were not previously included.
(iii) Differs from percentages provided in reply of 16 September 1981 (Hansard, pages 1450 and 1451), because expenditure from special appropriations was not previously included. .
Parliamentary Liaison Officers: Department of Housing and Construction
(Question No. 3046)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
How many Parliamentary Liaison Officer positions have existed in the Minister's Department and each statutory authority under the Minister's jurisdiction in each State, the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory for each yearfrom 1970 to 1981.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Since 1970, there has been one position formally nominated as Parliamentary Liaison Officer in the Department of Housing and Construction, or in each of its antecedent departments.
In addition, the parliamentary section of the Department currently has one other position engaged full time in parliamentary liaison duties.
No similar positions have been identified in the Snowy Mountains Engineering Corporation or the Housing Loans Insurance Corporation, nor in the Department's Regional Offices in the State or Territories. All parliamentary liaison activities are undertaken through the Central Office position.
Kakadu National Park
(Question No. 3310)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 14 October 1981:
(1) Is it a fact that traditional Aboriginal owners of land within the Kakadu National Park entered into an agreement with the Commonwealth for the operation of the Park and that leases were entered into between the Directors of the National Parks and Wildlife Service and Kakadu Aboriginal Land Trust under the terms of which the Director specifically agreed not to make any arrangements with the Government of a State for the performance of functions within the Park without the approval in writing of the Northern Land Council (NLC).
(2) Is the Public Service Board now endeavouring to implement the directions of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions (RCF) in order to hand over the effective administration of the Park to the Northern Territory contrary to specific legal agreements signed by the Director of the National Parks and Wildlife Service on behalf of the Commonwealth.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3103

(3) Was the RCF statement made without any consultation with or approval of traditional owners or the NLC.
(4) Is he concerned that the breaches of both the spirit and terms of the leases signed represents a new low in Government-Aboriginal relations; if so, will he now undertake to declare to the House that the Government will stand by the leases entered into by the Director on its behalf.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The terms under which Aboriginal land in the Alligator Rivers Region of the Northern Territory became part of Kakadu National Park are set down in an Agreement between the Northern Land Council (NLC) and the Director, National Parks and Wildlife (NPW), and three leases made by the Kakadu Aboriginal Land Trust to the Director, NPW.
The Agreement with the Northern Land Council states at paragraph 3:
The Director agrees that he shall not, without the prior written consent of the N LC, make any arrangements under section 36 of the Parks Act for the performance of functions or the exercise of powers under that Act in relation to the said lands except arrangements for the performance of functions and the exercise of powers in relation to the said lands by officers or employees of the Northern Territory Parks and Wildlife Commission who are responsible to the Director and under the direct supervision of officers or employees of the National Parks and Wildlife Service who are resident on the said lands.'
(2) The Government has made clear that the Agreement made with the NLC will be honoured. No action is being taken which would be contrary to that Agreement.
(3) Yes. I wrote to the Chairman of the NLC advising him of the Government's RCF decisions on 28 May 1981.
(4) See 2. No breach of the spirit or terms of the leases has occurred.
Interscan Systems
(Question No. 3452)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 28 October 1981:
(1) How many Interscan systems, the sophisticated electronic guidance system devised by CSIRO, have been (a) ordered or (b) installed and where is each located or to be located.
(2) What firms are manufacturing and/or assembling the elements which comprise lnterscan.
(3) What proportion of manufacturing or assembling capacity for lnterscan is in Australia.
(4) What royalty is payable to CSIRO in respect of Interscan and what sum has actually been paid.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I (a) No Interscan system has been ordered.
I (b) A demonstration prototype has been installed at Richard Gebauer Airfield near Kansas City, in America.
(2) Four firms have been involved in the Australian development program. They are:
(a) lnterscan Australia Pty Ltd, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Australian Industrial Development Corporation (AIDC);
(b) Amalgamated Wireless Australia Ltd; (c) Hawker de Havilland Ltd; and

(d) Wilcox Electric Inc, an American company.
(3) The production of Interscan is intended to be divided equally between Australia and America.
(4) No royalty is payable to CSIRO in respect of Interscan-the commercially significant patents have been transferred to the AI DC subsidiary company, lnterscan Australia through which royalty benefits will be achieved.
No royalty payments are due in respect of the Interscan technology.
Vehicle Conversion to LPG Usage: Department of Science aud Technology
(Question No. 1562)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :
(1) How many (a) cars, (b) commercial vehicles and (c) trucks were being operated by his Department, excluding vehicles supplied by the Department of Administrative Services, as at 30 June 1980.
(2) How many of these vehicles had been (a) converted to LPG usage and (b) purchased already' equipped for LPG usage.
(3) Have plans br'n made to increase use of LPG in vehicles operated by his Department; ifso, what are the details.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Minister for Administrative Services to Question No. 1563 (Weekly Hal/sard. 10 June 1981, pages 3579 and 3580).
Customs and Quarantine Passenger Statement Form
(Question No. 1690)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) When was the Australian customs and quarantine passenger statement form last reviewed.
(2) When next being reviewed will he consider including in the quarantine declaration specific reference to (a) rocks and sand, (b) herbs and spices, (c) vegetables, (d) wool and horns and (e) native artifacts.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am advised that arrangements are in hand for the AustralianCustoms/Quarantine passenger statement form to be printed following a revision completed late last year. It is intended that the revised form be printed in a number of languages.
(2) The proposed quarantine wording on the revised form is as follows:
'During the past three months have you while overseas
visited a place where farm animals are kept including farming communities, research farms, sanctuaries and saleyards
visited an abattoir or meat packing place.
Do you have in your possession or in the baggage accompanyingyou
FOOD OF ANY KIND (including tinned or packaged), including meat, sausages, salami, ham, poultry, fats, eggs, milk, baby food, butter and cheese.

3104 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

PLANTS or parts of plants, live or dead, including Fruits, nuts, seeds, bulbs, flowers, mushrooms, straw, bamboo, wooden articles or articles made of plant material.
ANIMALS, reptiles, fish, birds or insects (or parts thereof) alive, dead, stuffed or mounted
ANIMAL PRODUCTS, including semen, feathers, hair, skins, shells and hatching eggs
EQUIPMENT used with horses or other animals BIOLOGICAL SPECIMENS, including vaccines, cultures and blood SOIL'
Although specific reference to herbs and spices was not included on the revised declaration it is considered that the question relating to 'plants or parts of plants, live and dead' would be normally interpreted to include these items.
Vegetables have not been specifically included on the declaration but consideration will be giv!(n to including them as a separate category when the declaration is next revised.
Rocks and sand are not significant quarantine risks and therefore have not been included.
Space limitations on the form preclude reference to all specific items of quarantine concern.
Quarantine: Foot and Mouth Disease
(Question No. 1694)
Mr Bungey asked the Ministe~ for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Following the announcement by New Zealand of an infection in pigs which could be foot and mouth disease, were any Australian veterinary officers or quarantine officials sent to New Zealand to assess New Zealand's quarantine action; if not, why not; if so, who was sent and what deficiencies did they detect in the New Zealand procedures and measures.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to be the honourable member's question is as follows:
A quarantine veterinary officer was not sent to New Zealand until after the completion of all diagnostic tests and New Zealand had completed its investigation into the incident.
However, a Quarantine Veterinary Officer, Mr K. J. Dunn did visit New Zealand on 4-8 May 1981, after the ending of the emergency, to review quarantine procedures and measures which had been adopted in New Zealand in relation to their effect on Australia.
No deficiencies were detected.
Dialysis Treatment
(Question No. 2037)
Mr Milton asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 5 May 1981:
(I) Are shortages of staff and Facilities in Victorian hospitals threatening dialysis treatment for those who need it.
(2) Is it a fact that patients over 60 years of age may be refused treatment.
(3) If so, will he take action to prevent this life-saving treatment from being curtailed.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) Under the new health funding arrangements, the Commonwealth provides funding to Victoria for the operating costs of public hospitals, services previously

funded under the Community Health Program and the School Dental Scheme through general revenue grants at the level of funding provided in 1980-81, plus ten per cent, less a share of the revenue-that Victoria can reasonably be expected to raise by the introduction of appropriate inpatient and outpatient charges from I September 1981, having regard to the new health insurance arrangements that came into operation on that date.
With the revenue increase arising from increased hospital charges, Victoria will have at its disposal increased resources in 1981-82. The Commonwealth is not involved in any decision as to how these resources should be allocated by a State. The matter of priorities is entirely one for Victoria.
Therefore, the Victorian Government has the responsibility to determine its own priorities in the delivery of health care and to allocate funds to individual hospitals and related health services in accordance with those priorities. In this context, consideration of the need for additional staff and Facilities for renal dialysis patients in Victoria is a matter solely for the Victorian Government.

The Lodge: Renovations
(Question No. 2395)

Mr Robert Brown asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 3 June 1981:

(I) What renovations have been undertaken at The Lodge since 19757

(2) What has been the cost of the renovations?

Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) and (2) Work at the official residences is undertaken on the recommendation of the Official Establishments Trust (and its predecessor the Committee on Official Establishments) set up to advise the Government on the conservation, development and efficient operation of the buildings and grounds of Government House, Admiralty House, The Lodge and Kirribilli House.

At The Lodge, renovations to the main residence, including
normal on-going maintenance to the building structure and its services, over the financial year 1976-77 to 1980-81 were-

Extension and renovation of kitchen, servery,

dining room, staff common room, staff games

room, staff sitting room, furnace room and cellar,

including installation of fire protection, and new

and up-graded mechanical and electrical services

Note-In its Interim Report of April 1977, the

Committee on Official Establishments stressed

that it regarded the improvement of the services

and staff areas within The Lodge as being the most

pressing immediate need of all. The areas were

regarded as being completely inefficient and intol-

erable. The proposed renovations were discussed

with and had the Full endorsement of the

Federated Liquor and Allied Industries Em-

ployees Union.

Installation of intruder alarm and other security

measures

.......... .

Installation of fire protection measures

Internal and external painting and wall papering

Upgrading of main bedroom suite

Repairs and renovations to guest bedroom

Repairs to and upgrading of hot water services

Installation of external sun awnings and screens

Installation of bedroom air conditioning unit

$
314,852
42,785 28,922 15,507
9,857 3,933 4,767 2,080 1,258

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3105

General building maintenance

Mechanical maintenance

Electrical maintenance

Fire control equipment, pest control, and other

maintenance

.......

$ 16,960 10,469 16,772
8,359
476,521

Advertising Promotion: Department of Housing and Construction .
(Question No. 2675)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minist~'r'for' Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) What sum was spent by the Minister's Department on advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services during the period (a) I January 1981 to 18 October 1980 and ( b) 19 October 1980 to 17 August 1981.
(2) What was the cost of each campaign undertaken.
(3) Under which item of expenditure were funds allocated for each campaign.
(4) Which advertising agencies or consult~nts were used for each campaign.
(5) What was the total sum paid to each agency or consultant for each campaign. '
(6) How was each agency or consultant selected.
(7) By what percentage has the departmental cost of advertising increased or decreased each year from 1975 to 1980 and during the period I January 1981 to 17 August 1981.
(8) What is the estimated cost of advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services for 1981-82.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) Between I January 1980 and 18 October 1980, $47,134 was spent.
(b) Between 19 October 1980 and 17 August 1981, $91,756 was spent.
(2) Homes Savings Grant Scheme Publicity Campaign $82,221; We Build for Australia $42,752; Manufactured Housing $5,559; Housing Australia $8,358.
(3) Funds were allocated under Items 350/2/02, 350/2/07, 350/2/17.
(4) The following Commonwealth master placing/charging agencies were used for media placement, for checking and monitoring media performance and for all accounting matters for the campaigns:
Berrie Currie Advertising Pty Ltd Country Press Ltd
The technical services of the following agencies and consultancies were used to plan and/or produce advertisements for the campaigns:
Show Ads Art Photo Engravers Pty Ltd John Sands Ltd Film Australia (Manufactured Housing film)

(5)-

Periods

(a)

(b)

Berrie Currie Advertising Pty Ltd Country Press Ltd . . . . .

$

$

40,152 55,147

6,271 7,681

(6) By the Minister for Administrative Services in the case of the master placing/charging agencies and by the Australian Government Advertising Service in consultation with the De-
partment for selection of agencies to provide technical ser-
vices to place, create and produce advertisements.

(7) Since the Department's formation in December 1978

the percentage changes in total Departmental advertising

expenditure was:

$ per cent

1979 (base year)

105,741

1980

204,526

+93

1981 (I January-17 August)

159,454

-22

The Australian Government Advertising Service has advised that indexes of percentage increases in unit costs of
Commonw.ealth departmental advertising since 1975 are:

Index of unit cost of Commonwealth
departmental advertising

1975 (base)

100

1976

110

1977

120

1978

128

1979

140

1980

153

1981 (I January to 17 August)

165

(8) $180,000.
Health Insurance Industry
(Question No. 2702)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
Has his attention been drawn to the statements by Mr David Gadiel of the H.C.F. Sydney, as reported on page 155 of the 'Proceedings of the Second Australian Conference of Health Economists', that (a) a major component of the health insurance industry is in fact insolvent, (b) actual evidence suggests that reserves and provisions need to approximate a minimum of 43 per cent of break-even contribution income to meet liabilities and a solvency margin, (c) there were 12 open funds whose reserves were less than 20 per cent of their breakeven contribution income on 30 June 1979 and (d) there are a further 8 funds including the fourth largest fund in New South Wales and the third largest fund in Victoria whose reserves and provisions are 20-30 per cent of income and which must be regarded as fairly shaky; if so, is there any substance to these statements.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
At the outset, it should be made clear that in suggesting that a major component of the health insurance industry was 'technically insolvent', to use his words, Mr Gadiel was not implying that organisati<;lI1s were unable to pay contributors' claims and other debts. Clearly. this was not the case. There is a practical difference between a test of technical solvency COIlsidered by Mr Gadiel to be desirable and the ability of funds,

3106 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

by having.a surplus of assets, to meet claims and other liabilities as they fall due. His test of solvency w~.sthat combined reserves and provisions should be equivalen't"io not less than 43
per cent of break-even contribution incollie in order to meet liabilities and to provide a 'solvency margin '.

With regard to the reserves component, under present
Government policy a level of about two months of break-even
contribution income is considered appropriate for large organisations and about four months for small organisations. These levels alone are equivalent to about 16 per cent of break-even
contributions for large funds and 33 per cent for small funds. In arriving at these ratios, the Government struck a balance between the needs of financial viability and of not placing an unnecessary burden on contributors.

The other component within the 43 per cent mentioned
above is the level of provisions for liabilities. These provisions are primarily a matter for determination by each organisation
by reference to the estimated level of outstanding claims, long
service leave commitments and other liabilities for which provision should be made. For example, organisations with relatively high incidences of claims should raise higher provisions
for outstanding claims than organisations with lower claiming experiences.

In the circumstances, therefore whilst a combined reserves

and provisions figure of 43 per cent might be apprepriate for

some organisations, it cannot be said that such a level is

necessarily appropriate fo. all organisations registered under

the National Health Act.

.

In conclusion, I might mention that preliminary unaudited data for the year ended 30 June 1981 indicate that, in general,
the financial stiuation of organisations is stronger than in the
year ended 30 June 1979, the period to which Mr Gadiel's remarks related. In considering proposals for contribution rates from I September 1981, the Registration Committee, so far as it was possible to do so, satisfied itself about the adequacy of
provisions and that, where necessary, the rates would achieve within a reasonable time an appropriate level of reserves.

Concessional Book Post Rate

(Q"estion No. 2708)

Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:

(I) How many countries'within the Universal Postal Union (a) grant and (b) do not grant, special rates for book post.

(2) Which countries do not grant special rates.

(3) Does Australia offer a concessional book post rate; if not, why not, when its problem of communications within a widely-spaced population is one of the most extreme on earth.

(4) Will he undertake to pursue with the Government the
making of a grant to Australia Post sufficient to compensate it for the introduction of a concessional post for books.

(5) Is there any substance to the recent statement of

Australia Post that a special book post was introduced in the

Australian colonies in the 19th Century when there was a real

need to assist and encourage the dissemination of news and in-

formation, and to develop greater literacy in the Australian

community, but these purposes have largely lost relevance in

today's environment.

.

Mr Sinclair~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) (a) and (b) Australia Post has no information as to
which of the 164 member countries of the Universal Postal Union (UPU) grant or do not grant special postal charges for the transmission of books in the domestic post.

For the international post, UPU legislation provides for rates of postage, which are somewhat lower than the charges

for letters, to be applied to printed papers, including books. (All member countries of the UPU are bound to adhere to UPU legislation and, consequently, all members of the Union provide a reduced rate service for printed papers, including books, sent in the international post.)
(2) See (1) above.
(3) No. Under the terms of the Postal Services Act 1975, Australia Post is required to price its services to recover operating costs and to provide at least 50 per cent of its capital expenditure from revenue. Australia Post has received numerous requests for a postal concession for books. Australia Post's decision not to provide such a concession is based on the adverse effect on postal revenue which would result, and which could require other postal users to pay higher postage charges than would otherwise apply.
Moreover, Australia Post receives many requests for postal concessions of various types. It would be inappropriate to provide a concession tor books while denying similar concessions to other groups/organisations which may consider themselves to be no less entitled to such concessions.
(4) No. The introduction of such a grant would be inconsistent with the Government's policy of restraining outlays in the public sector. Book distributors may avail themselves of existing concessional postage rates by using local delivery mail and bulk presented mail services.
(5) The statement referred to was included in a letter from the Managing Director of Australia Post to Mr Zifcak of the National Book Council written some four years ago. Australia Post maintains that the statements made in that letter still hold true today.
Australian Capital Territory: Indigenous Population
(Question No. 2833)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
(1) Further to his answer to question No.2 (Hansard, 28 May 1981, page 2849). on what date and in what. form did each State and the Northern Territory make known its view that its Aboriginal population was not an indigenous population within the meaning of International Labour Organisation Convention No. 65-Penal Sanctions (Indigenous Workers),1939.
(2) Is the Aboriginal population of the Australian Capital Territory an indigenous population within the meaning of the convention.
(3) Is it a fact, as expressed by a former Minister for Industrial Relations (Hansard, 23 February 1977, page 405), that the convention deals with indigenous workers/populations.
(4) On what date did a review of unratified conventions by his Department reveal the existence of a number of provisions in the legislation of New South Wales, Queensland, the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory which were inconsistent with the convention (Hansard, 4 October 1977, page 1607, Question No. 874).
(5) Is he able to say whether Victoria still agrees that the convention should be ratified (Hansard, 9 October 1979, page 1805, Question No. 4404).
(6) Have officers of his Department had discussions concerning the convention with the International Labour Office as they had concerning Convention No. 107-Indigenous and Tribal Populations 1957 (Hansard, 19 November 1968, page 3007, Question No. 768; 24 April 1971, page 2122, Question No. 29(;9; 31 May 1972, page 3408, Question No. 4975; 24 October 1972, page 3110, Question No. 6219); if so, what was the date and outcome of the latest discussion.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3107

Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable

member's question is as follows:

.

(I) Each State and the Northern Territory has indicated in the following manner on the dates shown that in their view the
Aboriginal population of their State or Territory does not constitute a dependent indigenous population for the purposes of
International Labour Organisation Convention No. 65-Penal Sanctions (Indigenous Workers) 1939.

State or Territory

Date

Method

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia
Tasmania Northern Territory

2 August 1977 Letter

9July 1969

Telephone

20 June 1977 . Letter

26 May 1977 Letter

9 October 1979 Letter

13 May 1977 Letter

26 May 1977 Letter

3 June 1977 Letter

(2) This question is being examined.
(3) Convention No. 65-Penal Sanctions (Indigenous Workers) 1936, applies to all contracts by which a worker belonging to or assimilated to the indigenous population of a dependent territory of a Member of the Organisation (lLO) or belonging to or assimilated to the dependent indigenous popUc lation of the home territory of a Member of the Organisation, enters the service of any public authority, individual, company or association, whether non-indigenous or indigenous, for remuneration in cash or in any other form whatsoever.
(4) The review of Convention No. 65 was conducted by my Department in 1977.
(5) The Government has not been advised of any change of view by the Victorian Government.
(6) The Department has not had any detailed formal dis~ cussions with the International Labour Office concerning Convention No. 65 as the impediments to its ratification have been clear.

Construction Industry
(Question No. 2960)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 20 October 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that the total annual output of the construction sector in Australia is approximately $16,000 million; if so, is this equal to the combined value of agriculture and mining.
(2) Is it also a fact that total building and construction research, including private, government and industry, amounts to only 0.2 per cent of the total value of output.
(3) Does the CSIRO Division of Building Research deal with approximately 40,000 inquiries each year and does it make a very valuable contribution to standards in the construction industry.
(4) Does the Government propose to cut back the provisions of building advice as an economy measure.
(5) If so, what sum is expected to be saved by this cutback.
(6) Will the Government reconsider this decision.
Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The value of output of the Australian construction sector obviously depends on the definitions chosen for both 'output' and 'construction sector'. The figure for output can vary

widely with the definitions chosen. I am aware that an estimate of $16,000 mi!lion in 1978-79 has recently been mentioned. This has been on an extrapolation of figures in the Australian Bureau of Statistics publication 'Australian National Accounts: Input-Output Tables 1974-75'. There are other ways of measuring output, and I would suggest that the most authoritative, widely accepted, and widely used figures are those published by the Australian Bureau of Statistics in 'Australian National Accounts: National Income and Expenditure'. The most recently published (1981) edition of these national accounts gives a provisional figure for 1978-79 (latest available year) for gross domestic product at market prices of the construction industry, of$7,053 million.
The corresponding figures for agriculture (including forestery, fishing and hunting), and mining, are $6,481 million and $5,363 million respectively. These together total $12,204 million, or some 73 per cent more than the construction industry.
(2) The most reliable source of figures on research expenditure in Australia is 'Project SCORE, Research and Development in Australia'. The most recently available, complete figures in this series are for 1976-77, produced by the then Department of Science and the Environment. These show that total funding of reseach and development in the objective category of 'Construction' for that year was $8.089 million. This was 0.13 per cent of gross domestic product at market prices of the construction industry in that year. It should be noted that the level of indigenous Rand D does not depend only on the economic importance of the sector. Research intensity opportunities for research, and use of overseas technology rather than indigenous research, must also be taken into account.
(3) No strict account of the number of inquiries received by the Division of Building Research is kept. The Division has, however, estimated that it has dealt with about 40,000 inquiries per year in each of the last few years. About twenty officers of the Division are involved in standards activities; this includes regular meetings with committees of the Standards Association of Australia to develop standards in the areas of building and construction, and the publication and implementation of some of the Division's research results as standards.
(4) The Government has no plans to cut back the provision of building advice as an economy measure. The Division of Building Research has itself recently decided to close its own Consumer Information Service in recognition of other services now available, but it is expanding its Industry Liaison Service for architects, engineers, builders and other members of the building industry and allied trades.
(5) No estimate is available of the savings to the Division of the termination of the Consumer Information Service, as it occurred at the same time as other organizational rearrangements in the Division, most significantly the expansion of its Industry Liaison Service.
(6) As noted in (4) above, this was a decision not of the Government but of the Division of Building Research in response to its own perception of its priorities within the overall resource allocation for the Division determined by the CSIRO Executive and the Institute ofIndustrial Technology.

Parliamentary Liaison Officers under the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs

(Question No. 3043)

Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Em-

ployment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, an 9

September 1981:

.

How many Parliamentary Liaison Officer positions have
existed in the Minister's Department and each Statutory Authority under the Minister's jurisdiction in each State, the

3108 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory for each year from 1970 to 1981.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
No full time position of Parliamentary Liaison Officier exists or has existed in the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs since it was established in December 1978. However, one position in the Department's Central Office in Canberra has been nominated to carry out Parliamentary Liaison Officer duties together with other duties. That position is supported by four other positions which, similarly, are engaged on parliamentary liaison duties on a part time basis.
Disabled Persons: Use of and Access to Commonwealth Buildings
(Question No. 3059)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(I) Further to his answer to Question No. 901 (Hansard. 2 April 1981, page 1340) what is the progress to date on each of the 3 projects listed for modification to improve access by disabled persons.
(2) In regard to the modifications to the Commonwealth Centre, Chifly Square, New South Wales, what is the cost of the (a) new automatic sliding door entry, (b) new taps, (c) modification to cafeteria food race and (d) disabled persons toilet.
(3) Where are the new taps to be installed in the Commonwealth Centre and how are these intended to assist the disabled.
(4) Have any additional buildings in Sydney been identified as providing facilities for access for the disabled.
(5) Does Australia House, Sydney, have ready access for the disabled; if so, why was it not listed in part (I) of his answer; if not, why is a disabled person's toilet being installed inside Australia House.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Progress to date on each of the three projects listed in answer to part (2) of Question No. 90 I, is as follows:
(a) Australia House, Sydney-unisex disabled persons toilet-work completed.
(b) Commonwealth Centre, Chifley Square, Sydneynew automatic sliding door entry, new taps, modification to cafeteria food race, lower public telephone shelf-work completed. It was not possible to include the disabled persons toilet in the 1980-81 modification program, but it is now intended to execute the work as part of the 1981-82 modification program.
(c) 5-7 Hickson Road, Circular Quay-disabled persons toilet-work completed.
(2) The costs of the items listed are:
(a) New automatic sliding door entry-$4,435.
(b) New taps-$5,030.
(c) Modification to cafeteria food race-$I ,274.
(d) Disabled persons toilet-estimated $10,000.
(3) A modified tap was installed over one hand-basin in each of the male and female washrooms on each floor. The modified taps enable easier use by all people, especially disabled people.

(4) No additional Commonwealth buildings in Sydney have been identified as providing facilities for access for the disabled.
(5) Australia House, Sydney does have ready access for disabled people, as one entrance to the building is at street level.
As Australia House was included in part (2) of the answer to Question No. 901 as being modified to provide access, it was not listed in part (I) of the answer to that question.
Sale and Supply of Oxygen to Patients
(Question No. 3067)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(I) What are the procedures covering the sale and supply of oxygen to patients in nursing homes and outside approved hospitals.
(2) Who are the major suppliers of oxygen.
(3) Can patients requiring oxygen for medical reasons become dependent on oxygen.
(4) Has any investigation been made of the possibility of all distribution of oxygen outside approved hospitals being placed under the control of a hospital.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I understand that the sale and supply of oxygen to patients outside recognised hospitals throughout Australia is generally dependent upon such medical requirements being either initiated or confirmed by at least a general practitioner. In nursing homes, the supply of oxygen to patients is either initiated by their own doctor or the nursing home staff. I am not aware of the existence of any State legislation or regulations controlling the supply of oxygen to patients in the above categories.
(2) The major suppliers in Australia of oxygen for medical purposes are Commonwealth Industrial Gases Ltd (C.LG.) and Liquid Air Australia Ltd.
(3) Yes. It is possible for patients requiring oxygen for medical purposes to become psychologically or physiologically dependent on its use.
(4) No.
Norfolk Island Airport
(Question No. 3126)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that the approval of funds for the upgrading of Norfolk Island Airport facilities was to be subject to controls being negotiated between the Norfolk Island and the Australian Governments over frequency of /lights and size of aircraft to be used.
(2) Is work due to commence in late 1981.
(3) Did the Norfolk Island Select Committee Report on Tourism of May 1981 state that the controls referred to in part (I) have not yet been negotiated.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (3). No. The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works in its report, recommended that the Australian and Norfolk Island Governments should negotiate to ensure that controls of tourism, transit air passengers, airline

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3109

schedules and types of aircraft using the Norfolk Island Aerodrome are effective in preserving the Norfolk Island environment and economy.
In accord with the recommendation, I have reached agreement with the Norfolk Island Minister for Resources and Planning that there will be consultation with the Norfolk Island Government when a request is made which could have a major effect upon the provision of air services to Norfolk Island.
(2) Work on the aerodrome is expected to commence early in 1982.
Anencephalix
(Question No. 3220)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 23 September 1981 :
(I) How many cases of anencephalix were reported in each Canberra hospital in each month during 1980.
(2) If there were any noticeable variations in the pattern of reported cases has any investigation been made by health authorities as to its cause.
(3) What studies are made of each anencephali x episode.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) During 1980 Royal Canberra Hospital reported one case of anencephalus in January. Woden Valley Hospital reported a total of three cases-in March, April and September of 1980. No cases were reported in Calvary Hospital.
(2) and (3) The Capital Territory Health Commission's Maternal, Perinatal and Infant Mortality and Morbidity Committee routinely monitors incidence of birth defects. Statistics of anencephalus in the Australian Capital Territory are shown in the table below. Fluctuations in the numbers of deaths are to be expected where small numbers are involved.

Because the occurrence of four cases in 1980 was not unusual, no special investigations were made.

Year

Anencephalus, A.C.T. Births, A.C.T. (perinatal deaths) (live and still*)

1973

6

4,132

1974

I

4,404

1975

3

4,398

1976

2

4,520

1977

I

4,675

1978

4

4,467

1979

2

t4,520

1980

4

t4,500

* Stillbirths 1973 to 1978 adjusted to allow for altered inter-
national definition used from 1979. t Preliminary estimate.

Motor Vehicles: Imports from Sweden
(Question No. 3231)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 23 September 1981:
(I) How many motor vehicles were imported to Australia from Sweden by vehicle type (i.e. passenger cars, trucks and respective makes) in each year from 1976-77 to 1980-81.-
(2) How many motor vehicles were exported from Australia to Sweden, by vehicle type and make, during each of the same years.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The table below, derived from ABS data, indicates that for the years 1976-77 to 1980-81 the following assembled motor vehicles were imported from Sweden.

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

1979-80

1980-81

No. Value No. Value No. Value No. Value No. Value

Assembled new cars and station wagons

$m

$m

$m

$m

$m

2,724 13.7 1,116 4.8 2,554 14.3 2,480 17.1 1,829 11.8

Assembled motor vehicles for the transport of

goods or materials, special purpose motor ve-

hicles and road tractors for semi-trailers

328 7.3 191 2.3 52 1.5

0.1

6 0.4

Assembled public-service type passenger motor

vehicles (e.g. motor buses, coaches)

0.1

0.1

2 0.1

Import statistics are not classified by make, however registrations for 1980-81, from figures provided by the private statistical organisation, ADAPS, for the two Swedish vehicle producers, Volvo and Saab-Scania are shown in the following table.

Volvo Saab-Scania

1980-81 registrations

Station

Cars

wagons

5,412

1,464

435

Panel vans
95

Heavy trucks
863
234

Heavy buses
142

Total 7,976
669

These registration figures represent fully imported vehicles and those assembled from CKD packs. In 1980-81 $23.9m worth of unassembled vehicles were imported from Sweden, the bulk being unassembled cars and station wagons.

3110 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) According to ABS data there were no motor vehicles exported (excluding re-exports) to Sweden between 1976-77 and 1980-8J.
Brisbane Airpo'rt: Re-Iocation
(Question No. 3287)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:
(I) Where will the proposed flight paths of the Brisbane Airport be following the re-Iocation of the airport in 1986,
(2) What will be the noise exposure forecasts for lands adjacent to the new airport in respect of these flight paths.
(3) In particular, what is the expected noise level for residents of (a) Nudgee Beach, (b) Shorncliffe, (c) Sandgate, (d) Brighton and (e) Nudgee,
(4) Will the proposed cross-wind runway be used only when weather conditions do not permit landing or take off on the main runway,
(5) Will the proposed cross-wind runway be restricted to general aviation use only.
(6) Will the cross runway on the existing Eagle Farm Airport site be used for air traffic following completion of the redeveloped airport; if so, for what purpose,
(7) What recreational uses will be made of Commonwealth Government land adjacent to the redevelpped airport site.
(8) Will he ensure that whatever increase in inconvenience caused by higher noise exposure from the new airport is suffered by Nudgee Beach residents is offset by extensive recreational use of land adjacent to the airport.
(9) In relation to runway 02/20, on present indications, what percentage of (a) take offs and (b) landings at the new airport will take place over Moreton Bay.
(10) In relation to the proposed cross-wind runway 14/32, on present indications what percentage of (a) take offs and (b) landings will take place over Bramble Bay.
(II) At what stage is the Government's proposal to build a widely spaced parallel runway on the redeveloped airport site and where will the runway be located in relation to the main runway 02/20.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) There are two aspects of the flight paths at the redeveloped Brisbane Airport; firstly the number and type of aircraft using each runway and secondly the flight paths followed by each aircraft from the runway to the inbound or outbound route. The following table shows the expected proportion of all aircraft types using each run)Vay at the redeveloped airport.

Runway 02 Runway 14
Runway 20 Runway 32

Takeoff

Land

7am-IOpm Wpm-7am 7am-IOpm Wpm-7am

49

88

32

2.5

II

6.5

8

3

50

I

40

0.5

8

98

2

0,5

Owing to the differing characteristics of the two runways,
only aircraft about the size of an F27 or smaller, can use the cross-wind runway on a regular basis, while all types of aircraft can use the major runway. The exact fdaght paths that aircraft will follow between the runway and the inbound and
outbound routes have not yet been determined.

(2) The noise exposure forecast (NEF) for lands adjacent to the redeveloped Brisbane Airport is depicted in Drawing No.3 to the Department of Transport's Statement of Evidence to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works for the Redevelopment of Brisbane International Airport-Further Dredging and Reclamation. This evidence was submitted to the Committee on 2 September. Land within the 25 NEF zone is limited to areas of the suburbs of Meandah, Pinkemba, Myrtletown and Cribb Island, A total of 41 existing houses in Pinkemba and Myrtletown will be within the forecast areas.
(3) Nudgee Beach, Shorncliffe, Sandgate, Brighton and Nudgee are all well outside the 25 NEF zone, Typical estimated maximum noise levels at any of those locations would not exceed 75 decibels (a weighted peak noise level). These noise levels would be produced from possible overflight by propeller-driven aircraft up to Fokker F27 size, either approaching on base leg to, or on setting course after taking off from the proposed cross-wind 14/32 runway.
(4) No. The cross runway will be available at all times,
(5) No. However, the proposed length and strength of the runway will prevent its use by current airline aircraft larger than the F27.
(6) No, The existing runways will be closed on commissioning of the redevelopment airport.
(7) The Commonwealth land and waterway comprising the flood way on the western side of the airport are the only areas being considered for recreational use. The Joint Government Co-ordinating Committee is currently considering the development constraints and types of activities which will not impair the prime function of the area as a floodway and not affect the operation of the airport.
(8) Aircraft noise exposure to Nudgee Beach residents is likely to be minimal. Apart from the powers available under Building Height Control Regulations the Commonwealth has no powers over land outside the Commonwealth's acquisition boundary. The Commonwealth has no objection in principle to recreational use of the flood way, subject to the' conditions mentioned in (7).
(9) The proportion of total movements over Morlon Bay is given in the answer to part (I) of this question; aircraft landing on runway 20 and laking off from runway 02 pass over Moreton Bay.
(10) The proportion of lhe lotal movements over Bramble Bay is given in lhe answer to part (I) of this question; aircraft landing on runway 14 and taking off from runway 32 pass over Bramble Bay.
(II) The Government has no current proposal to build a widely spaced parallel runway, Planning for the development of the site allows for the construction of a runway 2000 metres to the west of the initial 02/20 runway. On current forecasts the construction of a limited length runway suitable for the smaller general aviation aircraft may be required in the mid-I 990s.
Commonwealth Road Grants
(Question No. 3337)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 15 October 1981:
(I) What was the projected increase in road construction costs made by the Government at the commencement of each year from 1976-77 to 1981-82.
(2) What was the actual increase in road construction costs, as measured by the Government index for each year from 1976-77 to 1980-81.

Answers to Questions

18 November 19&1 REPRESENTATIVES 3111

(3) What was the percentage real change in Commonwealth road grants to the Stafes and the Northern Territory, for each year from 1976-77 to 1980-81, using the actual increase in road construction costs referred to in part (2).
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Government has not had available to it annual forecasts relating specifically to movements in road construction costs. In the years (i.e. 1978-79,1979-80 and 1980-81) where the level of Commonwealth roads grants was fixed with a view to maintaining the level of expenditure in real terms,

the grants have been adjusted in line with forecast movements in the implicit price deflator for gross fixed capital expenditure on private non-dwelling construction. This index was considered to provide a reasonable approximation of cost movements in the road construction sector (see also answer to Question No. 3338) but makes no allowance for productivity growth or changing profit margins.
(2) and (3) Comparative details of increases in Commonwealth road grants, increases in the deflator for private nondwelling construction and changes in the level of Commonwealth assistance (in constant prices) for the period 1976-77 to 1980-81 are as follows:

Year

Commonwealth roads grants to the States
Annual increase

Annual increase in implicit
price deflator for private non-
dwelling construction

Annual change
in Commonwealth
roads grants in constant
prices

1976-77
1977-78 1978-79
1979-80 1980-81

$m

%

436.7

3.0

475.0

8.8

508.0

6.9

546.0(1)

7.5

606.9(1 )

11.2

%

%

12.8

-8.7

8.6

+0.3

6.8

+0.1

11.8

-3.8

12.4

-1.2

(I) For consistency of presentation Commonwealth road grants to the Northern Territory ($19.0 million in 1979-80; $21.1

million in 1980-81) have been excluded.

Source: Commonwealth Roads Acts and Australian Bureau of Statistics Quarterly Estimates of National Income and

Expenditure, June Quarter 1981

.

Road Construction Costs
(Question No. 3338)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 15 October 1981:
(I) For which years has the Government used the implicit price deflator of gross fixed capital expenditure on private non-dwelling construction to measure road construction cost increases.
(2) Is it a fact that this index does not include provision for bitumen prices; if so, what is the rationale for using the index and not another more appropriate index.
(3) For what period does the Government intend to use this index.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) In each of the years 1978-79, 1979-80 and 1980-81, the Commonwealth used forecast movements in the implicit price deflator for gross fixed capital expenditure on private nondwelling construction as the basis for adjusting the overall level of Commonwealth roads grants.
(2) The deflator referred to in (I) above does not include provision for bitumen prices. The Government saw the need to adopt an index for which up to date forecasts would be readily available in the annual budgetary context. In the five year period prior to 1978-79 movements in the deflator for private non-dwelling construction had closely approximated movements in other indexes designed to specifically measure historical changes in road construction costs (e.g. State Road Authority indexes).
(3) The Government has announced levels of assistance to the States and Northern Territory for roads for the period 1981-82 to 1984-85. These amounts were determined after taking account of a range of factors including the likely effect of the Government's economic policies on the general rate of

inflation. The Government has provided no undertaking to further adjust the grants according to movements in any index.
Qantas Services via Damascus
(Question No. 3433)
Mr Jull asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 28 October 1981:
(I) How many Qantas services operate from (a) Australia to Europe and (b) Europe to Australia, via Damascus, weekly.
(2) How many passengers terminating in Damascus in each direction were carried by Qantas during 1980.
(3) How much freight destined for Damascus was carried in each direction by Qantas 10'1980.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Qantas operates one service per week from Australia to Europe via Damascus and one service per week from Europe to Australia via Damascus.
(2) In 1980 Qantas carried 687 passengers from Australia to Damascus and 956 passengers from Damascus to Australia.
(3) In 1980 Qantas carried two tonnes of freight from Australia to Damascus and three tonnes of freight from Damascus to Australia.
National Highway between Newman and Port Hedland, Western Australia
(Question No. 3436)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 28 October 1981:

3112 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) With reference to his declaration document NH 6-8 declaring the national highway route in Western Austraia, including a zone of study between Newman and Port Hedland, to select the ultimate route for its national highway between the two centres, does the study rule out the existing alignment.
(2) What is the difference in distance and cost between the existing alignment and the proposed route.
(3) What is the latest estimated time of construction.
(4) When is it now proposed to start construction of the highway.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. The alternative routes which have been agreed by the Commonwealth and Western Australia for the study include the existing route via Marble Bar.
(2), (3) and (4) This study is in progress and is due to be completed by the end of March 1982. Consequently, it is too early to provide information on the lengths and costs of alternative routes and no decision has been made on the proposed route for the National Highway or on the timing for the commencement or duration of its construction.

Employment Levels
(Question No. 3450)
Dr Everingham asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 28 October 1981:
(I) What is the estimated percentage of persons in Australia aged 20-64 in the case of males or 20-59 in the case of females who were (a) employed, counting a part-time worker as, on average 0.4 of a full-time worker and (b) actively seeking work, in August of each year from 1976 to 1981.
(2) What criteria for actively seeking work are applied in each case:
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Australiati Statistician has supplied the following estimates based on the results of labour force surveys.
(I) (a) and (b) ESTIMATED PERCENTAGE OF MALES AGED 20-64 AND FEMALES AGED 20-59 EMPLOYED OR ACTIVELY SEEKING WORK IN AUSTRALIA: AUGUST 1976 TO AUGUST 1981

August

Persons

1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

Full-time equivalents employed (ie counting a part-time worker as, on average, 0.4 of a full-time worker) Actively seeking work"

percent
64.3 2.6

percent
64.2 3.0

per cent
62.6 3.5

percent
62.6 3.1

percent
63.1 3.3

per cent
63.0 3.3

- These estimates related to unemployed persons who were available to work in the survey week, or would have been available except for temporary illness.

(2) In each case the criteria applied for 'actively seeking for work' include checking or registering with the Commonwealth Employment Service or other employment agencies; writing, telephoning or applying in person to an employer for work; answering a newspaper advertisement for a job; advertising or tendering for work; contacting friends or relatives to find a job; and looking on factory or employment service notice boards.
Alice Springs-Darwin Railway Construction Project
(Question No. 3515)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) In relation to Division 655, Sub-Division 3, Item 12, of the estimates of expenditure for his Department for 1981-82 explanatory notes, what progress has been made in the (a) route identification survey, (b) detail design and (c) preparation of cost estimates being undertaken by the Australian National Railways Commission in respect of the Alice Springs-Darwin railway construction project.
(2) What specific information is he able to provide on the results of any cost efficiency studies for that may have been carried out on this project.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) As previously announced the Government has committed $IOm for preliminary planning and design work for the Alice Springs to Darwin railway project. $280,000 was provided in 1980-81 and $3m is to be provided in 1981-82. It is an- .ticipated that sufficient planning work will be completed for the Government to consider construction 'options by the end

of 1982. At this stage work is concentrating on route identification.
Aerial photography and mapping is complete for the section Katherine to Darwin. Aerial photography is complete for the section Alice Springs to Tennant Creek. Detailed ground survey is underway for the section Alice Springs to Bond Springs.
(2) The report of the Joint Commonwealth/Northern Territory study on the feasibility of constructing the rail link was released last year.
Apart from economic considerations, the report emphasised the defence, social and developmental aspects of the railway.
Sale of International Airline Tickets
(Question No. 3619)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) What consideration has his Department given to prohibiting the sale of international airline tickets which do not clearly indicate conditions and restrictions governing travel on the ticket.
(2) What action is he able to take to ensure that all restrictions attaching to airline travel being sold are clearly shown on the ticket at the time of sale.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) In developing its aviation policy the Government has attempted to create an environment responsive to the needs of both consumers and carriers. The basic aim of the

Answers to Questions

18 November 19&1 REPRESENTATIVES 3113

policy has been to encourage airlines to provide a comprehensive range of cost related fare and rate types to be available on a non-discriminatory basis. In accordance with this policy, and with the agreement of our bilateral partners, the airlines introduced on our major routes a ra'nge of fare types designed to cater for the different sections of the travel market. The fares normally range from the flexible on-demand types to which very few conditions attach (First Class, Sleeper, Business Class, Economy) through to the low cost promotional fare types involving more restrictive ticket conditions (Excursion Fares, Advance Purchase Fares, Group Inclusive Fares).
With respect to the promotional fare types, the Government, in co-operation with our bilateral partners, Quntas and the designated carriers of the countries involved, have developed arrangements to ensure that intending passengersare adequately advised of important fare conditions that may afl'ect their travel plans. Any advertising of advafwe purchase fares, for example, must include as a minimum requirement a statement of the advance purchase period and the fact that a cancellation penalty applies. Further, it is an important ticket requirement that passengers intending to buy advance purchase fares must not only be advised of the cancellation/refund conditions by the airline/travel agent involved, but a statement to the effect that the total fare is not refundable if not used on the fligh(s)/date(s) shown, must also appear on or be attached to the ticket itselr. In addition, passengers purchasing advance purchase fares must also be advised of the availability of insurance cover, which may assist in guarding against unforseen changes to travel plans.
In deciding whether or not to impose special consumer warning notices on tickets my Department has had to balance the consumer interest against the legitimate need of the industry to minimise airline and travel agent administrative costs. It should also be noted that administrative costs also affect the consumer interest through their impact on fare levels.
It would appear, from information available to the Department of Transport, however that consumers have readily accepted the more restrictive conditions on the promotional fare types in exchange for lower cost travel.
Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd
Mr Newman-On 24 September 1981 (Hansard, page 1735) Mr Cunningham asked me a question, without notice, concerning police inquiries into the activities of the former Chairman of Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd. I answered the honourable member at that time and he later wrote to me seeking clarification of two points.
( I) Why the first report was never released;
(2) When Mr Webster or his legal advisers were last interviewed.
The answers to the honourable member's further questions are as follows:
(I) I refer the honourable member to the statement made by my colleague, the Minister for Primary Industry in the House on 29 October 1981 (Hansard, pages 2681 to 2686). In the course of that statement, the Minister tabled a comprehensive report by the Australian Federal Police covering its investigations.
(2) I am advised by the Australian Federal Police that Mr Webster was personally contacted by investigating police on II September 1981 but he stated he did not wish to participate

in any further interviews and declined to answer any questions.
Annual Reports and Other Publications: Treasurer
(Question No. 1239)
Mr Bungey asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What annual reports are produced by his Department and authorities under his aegis.
(2) What was the cost of producing these publications for 1979-80.
(3) Are other regular publications issued by his Department and these authorities; if so, what are they, and what is the cost of (a) production and (b) distribution of each.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Annual reports are produced by the following:
The Treasury Reserve Bank of Australia Commonwealth Banking Corporation Australian Industry Development Corporation Australian Bureau of Stastics Australian Stastics Advisory Council Royal Australian Mint Commissioner of Taxation (a) Insurance Commissioner Life Insurance Commissioner Foreign Investment Review Board National Debt Commission
(a) The Commissioner of Taxation also produces, as a supplement to his annual report, a report on Taxation
. Statistics. (2) Printing production costs for these publications in 1979-80 were $244,451.
(3) Yes. Details follow; costs relate to 1979-30. Treasury Round-up of Economic Stastics:
(a) $28,688 (b) Available for sale through Australian Government
Publishing outlets.
Australian General Insurance Industry Statisical Bulletin: (a) $6,020 (b) Available for sale through Australian Government Publishing Service outlets.
Summary of Annual Returns for Life Insurance Companies: (a) $5,035 (b) Available for sale through Australian Government Publishing Service outlets.
Reserve Bank of Australia Monthly Statistical Bulleiin: (a) $74,084 (b) $39,186 distribution costs.
Australian Bureau of Statistics Publications are listed in the catalogue of Publications, 1980 (ABS reference: 1101.0):
(a) $1,037,000 (b) $560,000 costs.
Income Tax Ready Reckoner (a) $49,050 (b) Available for sale through branch and regional offices of the Australian Taxation Office.
The Commonwealth Banking Corporat~ion produces a monthly economic newsletter. However, for competetive commercial reasons, it would not be appropriate to provide details of expenditure on this newsletter.

3114 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

MANDATA System: Department ofEducation
(Question No. 2222)

Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:

(I) Has the MANDATA System been introduced in his
Department and Government instrumentalitieS' under his control; if so, what was the (a) cost of (i) the equipment, (ii)
installation, (iii) site preparation, (iv) acquiring or renting sites and (v) other additional factors associated with the introduction of the system and (b) total cost of introducing
the system.

(2) Were any reductions in the staff of personnel/establis-
ment units achieved as a result of introducing this system; if so, what (a) reductions in staff and (b) cost savings were achieved in each year since its introduction.

(3) What staff (a) saving or (b) increase is expected with the termination of the MANDATA System.

(4) What is the anticipated (a) extra cost or (b) saving resulting from the termination of the MANDATA System.

Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Yes, in the Department of Education, the Curriculm Development Centre, the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission and the Commonwealth Schools Com-
mission. (The two Commissions were on the Leave Subsystem only). All MANDATA Sub-systems ceased during the period May to September 1981.

(a) (i) Equipment (purchase of equipment and initial installation were included in

original purchase costs by Public Ser-

vice Board)

(ii) Installation (additional power points)

(iii) Site preparation (room partitioning)

(iv) Acquiring/renting sites

(v) Additional factors, Plan'ning for

introduction

5,000

Training of staff and data

conversion

38,000

(b) Total cost

$
nil 700 2,900 nil
43,000 46,000

(2) No staffing reductions were achieved on implementation of the system and the conversion required the mainten-
ance of existing resources. However, the Department was very advanced in incorporating the system into operational areas throughout the Department. To achieve a similar
operating standard, it is certain that additional staff numbers would have been required had the Department continued
with manual operating methods rather than converting to an automated system.

(3) (a) 3 staff members have been redeployed within the Department.

(b) Nil.

(4) (a) Introduction of an automated personnel and establishment information system through a private bureau service. If the
Department did not use such a system,
an additional two staff to those mentioned in (b) below would be required to maintain services formerly provided
under MANDATA. . . . . . . (b) Savings will be in terms of costs of
salaries For 3 staff members redeployed

$
55,000 45,000

Mining Industry Income: Proportions Payable Overseas
(Question No. 2470)
Mr Uren asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:
(I) What proportions of total company income in (a) the minining industry, (b) the manufacturing industry, (c) the finance sector and (d) all industries were payable overseas in each year since 1970-71.
(2) What proportions of income payable overseas in (a) the mining industry,(b) the manufacturing industry, (c) the finance'sector and (d) all industries were retained in Australia in each yea'r sihce 1970-71.
Mr Howard-the answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) (b) (c) and (d) Estimates of the proportions of total company income (after income tax) in the mining industry, manufacturing industry, the finance sector and in all industries that were payable overseas in each year from 1970-71 to 1979-80 are as follows:

Mining

Manu-

All

facturing Finance industries

1970-71 1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78
1978-79 1979-80

per cent 46.5 25.1 41.2 51.3 52.2 42.5 47.8 39.5 30.8 n.a.

per cent 27.0 27.3 26.3 24.6 19.9 27.3 31.1 30.7 31.7 n.a.

per cent 18.3 21.5 22.6 21.7 8.8 29.7 16.8 54.2
15.3 27.1

percent 29.0 26.9 31.2 30.9 25.5 32.6 34.1 37.9 32.7 36.5

These estimates have been derived from data provided by the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS). The method Followed in the calculation of the estimates is in accordance with that used For the preparation of the data on the proportion of total company income payable overseas that were released on 31 March 1980 (Press Release by the Treasurer, No. 35).
The estimates are subject to the qualifications noted in that press release. In particular, it should be noted that the proportion of total company income payable overseas is not a reliable measure of the extent of Foreign participation in the economy. It is subject to a good deal of short-term fluctuation and apparent trends may be subject to reversal as revised and more recent data become available. Moreover, the proportion, apart From being calculated From data that are subject to problems of statistical estimation, is affected by various influences in addition to the level of Foreign ownership. These include any tendency for the profitability of Foreigncontrolled enterprises to differ From that of Australiancontrolled enterprises and For the profitability and taxation payments of sectors in which foreign ownership is relatively high to vary relative to other sectors. For these reasons, great care should be taken in drawing any conclusions relating to foreign participation from the data.
In addition to these general qualifications, it should be noted that some of the data required for the calculations of the proportions of company income payable overseas in respect of the mining, manuFacturi ng and finance sectors were not available, with the result that certain assumptions and approximations had to be made. A major qualification to the proportions for these sectors is that the estimates of income payable overseas are derived from data For groups of related

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3115

enterprises classified according to the 1961 Population Census Classification of Industries, whereas the estimates of total company income relate generally to single enterprises classified according to the Australian Standard Industrial Classification.
Hence, the reliability of the estimates for the industry sectors shown in the table is severely limited, both as regards levels and year to year movements in the proportions, by the lack of consistency on an industry basis between the income payable overseas data and the total company income data, and also by the assumptions and approximations that have had to be made.
The following notes regarding the calculations,of the proportions of company income payable overseas should also be taken into account when interpreting the data shown in the table:
(i) In order to derive the proportion of total company income payable overseas, withholding tax has been added to the income payable overseas data. (Although withholding tax reduces the income received by the foreign owners of Australian businesses, it is the amount of income generated by these businesses, rather than the amount payable to their owners, that is relevant for the purpose of obtaining an indication of the share of foreign investors in total company income.) It was not, however, possible to make this adjustment in respect of the data for the industry sectors.
(ii) Information is not available to permit the proportions for the mining and manufacturing industries to be estimated using numerators consistent with the denominators in that the denominators do not include dividends received.
(iii) The data used for tax payable by mining companies and manufacturing companies were approximations and included estimated adjustments for late assessments.
(iv) The estimated company income after tax of financial enterprises included data relating to institutions engaged mainly in financing. Data relating to companies engaged in financial service activities (eg stock or commodity exchanges, financial consultants or brokers) were not included.
(v) The company income data used to derive the proportions in the table are before deducting any allowance for stock valuation adjustment (this is a measure of the 'paper profits' derived from stocks as a result of rising prices). This ensures that both the company income and the income payable overseas data are valued in the same way.
(2) (a) (b) (c) and (d) The proportions of income payable overseas on direct foreign investment in the mining and quarrying industry, manufacturing industry, the insurance, banking and other finance and property sectors, and all industries that were retained in Australia in each year since 1970-71 were as follows:' ,

1970-71
1971-72 1972-73 1973-74
1974-75 1975-76 1976-77

Mining and
quarrying
per cent 62.8 58.0 55.0 57.9 37.2 49.8 19.1

Insurance banking
and other
Manufinance and facturing property

All industries

percent
55.4
48.8 44.8 49.8
48.3 56.2 66.9

percent
29.4 42.4 35.3
7.4 -233.3
52.1 23.9

percent
50.9 43.8 42.7 50.5
33.5 53.4
49.7

Mining
and quarrying

Insurance
banking and other
Manufinance and facturing property

All industries

1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

percent
23.2 21.3 29.6

per cent
62.4 66.2 62.5

percent 62.5 49.1 63.7

percent
47.7
52.8 52.6

Note: These proportions have been derived from ABS data.

Taxation Incentive: Investment on Films
(Question No. 2488)
Dr Klugman asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 5 June 1981:
(1) Did he receive a submission from Mr James Mitchell, Executive Director, Film and Television Production Association of Australia, dated 12 May 1981.
(2) If so, does the submission state On page 2, in regard to the 150 per cent incentive investment write-off on films and the other promised tax concession, that. the original estimate of $2 million per year cost to revenue was based on total investment in production of $20 million.
(3) Can he say whether a similar calculation convinced the Prime Minister and the former Minister for Home Affairs and Environment to promise these benefits during the last election campaign.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) Yes.
(3)- As I indicated in my response to the honourable member's question in the House on 28 May 1981, the original estimate of cost of the policy speech proposal was based on estimates supplied by the Au~tralian Film Commission. The concession was proposed as an incentive to the Australian film industry. The projected cost was one of the factors taken into account in developing the proposal.

Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting TaskForce
(Question No. 2648)
Mr Hayden asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(1) What are the (a) numbers and (b) salaries of (i) Second, (ii) Third and (iii) Fourth Division officers participating in the Commonwealth Heads of Government .Meeting Task Force.
(2) What was the total cost of salaries and overtime for members of the Task Force during 1980-81.
(3) Are all the members of the Task Force officers of his Department; if not, which other Departments are represented on the Task Force, and by how many officers from each Division.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) There were 459 staff attached to the Task Force as outlined in the tabulation below. Of these 77 were on the Task Force payroll whilst the remainder (382) were attached on a very short term basis and counted on the payrolls of their parent departments. The 382 short term staff included 133 Delegation Liaison Officers, 60 pass checkers and 50 keyboard staff who were employed for a period little more than the duration of the meeting..

3116 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Designation

Classification

Long Term

Short Term

Total Annual Salary

Second DivisionHead
Deputy Head Assistant Secretary Assistant Head Host Broadcaster

LevelS Level 3 Level 2 Levell Level I

$

I 46,781

I 40,406

I 37,220

2

2 34,031

I

1 34,031

Sub-total Third Division-
Journalist Clerk Journalist Clerk Journalist Clerk Operations Officer Clerk Journalist Clerk Clerical Officer Clerk Broadcast Eng Off Librarian Clerk Clerk Clerk Clerk

GradeA4 Class 11 GradeA2 Class 10 Grade AI Class 9 Grade 9 Class 8 Grade A Class 7 Class 7 Class 6 Grade 4 Class 2 Class 5 Class 4 Class 2/3 Class 1

5

6

I

1 30,865

6

27

33 28,182-29,096

2

2 27,263

3

24

27 26,350-27,265

1

1 24,547-25,466

7

36

43 24,522-25,431

1

1 23,529

5

35

40 22,693-23,609

1

1 20,990-21,930

6

20

26 20,542-21,772

I

i 20,153-21,360

11

20

31 18,708-19,935

1

1 18,616-19,568

1

1 17,415-19,165

1

17

18 16,874-18,246

2

26

28 15,044-16,415

26

26 12,957-14,579

19

19 6,434-12,562

Sub-total Fourth Division-
Senior Furniture Officer Graphic Designer
Personal Secretary Transport Supervisor Clerical Assistant Communications Officer Typist Controller Clerical Assistant
Word Processing Supervisor Steno-secretary Communicator
Clerical Assistant Word Processing Supervisor Senior Machine Operator Word Processing Typist Clerical Assistant Typist Supervisor
Steno-secretary Clerk Word Processing Typist Clerical Assistant Assistant Printer Typist Clerical Assistant Typist Clerical Assistant

Grade 2 Grade 2 Grade 4 Grade 7 Grade 3 Grade 2 Grade 6 Grade 2 Grade 2 Grade 3 Grade 5 Grade I
Grade 2 Gtade4 Grade 1 Grade 1 Grade 4 Grade 1 Grade 3 Grade 1 Grade 2 Grade 2 Grade 1 Grade 1

48

252

300

18,195-18,764

16,916-17,822

16,582-17,443

16,167-16,497

1

15,369-15,821

1

14,725-15,658

1

1 14,883-15,253

1

4

5 14,185-14,917

1

2

3 13,983-14,281

4

6

10 13,275-14,079

2

2 12,960-13,852

6

6 13,094-13,815

2

2 13,276-13,673

1

1 12,840-13,267

I

2 12,680-12,975

14

14 12,233-12,737

3

3 12,381-12,680

3

10

13 12,084-12,680

1

1 12,001-12,495

1

14

15 12,068-12,387

1

17

18 11 ,242-11 ,985

2

2 11,598-11,970

2

9

11 11,089-11,609

5

8

13 10,502-10,999

19

19 5,102-10,828

5

6 4,832-10,337

Sub-total Total

24

129

153

77

382

459

(2) $365,226. (3) No. The number of officers from all departments represented on the Task Force were as follows:

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3117

Division

Department

Second

Aboriginal Affairs

. Administrative Services
Australian Information Service . . . . . .

Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Service

Attorney-General's

Auditor-General's

Australian Broadcasting Commission

Business and Consumer Affairs

Petroleum Products Pricing Authority

Capital Territory

Communications

Defence

Education

Employment and Youth Affairs

Family Court

Federal Court

Finance

Australian Government Retirement Benefits Office

Foreign Affairs

Australian Development Assistance Bureau

Health

Home Affairs and Environment

Australian War Memorial

Housing and Construction

Immigration and Ethnic Affairs

Industrial Relations

Industry and Commerce

Government Aircraft Factories

National Development and Energy

Office of National Assessments

Office of the Public Service Board

Parliamentary Library

Primary Industry

Australian Plague Locust Commission

Prime Minister and Cabinet (includes 18 Temporary Staff recruited for

CHOGM)

4

Science and Technology

Bureau of Meteorology

Social Security

Trade and Resources

Transport

Treasury

Australian Bureau of Statistics

Australian Taxation Office

Veterans' Affairs

Total

6

Third
3 24
5 1 5
3 6 2 8 I 16 3 19
6 I 69 I 1 7 I 5 14 2 3 1 4
5 2 I 1
36 6
to 4 7
I I 6 9
300

Fourth
I 8
I 3 I 6
20 7 11 1 1 I
6 2
5 4 I 3 I I I 5
2
27 5 I 5 4 5
6 7
153

Total
4 32
5 I 6 3 5 12 2 9 I 36 to 30 I I 7 1 76 3 I 7 I 10 18 3 6 2 5 I 10 2 3 I
67 II I 15 8 12 1 I 12 16
459

Advertising and Promotion: Department of Industry and Commerce
(Question No, 2653)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 18 August 1981 :
(1) What sum was spent by the Minister's Department on adverising and the promotion of Government programs and services during the period (a) 1 January 1980 to 18 October 1980 and (b) 19 October 1980 to 17 August 1981.
(2) What was the cost of each campaign undertaken.
(3) Under which item of expenditure were funds allocated for each campaign.
(4) Which advertising agencies or consultants were used for each campaign.

(5) What was the total sum paid to each agency or consultant for each campaign.
(6) How was each agency or consultant selected.
(7) By what percentage has the departmental cost of advertising increased or decreased year from 1975 to 1980 and duringtheperiod I January 1981 to 17 August 1981.
(8) What is the estimated cost of advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services for 1981-82.
Sir Philip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1)-
Project Australia Campaign: (a) $787,968.00; (b) $634,335.00.
Shorter Working Week: (a) Nil; (b) $545,360.00. Small Business Program: (a) $3,378.65; (b) $12,390.70.

3118 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Points of First Contact (Business Information Centre): (a) $14,713.58; (b) $2,127.58.' .
The following expenditure figures relate to part (b) only as the areas which incurred the expense were not part of the Department of Industry and Commerce prior to I November 1980.
Government Aircraft Factories-Fishermen's Bend: (b) $168,316.00.
Australian Defence Equipment Catalogue: (b) $8,395.00.
.Pacific Defence Reporter: (b) $5,585.00.
(2) The cost of each campaign and a brief outline of the campaign follows:-
Project Australia Campaign: $1 ,422,303.00.
The broad objectives of the campaign are: to heighten community awareness and appreciation of
Australian skills, achievements and potential. to highlight the role of individual initiative in the econ-
omy;and to promote improved product quality, design, pro-
ductivity and marketing; and to encourage the purchase, use and transport of Australian products, services and technology so as to increase employment opportunities.
Shorter Working Week Campaign: $545,360.00.
The Government decided in March 1981 that there should be a media campaign pUblicising the costs and consequences of a shorter working week. This publicity campaign is aimed at informing the public of the effect on the economy of a shorter working week.
Small Business Programme: $15,769.35. In October 1976 Commonwealth and State Ministers responsible for industrial and commercial developments agreed upon a broad program of assistance to small business with emphasis on co-operation between the Commonwealth and States and a rationalisation of services and assistance provided. The basis of the agreed program is that the States assume responsibility for the provision of direct services to small firms in such fields as information, counselling, and training. The Commonwealth provides support services in such areas as publications, training materials, and research and also undertakes a co-ordinating role.
Points of First Contact (Business Information Centres): $16,841.16.
In February 1980, Business Information centres were established on a trial basis for the purpose of providing "points of first contact" for businessmen in relation to Government programs and assistance. The trial project was terminated on 30 April 1981.
General Advertising(i) Government Aircraft Factories-Fishermen's Bend:
$168,316.00 The advertisements placed by G.A.F. relate to pro-
motion of programs and services International Advertising campaign on Nomad aircraft project ($165,301.00) Occupational Health (Australia and New Zealand) ($370.00) International Herald Tribune of Paris, France ($2,580.00) Little Athlete of Melbourne ($65.00)
(ii) DepartmentalAustralian Defence Equipment Catalogue $8,395.00. This catalogue lists all defence orientated equipment produced by both private enterprise and by Government Factories. Pacific Defence Reporter $5,585.00. This publication advertises services performed by the factories as a whole, it advertises Department of

Industry and Commerce as a supplier of Defence equipment in order to expand markets for the future.
(3) Listed below are the heads of expenditure where funds were allocated for each campaign:-

Campaign
Project Australia Campaign
Shorter Working Week
Small Business Program Pdints of FitstCdhtact
(Business In Formation Centre) Government Aircraft Factories-Fishermens Bend Australian Defence Equipment Catalogue Pacific Defence Reporter

Head of Expenditure
Project Australia Trust Fund 888-02-00(80/81) 380-03-05(81/82) 380.2.04-Administrative Expenses-Advertising
G.A.F. Trust Account
Government Factories Trust Funds

(4) The following Commonwealth master placing/charging agencies were used for media placement, for checking and monitoring media performance and for all accounting matters for the campaigns:
Project Australia Campaign-Doyle Dane Bernbach/ Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd, Fortune (Aust) Pty Ltd.
Shorter Working Week-Doyle Dane Bernbach/Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd, Neville Jeffress Advertising Pty Ltd, Fortune (Aust) Pty Ltd, Country Press Ltd, Country Press Co-operative Ltd.
Small Business Program-Doyle Dane Bernbach/Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd, Neville Jeffress Advertising Pty Ltd.
Points of First Contact (Business Information Centre)- Doyle Dane Bernbach/Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd, Fortune (Aust) Pty Ltd.
The technical services of the following agency(s) and consultancy(s) were used to (research) plan and/or produce advertisements for the campaign(s):
Points of First Contact (Business Information Centre)- Richardson, Cooper, Kain Advertising Pty Ltd.
Government Aircraft Factories-Fishermens BendKutt, Skinner, Bennett Pty Ltd.
Australian Defence Equipment Catalogue-Peter Isaacson Publications.
(5) Outlines below are the total sums paid to each agency for each campaign.

Project Australia CampaignDoyle Dane Bernbach/Berry Currie Adver-
tising Pty Ltd
Fortune (Aust) Pty Ltd

$
777,687.00 644,616.00

1,422,303.00

Shorter Working WeekDoyle Dane Bernbach/Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd Neville Jeffress Advertising Pty Ltd Fortune (Aust) Pty Ltd
Country Press Ltd Country Press Co-operative Ltd

282,200.00 89,856.00
158,221.00 6,129.00 8,954.00

545,360.00

Small Business ProgramDoyle Dane Bernbach/Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd . . . . .

12,274.90

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3119

Neville Jeffress Advertising Pty Ltd

$ 3,494.45

Points of First Contact (Business Information Centre)-
Doyle Dane Bernbach/Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd
Fortune (Aust) Pty Ltd

15,769.35
12,793.59 4,047.57

Government Aircraft Factories-Fishermens Bend-
Kutt, Skinner, Bennett Pty Ltd
Single advertisements

16,841.16
165,301.00 3,015.00

168,316.00

Australian Defence Equipment CataloguePeter Isaacson Publications
Pacific Defence Reporter Neville Jeffress Advertising Pty Ltd

8,395.00 5,585.00

(6) Each agency was selected by the Minister for Administrative Services in the case of the master placing/charging agencies and by the Australian Government Advertising Service in consultation with the Department in relation to selection of agencies to provide technical services to plan, create and produce advertisements.
(7) Total expenditure for all types of advertising by the Department of Industry and Commerce and the percentage changes between the fiscal years concluding in the years nominated in the Question are:

1975-76 1976-77
1977-78 1978-79 1079-80 1980-81

$
27,634 5,471
22,110 12,660 57,068 68,074

%
-80 +304
-42 +351
+

The Australian Government Advertising Service has advised that indexes of percentage increases in unit costs of Commonwealth departmental advertising since 1975 are:

1975 (Base) 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 (I Jan-17 Aug)

Index of unit cost of Commonwealth
departmental advertising
100 110 120 128 140 153 165

(8) The estimated cost of advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services for 1981-82 is $54,000 for advertising and, Project Australia campaign $500,000, and for Shorter Working Week $310,000.

Curriculum Development Centre
(Question No. 2773)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) Has he received correspondence from Mr Graham Evans, President of the Mathematics Education Research Group of Australasia expressing total opposition to the decision taken by the Government in relation to the Curriculum Development Centre and the Education Research and Development Centre.
(2) If so, did the President cite the long term effects on the quality of educational opportunity offered to Australian children and the quality of trained personnel needed for the growth and development of Australian technology as reasons for reconsidering the Government's decision.
(3) Will he reconsider the decision of the Government in this matter; if not, why not.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I have received a letter from Dr Graham Jones, President of the Mathematics Education Research Group of Australia, in which reference is made to the Government's decision in relation to the Curriculum Development Centre.
(2) Dr Jones did express concern about the potential long term implications of the decision for the development of trained personnel needed for Australia's prosperity and growth.
(3) No; the Government decided in June that $2.04m would be provided for CDC activities in this financial year. The Commonwealth is still to decide which projects it will continue to fund as projects of particular national significance. It will be prepared to join in funding other projects sponsored by the Australian Education Council.
Education: Commonwealth Contribution
(Question No. 2774)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) Did he state in his letter to Members of Parliament, dated 7 May 1981, concerning improved recognition of the Commonwealth Government's financial contribution-to education, that his Government would attempt to receive more recognition for education funding by way of plaques.
(2) If so, has any State Education Minister replied to his suggestion by saying that such a concentration of interest by him on the wording of plaques is petty.
(3) Will he consider having future plaques made from tin instead of brass in view of budgetary restraints and general reductions in Government expenditure.
(4) If not, will he transfer the money allocated for plaques into one of the many areas of expenditure affected by cuts recommended by the Government's Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) No.
(3) No.
(4) No.

3120 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Training Opportunities for Aboriginals
(Question No. 2813)
Mr Burr asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 20 August 1981:
(I) Did he write to members of the House of Representatives and senators asking that they provide training opportunities for Aboriginals in their electoral offices under the National Employment Strategy for Aboriginals.
(2) If so. will he also give approval for members and senators to accept final year students for training as part of their work experience program.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Under the guidelines for the Commonwealth Work Experience Program members and senators may accept final year students for work experience.
Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Education
(Question No. 2852)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
(I)' Further to the Review of Commonwealth Functions which called for Ministers to scrutinise all authorities within their portfolios (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1850) which statutory authorities within the Minister's portfolio are to be (a) terminated, (b) continued and (c) reviewed in depth.
(2) If the scrutiny referred to in part (I) has not been completed, when will it be finalised and the results reported to Parliament.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer to the answer to question 2839 given by the Acting Prime Minister (Hansard. 22 September 1981), which commented on general action being taken by Ministers to examine statutory authorities within their portfolios.
Included among the educational decisions taken in the context of RCF was that requiring the Curriculum Development Centre (CDC) to be abolished unless the States agreed to contribute 50 per cent of the total operating costs. As it is now clear that the States are not prepared to meet the request, plans have been made to wind down the operation of the CDC during 1981-82.
Also as a result of RCF, the Office of the Commonwealth Teaching Service Commissioner has been abolished, as has the non-statutory Education Research and Development Committee. The structure of the ACT Schools Authority is being reviewed.
Statutory Authorities under the Minister for Housing and Construction
(Question No. 2863)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
(I) Further to the Review of Commonwealth Functions which called for Ministers to scrutinise all authorities within their portfolios (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1850) which statutory authorities with' 1 the Minister's portfolio are to be (a) terminated, (b) continued and (c) reviewed in depth.

(2) If the scrutiny referred to in part (I) has not been completed, when will it be finalised and the results reported to Parliament.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) I refer the honourable member to the answer provided by the Prime Minister to question No. 2839 (Hansard, 22 September 1981, pages 1647 and 1648).
Foreign Ownership and Control ofIndustry in Australia
(Question No. 2880)
Mr Barry Jones asked the Minister for Industry and Commerce, upon notice, on 26 August 1981:
(I) Did the Australian Bureau of Statistics paper entitled 'Foreign Ownership and Control in Ma~ufacturing Indus~ry 1972-73' indicate that there were very hIgh levels of foreIgn ownership and control of various sectors of industry in Australia, for example, (a) motor vehicles, 99.8 per cent of value added, (b) oil refining (ownership) 90.8.per cent, (c) basic chemicals 78.0 per cent, (d) pharmaceultcals 77.8 per cent, (e) transport equipment 54.6 per cent, (f) basic metals 38.0 per cent, (g) textiles 33.3 per cent and (h) food, beverages and tobacco 33.2 per cent.
(2) What is the current percentage of value added which is foreign controlled in each of the industries referred to in part (I).
(3) What percentage of computer equipment sold in Australia during the last 3 years was manufactured in Australia.
Sir Phillip Lynch-The answer to the honourable member's questions are as follows:
(I) I am advised that the ABS document referred to shows the following estimates:

ASIC Industry industry description
3211 Motor vehicles 273 Petroleum refining 271 Basic chemicals 2723 Pharmaceu tical and
veterinary products 32 Transport equipment 29 Basic metal products 23 Textiles 21-22 Food, beverages and
tobacco

Percent of value
added foreign owned

Percent of value
added foreign controlled

98.8

99.8

90.8

n.a.

58.0

78.0

76.3

77.8

53.7

54.6

34.0

38.0

29.4

33.3

29.0

33.2

(2) I understand that no directly comparable information has been published by ABS since the document quoted. However the ABS did publish some relevant information in 'Foreign Control in Manufacturing Industry. Study of large Enterprise Groups, 1975-76' (Catalogue 5315.0) indicating, for the 20 largest enterprise groups in each 3 digit ASIC industry, the percentage of value added by foreign controlled enterprise groups.
(3) I understand that there are no reliable data upon which to base an answer to this question.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3121

Redevelopment of Brisbane Airport: Effect on Fisheries
. (Question No. 2943)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on -27 August 1981:
(I) What is the location of any fish or prawn trawling, breeding and/or feeding grounds which will be lost or adversely affected as a result of dredging or pumping of sand from Moreton Bay, Queensland, in association with the redevelopment of Brisbane's International Airport.
(2) Have any investigations been carried out to ascertain whether new trawling and fishing grounds can be opened up to compensate for those lost.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The likely effects of Airport construction on both the Middle Banks in Moreton Bay and the existing Serpentine Creek system were examined by the Brisbane Airport Environment Study Committee between 1972 and 1979. The work of this Committee formed the basis of the Environmental Impact Statement prepared in 1979 and on which public comment was invited and considered. Further studies have continued since 1'979 and are continuing at the present time.
The study showed that the Middle Banks were generally devoid of marine vegetation and supported very little fish life. The presence of fish in the Banks area tends to be transitory and it is not expected that dredging will result in more than a passing interference in fish occurrence. Full recovery of bottom dwelling sealife is also expected within 12-18 months of termination of dredging.
A total loss of fish and prawn habitat will occur in the sections of Serpentine Creek that are to be reclaimed. Studies have shown, however, that the Creek is not an important nursery area for bream or whiting although studies on other species have been inconclusive. The new flood canal may prove to have potential for fish breeding and feeding grounds as observations to date indicate that it has attraction for fish.
Removal of the mangrove areas in Serpentine Creek will reduce the amount of suitable habitat available in the Moreton Bay region for post larvae and juvenile prawns which migrate to estuarine areas after hatching in oceanic waters. However, relative to the total estuarine areas available, this loss is likely to be insignificant and the Moreton Bay prawn crops are likely to be affected only to a small extent.
The reclamation of Serpentine Creek and diversion of flows to the flood canal may change the distribution of the bottom dwelling sealife in Bramble Bay, but the effects are expected to be minor compared with those of a natural event such as a major flood.
The reclamation works on Boggy Creek in the Brisbane River are unlikely to have any more effects upon the ecology of the area than do the regular dredging of the shipping channels or the flood flows in the Brisbane River.
(2) This is a matter for the Queensland State Government and the Queensland Department of Primary Industries has advised that no new trawling and fishing grounds are available to be opened up.
Curriculum Development Centre
(Question No. 2978)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 8 September 1981:

(I) Is it a fact that the States have always heavily supported the Curriculum Development Centre, in particular by continuing to meet the salaries of State personnel involved in its various programs.

(2) Does the Centre's English Language Development

Project currently involve the the active participation in its de-

velopment work of some 200-250 English language curricu-

lum consultants and teachers in all States and Territories in

Australia.

.

(3) Did he demand that the States be asked to put up a significant share of the Centre's running costs; ifso, why, when it
is apparent that they already support it substantially in kind.

(4) Does the Government propose to continue the national
Language Development Project which is at present a project of the Curriculum Development Centres.

(5) Was the developmental phase II funded directly by
Cabinet approval for 1978-79 and 1979-80; if so, what sum was involved.

(6) Were these funding decisions indicative of the significance attached by the Government to the development of
literacy in Australia.

(7) Has the Government's policy of support for the development of literacy in Australia changed; if so, in what way.

(8) Is the National Language Development Project at present in the middle of a materials development phase and
are curriculum materials for use in Australian schools being
developed by each State team; if so, is it anticipated that they wi11 be ready for publication by the end of 1982.

(9) Will he honour the grants offered by the Curriculum
DevelopmenrCentre to the States for continuing work in the Language Development Project.

(10) Will the remaining $52,000, which is essential for continued developmental work, be paid, if so, when.

(II) Does he expect that development work begun by an
extensive and growing network of teachers in the Australian
Capital Territory, currently supported by the Language Development Project team working at the Curriculum Development Centre, will continue; if so, by what means will this work be promoted in the event of the closure of the Centre.

Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) The States meet the salaries of task force personnel located in States and Territories for those Curriculum Development Centre projects which the States regard as significant
to their own needs.

(2) Yes. The Government, through grants to the CDC, has supported each Language Development Project Task Force
to the extent of $15,000 each year.

(3) The Government sought contribution from the States of 50 per cent of the Centre's total operating costs. Existing
forms of support from the States and Territories were noted.

(4) The Government has provided an amount of $210,000
in the 1981-82 appropriation of the Centre for continuation of the development phase of the national Language Development Project. Funds are also available within the Centre's 1981-82 publishing budget for publication of any outcomes finalised during the year.

(5) Phase II of the project was funded as a result of normal budgeting processes. Actual development expenditure in the
two years was as follows:

1978-79 $207,200; 1979-80 $115,200.

In 1980-81 expenditure was $216,200. Funding of the projects has been on an anllual basis.

3122 REPRE~ENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(6) and (7) The broad lines of Government's policy of support For the development of literacy in Australia have not changed. The Language Development Project was Funded with the strong recommendation of the CDC Council.
(8) Yes; it is expected that materials will become ready For publication progressively during the first halF of 1982.
(9) Grants For the period up to December 1981 will be paid to States and Territories under Sections 7 and 8 of the Curriculum Development Centre Act.
(10) Funds are available in the current budget for additional grants to States and Territories in the period January-June 1982 provided that requests meet the test of essentiality.
(II) Development work in the Australian Capital Territory will continue during the 1981-82 financial year. The Future of the Centre and of the Language Development Project are under consideration by the Government.
Urea Formaldehyde Foam Insulation
(Question No. 3001)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(I) Further to his answer to part (2) of question No. 499 (Hansard. 2 April 1981, page 1337), has his Department now compiled all available inFormation on urea Formaldehyde Foam '(UF) insulation and has the evaluation and publication of policy directives and information documents now taken place; iF not, why not.
(2) In view of concern which has been expressed by consumer organisations, such as the Australian Consumers Association, and the general public, will he now publicly release those documents, in order to ensure that the community is well inFormed about the possible hazards of UF insulation; if not, why not.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Department of Housing and Construction has evaluated available inFormation on urea Formaldehyde Foam (UF) insulation and prepared a Technical InFormation Document which will be issued to staff shortly.
The Document inForms Departmental staff of the health aspects of UF insulation and provides interim guidelines For the saFe and appropiate use of the material in Commonwealth projects.
Further directives may be issued after a Full evaluation has been conducted by health and regulatory authorities.
(2) Single copies of the Department's Technical Information Document will be made available to the public upon written request. In line with Government policy, multiple copies will be available at a modest charge to cover production and administrative costs.
Tenosynoyitis: Department of Communications
(Question No. 3013)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 9 September 1981 :
(1) Have any cases of Tenosynovitis been reported to date, in the Department or Statutory Authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction.
(2) If so, will the Minj~ter state (a) how many cases have been reported (b) in wha, types of work the affected persons were engaged (c) of the cases reported how many were in re-

spect of (i) Female and (ii) male employees and (d) what age brackets appear to be the most affected in the Department and each Statutory Authority.
(3) Will the Minister provide similar information in respect of carpal tunnel.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Administrative responsibility in my portfolio is spread through hundreds of offices throughout Australia, under the direction of the various Statutory Authorities and the Department. To Fully answer the questions asked by Mr McMahon would prove extremely time consuming and would place enormous additional workload on administration throughout the portFolio, particularly for cases other than those related to compensation matters.
A sample 12 months period has thereFore been surveyed throughout the portFolio and combined details have been obtained For compensible Tenosynovitis and carpal tunnel. It has not been possible to seperate these into individual ailments in all cases:
(a) In the period May 1980 to April 1981 41 cases have been recorded For compensible injury.
(b) Affected people were From a broad range of employment groups which include, Clerical/Administrative, Keyboard, Technical and Trades staff. The majority of claims arise From the Clerical and Keyboard groups.
(c) OF the reported cases 21 arefemale and 20 are male.
(d) The claims are being made From all age groups with the majority Falling into the 30-45 age group.
Tenosynoyitis: Department of Education
(Question No. 3023)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 8 September 1981:
(I) Have any cases of tenosynovitis been reported to date, in the Department or statutory authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction.
(2) If so, will the Minister state (a) how many cases have been reported, (b) in what types of work the affected persons were engaged, (c) of the cases reported how many were in respect of (i) female and (ii) male employees and (d) what age brackets appear to be the most affected, in the Department and each statutory authority.
(3) Will the Minister provide similar information in respect of carpal tunnel syndrome.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) Yes.
(2)-
(a) A total of 15 cases of tenosynovitis have been reported in the Department and in statutory authorities within the portfolio:
(b) teaching duties; clerical; secretarial work, typing and data processing; cleaning.
(c) 11 female, 3 male (no record of the remaining case).
(d) 30-45 years (age range 24-59 years).
(3)-
(a) There have been four reported cases of carpal tunnel syndrome.
(b) teaching duties; clerical; secretarial work.
(c) Hemale, 1 male.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3123

(d) Age range 31-58 years.
Note: The inFormation provided above relates to reported cases in recent years. It should also be noted that specific reasons For illness are often not provided on medical certificates submitted by staff members. The inFormation provided is based only on those cases supported by medical certificates speciFying the illnesses in question, and is thereFore unlikely to reflect incidence accurately.
Tenosynovitis: Department of Administrative Services
(Question No. 3028)
Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(I) Have any cases of tenosynovitis been reported to date, in the Department or statutory authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction.
(2) IF so, will the Minister state (a) how many cases have been reported (b) in what types of work the affected persons were engaged (c) of the cases reported how many were in respect of (i) Female (ii) male employees and (d) what age brackets appear to be the most affected, in the Department and each Statutory Authority.
(3) Will the Minister provide similar inFormation in respect of carpal tunnel syndrome.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Because of the administrative costs involved the extraction of data was limited to current records. Consequently the figures shown below are in respect of the period 1978 to 1981 of staff presently employed in the Department of Administrative Services, the Australian Electoral Office, the Australain Federal Police and the Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Service Ltd; the Following inFormation is provided in respect of specific questions:
(I) Yes.
(2)-
(a) 21 cases-13 in the Department of Administrative Services; I in the Australian Electoral Office; 4 in the Commonwealth Accommodation and Catering Service and 3 in the Australian Federal Police.
(b) Keyboard duties (7); printing trades (6); catering occupations (4); stores staff (2); and labouring-type duties (2).
(c) 17 Females; 4 males.
(d) There is no clear pattern.
(3) Only one case has been reported. The employee concerned was a Female typist, aged 28, in the Department of Administrative Services.
Entry Visas to Australia
(Question No. 3074)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 10 September 1981:
(I) How many (a) individuals and (b) delegations from the (i) Democratic People's Republic of Korea and (ii) USSR have been refused entry to Australia since January 1980.
(2) What were the names of those denied entry and what was the proposed purpose of their visit to Australia.
(3) What were the reasons for the refusal of entry visas.

Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) From January 1980 to the end of September 1981 visas for temporary entry to Australia were refused as Follows:

Individuals Delegations

Democratic People's Republic of

Korea

nil

2

USSR

10

16

(2) and (3) Those applying for visitor visas and persons or organisations that might be sponsoring a visit have an expectation that details of their applications would not be made public. For this and other reasons I am not prepared to provide the names, purposes of visits and reasons for refusal sought by the honourable member.
Refusal of a visitor visa application is only made after careful consideration of all the factors involved and in the interests of the Australian community.
Applications for visas For Democratic People's Republic of Korea delegations have been considered in the context of our overall relationship with the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. In this regard the central Factor remains that diplomatic relations have been interrupted For some years. The Government has made it clear to the Democratic People's Republic of Korea the circumstances in which it will consider restoring relations. Meanwhile, proposals for official delegations from the Democratic People's Republic of Korea seeking to visit Australia are considered case by case.
Applications from USSR nationals are, of course, currently considered in the context of the current Government restrictions on contacts with the Soviet Union which were imposed following the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. In this respect I rely on the advice of the Minister for Foreign Affairs.

School Curricula
(Question No. 3095)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 15 September 1981:
Further to the Prime Minister's reply to my question No; 617 (Hansard, 2 April 1981, page 1329) when will the current review of curricula be completed.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
In my Guidelines Statement to the Parliament on 4 June 1981, I referred to the review of education and training opportunities for young people, which had been announced on 16 January 1981 and to which the Prime Minister referred in his answer to question No. 617. The review was considered by the Government in the context of deciding on guidelines for the Education Commissions for 1982 programs.
The Commonwealth is concerned to see accelerated development of appropriate transition courses in secondary schools with emphasis on basic changes in curricula relevant particularly to the needs of low achievers.
Such developments can be implemented only through action by State authorities, but the Commonwealth will be looking to their implementation as one of the outcomes of its funding of transition programs in the States. In addition most States have assured the Commonwealth that they are significantly increasing their own expenditures on transition education. The continuing process of curriculum adaptation to meet the needs of young people in making the transition from

3124 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

school to working life is proceeding in a context of joint StateCommonwealth funding and dialogue concerning directions and objectives.
Tertiary Institutions: Enrolments
(Question No. 3145)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 16 September 1981:
(I) How many students were enrolled in tertiary institutions where students have been in receipt of the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme allowance in each year from 1978 to 1981, and how many are projected to be enrolled in similar institutions in (a) 1982 and (b) 1983.

(2) How many students have been in receipt of TEAS allowance or are projected to be in receipt of TEAS allowance for each of the same years.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) On the assumption that at all tertiary institutions there have been at least some students in receipt of Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme (TEAS) allowance, the total numbers of students, both Full-time and part-time, enrolled in tertiary institutions where students have been in receipt of TEAS in the years 1978 to 1981, and projected to be enrolled in 1982 and 1983 are as Follows:

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982(a)

1983(a)

University . CAE (b)(d)TAFE

159,406 153,537 620,514

160,142
160,126 654,459

162,484 165,070 701,820

165,937
168,781 730,OOO(a)

166,000
168,800 759,200

166,000 168,800
790,000

Total(c)

933,457

974,727

1,029,374

1,064,718

1,094,000

1,124,800

(Source: Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission).

(a) Numbers For 1981 (TAFE), and 1982and 1983 are estimated.

(b) Excluding stream 6 (Adult Education) in TAFE (note: enrolment data for TAFE contain a significant number oFmul-

tiple enrolments and should not be equated with student numbers).

(c) Total enrolments, both Full-time and part-time.

(d) Excluding enrolments at certain non-government business colleges where secretarial courses ~ave been approved under

TEAS.

..

As only Full-time students are eligible for TEAS, I have included the following table which shows the numbers of Full-time students (other than higher degree students i.e. PhDs and Masters), as a component of total enrolments indicated above:

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982(a)

1983(a)

University
CAE TAFE

93,783
85,301 45,166

91,400
83,424 49,254

90,966
79,593 57,619

91,534
78,085 59,900(a)

91,500
78,000 62,300

91,500 78,000 64,800

Total

224,250

224,078

228,178

229,519

231,800

234,300

(Source: Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission). (a) Numbers For 1981 (TAFE),1982and 1983 are estimated.
(2) The numbers of students who have been in receipt of TEAS allowance for the years 1978 to 1981, and the numbers projected to be in receipt of TEAS allowance For the years 1982 and 1983 are as follows:

1978

1979

1980

1981(a)

1982(a)

1983(b)

University CAE TAFE(c)

41,638

37,359

35,128

34,100

33,300

na

36,774

35,891

35,290

34,200

33,400

na

19,808

20,309

21,153

20,500

20,100

na

Total

98,220

93,559

91,571

88,800

86,800

na

(Source: Commonwealth Department of Education). (a) Numbers For 1981 and 1982 are estimated.
(b) The numbers of students in receipt of TEAS in any (calendar) year are dependent on decisions taken by the Govern-
ment in the preceding Budget, particularly as to the level of Family income allowed for maximum benefits under the TEAS scheme which in turn is related to movements in the average weekly earnings. Thus the estimated numbers for 1982 are based on decisions taken in the 1981-82 Budget, and the information necessary to make accurate estimates For
1983 is not yet available. (c) .TAFE figures include students undertaking approved secretarial courses at non-government business colleges.

Taxes and Other Charges Imposed by State and Territorial Governments
(Question No. 3224)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 23 September 1981:

Will he provide a complete list of all additional or special taxes, freights, fees, royalties or other charges which can be identified as having been imposed by State and Territorial Governments to obtain extra revenue benefit from resource developments and to benefit from the vacuum created by the Commonwealth Government's Failure to introduce an appropriately structured and equitable resource rent tax which is

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3125

profit related, showing in each case (a) the State or Territory which has imposed it, (b) the nature of the charge and the basis on which it is imposed and assessed including whether it is profit related or otherwise, (c) the estimated annual revenue derived by the State or Territory from the item, (d) the declared purpose of imposing the special charge and (e) whether any of the revenue derived from the charge is specially earmarked for any particular purpose.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

It is, of course, impossible for me to know the motives of the States for imposing additional or special taxes, freights, fees, royalties or other charges on resource developments. The presumption however would be that they have imposed such charges for the purpose of raising additional revenues and directly capturing for the benefit of State residents some of the benefits of mining within the State's jurisdiction.
Royalties and other charges of which I am aware that have been introduced by the States since July 1978 are set out below, together with total royalty collections for each State and the Northern Territory in 1979-80.

State or territory

Measure and date introduced

Total Estimated royalty collecrevenue(a) tions(b) 1979-80

New South Wales Victoria Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia
Tasmania Northern Territory

Increase in coal royalty from $1 per tonne to $1.70 per

tonne-1981

............

Increa~e in Pipeline licence fees-1981 . . . . . . .

Increase in levy on Gas and Fuel Corporation from 8 to 15 per

cent of turnover-I 98 I

......

Contributions to road construction by coal industry-198 I

No change

Increase in bauxite royalty-I 979

Increase in ad valorem royalties on certain other

minerals-1981

............

1ncrease in combined ad valorem/profit related royalty on

certain minerals-1978

No change

($m)
22 30(c)
17.3 128.7(d)
2 (estimated)
7
2

($m) 86.8 90.6
73.5 5.9
66.7
5.3 2.6

(a) Annual revenue figures are on a full year basis. (b) Excludes other charges (e.g. rail freight tariffs on minerals) paid by the mining industry.
(c) $20m related to licence fees payable by Esso/BHP, and $IOm payable by the Gas and Fuel Corporation. (d) This represents a once only charge.

Electoral: Ballot Boxes and Voting Screens
(Question No. 3259)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:
(1) Did the annual report for 1980-81 of the Australian Electoral Office report that difficulties emerged during the testing and proving of the design of new ballot boxes and voting screens.
(2) If so, what were the difficulties.
(3) Who was the successful tenderer and what was the cost of the successful tender.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The contract requires the use of polypropylene to produce plastic moulded ballot boxes and voting screens. The plastic sections of the voting screens are to be mounted on aluminium extrusions.
Ballot Boxes. The use of polypropylene for production of ballot boxes requires a most complex mould and preparation of the tooling took longer than was originally expected by the contractor. The basic ballot box form has been established since September 1980. First off mouldings, as expected, were not in complete accord with the design drawing: some distorsion of the moulding existed and appropriate tooling modifications were recommended to overcome this.
Fine tuning of the tool had been underway for some time, with little success, until July 1981 when a chemical analysis of

the raw moulding material revealed that it had been contaminated by a non-compatible thermoplastic at the source of
supply.

It seems that manyof the problems experienced during initial moulding trials may have been attributable to that con-
taminated material.

Following replacement of the faulty material by the supplier tool testing has been recommenced. On the basis of the tests so far undertaken some minor modifications to the ballot box design may be necessary to ensure compliance with the Australian Electoral Office's stacking specification. Some fine tuning of the moulded hinges also may be necessary.

I am informed that, at this stage, the Australian Electoral Office's technical advisers believe a satisfactory product is close to being achieved.

Voting Screens. The main difficulty here also was the much longer time involved than originally estimated by the contractor for preparation of the complex tooling to undertake the
necessary moulding. Tooling for the first panels will be tria lied
shortly and the remainder by 4 December 1981.

A secondary difficulty arose when the aluminium extrusions delivered by a sub-contractor were not in accordance with specifications and required some further machining. This work is proceeding and early completion is expected.

(3) (a) Successful Tenderer: DMG Tools Pty Ltd

(b) Tendered Cost:
Ballot boxes Voting screens

$ 110,402.64 455,465.42

565,868.06

3126 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

It should be noted that the tendered price 'included amounts of $90,000 and $137,000 for the initial production of the tooling required for moulding of the ballot boxes and voting screens respectively. These are a once only cost. The tooling will remain the property of the Commonwealth and will be available for production of subsequent requirements of both items at a unit cost considerably below that of the labour intensive equipment currently in use.
Even including the cost of tooling the unit price of the items produced under this contract will be considerably less than the present unit cost of the items currently used.
Apart from the cost advantage of the new designs the new ballot box design will have the advantage of being able to be nested for transport and storage considerably reducing these costs. The voting screens also will be much lighter which also will reduce freight costs and facilitate handling.
Coal
(Question No, 3293)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Trade and Resources, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:
(I) What is the projected annual export of (a) coking coal, and (b) non-coking coal from (i) New South Wales and (ii) Queensland for each of the years (A) 1985, (B) 1990, (C) 1995 and (D) 2000.
(2) What is the projected annual level of domestic consumption of (a) coking coal, (b) black non-coking coal and (c)'brown coal in each Australian State for each of the years (i) 1985, (ii) 1990, (iii) 1995 and (iv) 2000.
Mr Anthony-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Projections have been made by a large number of bodies using different assumptions and methodology. No single set of projections is regarded as sufficiently definitive to be used in isolation and most do not provide figures for aU the categories nominated.
The World Coal Study (Published 1980, under the title 'Coal-Bridge to the Future') which is one of the most representative and authoritative international studies, projected total Australian exports as:

1985 1990 2000

Metallurgical coal Steaming coal

(million tonnes of coal equivalent)

61

68

85

17

37

75

Total

78

105

160

The Department of Trade and Resources (DTR) completed a draft of overseas demand for Australian coal in June 1981, but covering the period to 1990 only. Comments on the analysis have been sought throughout the world and the study is being revised as these are received. It is intended to publish the revised results in mid-1982.
The projections of most likely ranges of demand in this draft study are:

Metallurgical coal Steaming coal
Total Exports

1985 1990
(million tonnes) 48-55 50-60 30-40 50-70
78-95 100-130

Earlier, in October 1980, the Joint Coal Board (JCB)
published a similar study which covers the individual categories nominated. The individual ranges of projected demand are, however, much larger than those of the DTR study:

1985 1990 1995 2000

Coking coalNew South Wales
Queensland

22-28 25-32

27-38 31-42

(million tonnes)
30-50 35-57 36-50 43-63

Total

47-60 58-80 66-100 78-120

Non-coking coalNew South Wales
Queensland

24-40 40-70 55-85 65-103 4-10 17-30 29-50 37-67

Total

28-50 57-100 84-135 102-170

Total Exports 75-110 115-180 150-235 180-290

(2) Forecasts of domestic coal demand for the period to 1989-90 are contained in 'Forecasts of Enery Demand and
Supply-Primary and Secondary Fuels, Australia: 1980-81 to 1989-90' published by the Department of National Develop-
ment and Energy in June 1981, as follows:

1984-85 1989-90

Black coalNew South Wales Victoria
Queenslano South Australia
Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory

(Energy equivalent in Petajoules)

727.1 0.2
255.7 61.4 89.6 15.1

883.4 0.2
389.9 76.9 150.0 23.2
8.3

Total

1,149.1 1,531.9

Brown coalVictoria

369.6

540.0

Drawing on the conversion factors quoted in the publication, the forecast amounts of coal are:

Black coal-New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory
Total
Brown coalVictoria

1984-85 1989-90

(million tonnes)

28.9

34.9

10.\

15.5

3.1

4.0

4.5

7.6

0.6

0.9

0.3

47.2

63.2

39

57

Projections of domestic black coal consumption covering the individual categories nominated were also contained in the JCB study, as follows:

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3127

1985 1990 1995 2000

Coking coalNew South Wales
South Australia Queensland

10-11 2 2-4

(million tonnes)

12-14 13-16 14-18

2

2

2

3-7 5-9 5-9

Total

14-17 17-23 20-27 20-29

Non-coking coalNew South Wales
Victoria
Queensland South Australia Western Australia
Tasmania Northern Territory

23-25 10-13
3 -4 0.3 0.3

31-39
15-22 5 6-7 I I

37-54 0-1 20-32 7-8 7-9 1.5
I

47-73 0-2 27-43 8.10 7-10
2 1.3

Total
Total consumption

41-46 55-64

59-75 74-107 92-141 74-98 93-133 133-170

Projections of Victorian brown coal production, which rellect expected consumption levels, were also prepared in May 1981 by the State Electricity Commission of Victoria, as
follows:

1985 1990 2000

Brown Coal production

(million tonnes)

42

55

80

(These figures do not take into account, possible brown coal requirements for liquid fuel conversion projects which are currently under study.)
Pensions: Taxation
(Question No. 3299)
Dr Klugman asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 14 October 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that some taxable pensions paid to war veterans are made on a 12 weekly basis and that therefore, in some financial years, there are five payments.
(2) If so, does this lead to an extra tax liability in some cases.
(3) Will he take steps to permit these recipients to average their pensions on a 52 week per year basis for taxation purposes.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
( I) Pensions payable to war veterans are made, at the option of recipients, either fortnightly by cheque or at twelve weekly intervals by direct credit to a nominated bank account or similar facility. Under the twelve weekly method, five pay, ments are made to war veterans in some financial years.
On 14 October 1981, in answer to Question No. 2689 (Hansard, page 2049), the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans; Affairs advised that consideration has been given to introducing fortnightly payments direct to accounts at banks, building societies and credit unions. The m'agnitude of the financial implications in making such a change prevented this action being taken during 1981-82.
(2) The receipt of five pension payments in a financial year can have the effect of placing a recipient beyond the tax threshold.

(3) It is a basic principle of taxation law that income in the form of salary, wages or pension is derived only at the time of its receipt and it would represent a significant departure from this rule to permit the exclusion from assessable income of a particular year of amounts that had, in fact, been derived as income.
Immigration: Indo-Chinese Refugees
(Question No. 3300)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 14 October 1981:
(I) Is it proposed to publish a 12 page booklet to dispel the many myths surrounding Indo-Chinese refugees.
(2) If so, is the booklet a combined project of his Department, the Fairfield City Council and the Milperra College of Advanced Education.
(3) Will his Department accept responsibility for the cost of production and distribution of the booklet in view of the importance of correct information being widely disseminated especially following the sensationalist series of articles in the National Times.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable gentleman's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The Fairfield City Council, through its Refugee Liaison Committee on which my Department is represented, is producing a booklet aimed at reducing misinformation and increasing understanding about Indo-Chinese refugees who have settled in comparatively large numbers in the area. My Department is assisting with the text of the booklet and other community bodies, including the Milperra College of Advanced Education, local educational authorities and a Vietnamese newspaper, are also co-operating in its production and distribution.
(3) This initiative in Fairfield demonstrates a fundamental concern on the part of a significant element of the Australian community to combat the false information and prejudiced views that are sometimes current about refugees. It puts into perspective the intolerant and racist utterances of a few extremists which I condemned in my remarks to the House on 22 October. I have agreed that my Department share with Fairfield City Council the costs of publishing and circulating the booklet
Aboriginal Community Housing Projects
(Question No. 3304)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 14 October 1981:
(I) Do construction staff.of his Department in Western Australia work on Aboriginal community housing projects for eight week periods and then spend two weeks in Perth.
(2) Is it more common in the Northern Territory for the community itself to administer its own housing project funds and generally employ a housing manager who lives and works in the community on a full time basis.
(3) In the Northern Territory does his Department give services to housing programs such as technical advisers and work evaluations free of charge.
(4) In Western Australian communities does his Department charge, on average, about 11 per cent of the communities' housing budgets for the services of his Department.

3128 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(5) What is the comparative cost of an employee being based in Perth and spending eight weeks at a time in a community compared with the cost of having a resident housing manager in the community.
(6) Does his Department recruit housing managers for the Aboriginal housing programs in Western Australia directly from the Department or does it take advantage of the Aboriginal employment section of the Commonwealth Employment Service.
Mr McVeigh~The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes, in those instances where housing projects are of more than approximately three months duration and are located in remote areas where there are no appropriate facilities for construction staff.
(2) Yes. Some larger communities employ a full-time housing manager. Other communities employ a community adviser, part of whose' duties relate to housing, and in other instances a Mission or Council administers housing funds on behalf of communities.
(3) Fees are charged for design and construction services. Fees are not charged for feasibility studies, technical advice, programming assistance or estimates provided for the Department of Aboriginal Affairs and the Aboriginal Development Commission or for similar advisory support provided at the request of communities.
(4) No. Fees vary according to services provided and are based on minimum commercial scales less rebate for repetitive work. A typical fee for procurement, supervision and construction consultancy is 6.8 per cent. Direct project charges are levied at cost.
(5) The Department does not employ resident community housing managers and comparative figures are not available.
(6) The Department does not recruit or employ housing managers for Aboriginal communities or Aboriginal housing programs. When skilled on-site foremen are needed they are either provided from the Department's workforce or recruited locally.
Aboriginal Housing Programs
(Question No. 3305)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Housing and Construction, upon notice, on 14 October 1981:
(I) In areas where Aboriginal housing programs are administered by his Department, is the Department committed to providing training for Aboriginal employees.
(2) If so, has it made an estimation of the added cost involved per housing unit for this training.
(3) For each Aboriginal community housing project in the Kimberley region of Western Australia, what is the number of (a) housing project employees for whom the community is receiving a NEATS subsidy and (b) Aboriginal employees working on each project.
Mr McVeigh-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Department does not administer Aboriginal housing programs. It provides technical advice and estimates to the Department of Aboriginal Affairs and the Aboriginal Development Commission, and advice and consultancy services to Aboriginal communities. The service provided is directed to promotion of self-sufficiency. The Department is currently training 45 Aboriginals on its own programs under the National Employment Strategy for Aboriginals.

(2) No. See above.
(3) (a) No figures are available.
(b) Aboriginal employees are engaged and paid by Aboriginal communities. The Department does not have records of numbers engaged.
Community Youth Support Scheme
(Question No. 3331)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister for Employment and Youth Affairs, upon notice, on 15 October 1981:
(I) When will the new guidelines for the Community Youth Support Scheme (CYSS) be finalised.
(2) Will local CYSS Committees and project officers have the opportunity to put their views on draft guidelines before final guidelines are implemented.
(3) Will the two conferences in Brisbane during November 1981, one for project officers and the other for project officers and local CYSS committees, be the only opportunities for these people to make suggestions regarding the new guidelines; if so, will funds be provided to allow adequate representation from all States.
Mr N. A. Brown-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) It is anticipated that the new guidelines will be finalised in time to be operative from I March 1982.
(2) No, but before the draft guidelines are prepared, committees and project officers have the opportunity to present their views on those matters that should be contained in the guidelines.
(3) Apart from contributing to conferences at the national level, project officers and local CYSS committees have the opportunity to participate directly in the consultations being conducted by the Task Force throughout Australia. CYSS projects have been authorised to spend up to $250 of their current grants to enable their participation in the consultation process.
Rhodesia Medal
(Question No. 3344)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 15 October 1981:
Further to the prompt answer to my question No. 3253 (Hansard, 13 October 1981, page 1958) was the nation formerly called Southern Rhodesia officially known as Zimbabwe-Rhodesia during the period in Which Commonwealth Monitoring Forces served there; if so, is it quite inappropriate to award Australians who served in that force during that period a medal known as the Rhodesia Medal.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The official name of Zimbabwe before it gained its independence was Southern Rhodesia though the term 'ZimbabweRhodesia' was fairly widely used.
Tertiary Fees Loans Scheme
(Question No. 3370)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 20 October 1981:
(I) How many universities have agreed to administer a Tertiary Fees Loans Scheme.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3129

(2) Will he provide details of the administrative arrangements involved in adopting this scheme, including the anticipated rate of interest on the loans.
(3) Will the Government be supplementing tertiary recurrent funding to pay the costs associated with staffing such a scheme.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3) Commonwealth officers have had useful discussions with representatives of the Australian Bankers' Association and the Commonwealth Bank on the details of the proposed loan scheme for tertiary students. There are some aspects which have yt:t to be settled, but as soon as it is possible the full details of the scheme will be announced.
Tertiary institutions will be approached on the administration of the loans when the form and scope of the scheme has been decided.
Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme Means Test
(Question No. 3429)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 27 October 1981:
(I) With regard to the Commonwealth Government Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme (TEAS) for, ordinary students, what are the criteria (a) by which the Government establishes the nominated maximum level of adjusted family income below which ordinary students can obtain the maximum rate of living allowance and (b) for establishing the nominated reduction rate of $2.50 for every $10 of income, where the adjusted family income exceeds $10,312.
(2) With regard to the Commonwealth Government TEAS for independent students, (a) why is the means test applied to student's income for the previous financial year, (b) why is the means test not applied to an applicant's available income at the time of commencement of studies, (c) what is the reason for the difference between proportional reductions in allowance applied to an ordinary student's family income and to independent students spouse's income, (d) how many students who applied for TEAS allowance were refused the allowance on the basis of means test provisions since the introduction of the means test and (e) how many students receiving a TEAS allowance withdrew as a result of financial difficulties.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) As regards 'ordinary' students under the Tertiary Education Assistance Scheme (TEAS)-
(a) The level of adjusted family income at which maximum TEAS benefits are provided at the 'at-home' and 'away-from-home' rates (which is known as Marginal Adjusted Family Income or MAFI) is reviewed annually in the Budget context. The Government considers movements in average weekly earnings as well as its overall commitment in finding for student assistance programs generally.
(b) The principle of a gradually tapered means test is long standing; whilst administratively more complex it avoids the obvious inequities arising for exafTlple from a system based on income banding or from an all-ornothing system. The abatement rate of $2.50 in allowance for every $10 by which the adjusted family income exceeds the MAFI has applied since 1977 and permits support to students over a relatively wide range of parental incomes.

(2) As regards students granted independent status under TEAS-
(a) and (b) The means test on the student's income is in fact applied to income during the year of study and not, as the question suggests, to income for the previous financial year. It would not be realistic to means test the student's own income on the basis of the preceding year when in some cases his or her income will be of a very different order during the year of study; on the other hand, parental income is means tested on the basis of the preceding year, since that year's income is verifiable and can reasonably be assumed to be ongoing at a broadly comparable level.
(c) The abatement rate applied to the income of the independent' student's spouse, by which the allowance is reduced at the rate of $1 for every $2 by which the adjusted spouse income exceeds the MAFI, provides a less gradual taper than does' the abatement rate on family income in the case of the 'ordinary' student. The respective abatement rates take account of assumptions about the income of the family unit and the demands assumed to be placed upon it in the case of an 'ordinary' student; account is also taken of the range of other benefits or concess'ions available to the different types of TEAS beneficiary.
(d) Information is not readily available on the numbers of students, since the introduction of the TEAS means test in 1974, whose applications for TEAS allowances were refused on the basis of the means test provisions; and
(e) Similarly, information is not available on the number of students who were in receipt of a TEAS allowance and subsequently withdrew, whose withdrawal was as a result of financial difficulties. However, J refer the honourable member to the 1979 Survey of Full-time Tertiary Student Finances (Volume 2) which was tabled on 14 October 1981, which in Chapter 3 (page 31) discusses the reasons why students discontinue full-time studies. It should be noted that the sample involved in the survey, which related to universities and colleges of advanced education only, was concerned with full-time students generally, and that of the respondents, 41 per cent were in receipt of TEAS.
Tax Deductions: Donations to the RSPCA
(Question No. 3466)
Dr Theophanous asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that donations to the RSPCA are not tax deductible.
(2) If so, will he take steps to have the classification of the RSPCA changed so that donations to it can be made tax deductible.
(3) If he will not take steps to change the classification of the RSPCA, what is the reason.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Under the present gift provisions of the income tax law, donations made to the RSPCA are not deductible for income tax purposes. They may be deductible, however, under the general deduction provisions of the tax law, where it can be shown to the satisfaction of the Commissioner of Taxation that an appropriate nexus exists between the making of the gift and the earning of assessable income by the donor.
(2) and (3) The Government receives numerous requests each year for amendment to the gift provisions of the income tax law so that gifts to particular organisations ,may be

3130 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

allowed as deductions. Most of these requests relate to organisations or funds which, like the RSPCA, have objectives of obvious merit.
Since allowance of all such requests would have serious implications for the taxation revenue, and since it would be neither fair nor appropriate to consider particular requests in isolation, it has long been the practice to bring together all requests for new or altered .taxation concessions for consideration at Budget time. It is then possible to assess the relative merits of the requests against the general budgetary situation and such scope as there may be for granting concessions. The question of including the RSPCA in the gift provisions of the income tax law will again be considered in the context of the 1982 Budget.
Institute of Multicultural Affairs
(Question No. 3572)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs is leading an inquiry into the implementation of the Galbally Report; if so, what is the precise purpose of this inquiry.
(2) Is it also a fact that the Institute was funded following the recommendations of the Galbally Report.
(3) Is Mr Frank Galbally the Chairman of the Institute of Multicultural Affairs.
(4) Can he say whether the Director of the Institute of Multicultural Affairs, prior to his present position, was a member of the Prime Minister's staff.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. The terms of reference require the Institute to
assess the effectiveness of the implementation of the Review of Post-Arrival Services and Programs for Migrants (the Galbally Report)
determine whet her the overall objectives are being achieved
determine whether the Report's objectives and recommendations remain valid and
recommend whether the objectives and recommendations should be pursued in the future and what changes (if any) should be made.
(2) Yes.
(3) Yes.
(4) Yes.
Recognition of Business Qualifications
(Question No, 3578)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) What projects are there to recognise the qualifications of overseas-trained (a) professionals, (b) semi-professionals, (c) tradesmen and (d) others.
(2) How many overseas-trained persons referred to in part (I) arrived in Australia in each year since 1978, and how many had their qualifications converted or recognised in Australia.
(3) What was the country of origin of the persons whose qualifications (a) have and (b) have not been recognised in each year since 1978.

(4) How many of those admitted since 1978 continued in their profession after (a) I, (b) 2 and (c) 3 years residence in Australia.
(5) What mechanisms are there to ensure that persons admitted to Australia will be employed in jobs in which they claim expertise or qualification.
(6) Is he able to state what is the position of (a) State governments and (b) trade unions in respect of the recognition of qualifications.
(7) How many full-time staff has the Committee on Professional Qualifications.
(8) How many persons had their qualifications (a) recognised or (b) rejected in each year by the Committee since its constitution, what was their country of origin and what was the profession.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Committee on Overseas Professional Qualifications was established in 1969 to assist in the recognition of professional qualifications obtained overseas. In 1978 its terms of reference were expanded to include sub-professional, technical and general academic qualifications.
The Tradesmen's Rights Regulation Act, passed in 1946, provides for the recognition of certain types of trade qualifications: it is administered by the Department of Industrial Relations.
No provisions have been made at the national level for the recognition of non-TRRA trade qualifications.
In addition, I recently announced, following consultation with my State and Territorial counterparts, that a wide ranging review of the problerns faced by migrants and refugees in obtaining recognition of their qualifications would be undertaken. The review will commence shortly.
(2) Statistics are not maintained on this subject.
(3) Statistics are not maintained on this subject.
(4) Statistics are not maintained on this subject.
(5) Procedures for the recognition of qualifications and the provision of labour market information are under constant review so as to ensure that there is adequate information and advice available to overseas posts on the acceptability of overseas qualifications, and the demand for them in Australia. However, no mechanisms exist to follow-up people once they have arrived in Australia.
(6) Advice normally given to me by State Governments and trade unions is that overseas qualifications are accepted when the decision-making body is confident that the individual concerned has reached the standard of professional, semiprofessional or trade competence required of people who obtain their qualifications in Australia. No doubt this question will be studied in detail by the review body already referred to.
(7) The Committee on Overseas Professional Qualifications has 21 full time positions in its secretariat, provided by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs: 18 of these positions are currently occupied.
(8) Statistics are not maintained on this subject.
Australian Council on PopUlation and Ethnic Affairs
(Question No. 3591)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3131

(I) On what basis were the members of the Australian Council on Population and Ethnic Affairs chosen.
(2) How many of the members can claim that they actually represent the ethnic community's view in their advice to him.
(3) On what basis does his Department make its recommendations of persons to be appointed to various committees.
(4) Does his Department have an undue influence on a committee considering that it provides the secretarial services and therefore the back-up and research materials for a committee.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Members of the Australian Council on Population and Ethnic Affairs are appointed in their own right as individuals whose particular expertise and qualifications reflect the terms of reference and range of activities of the Council.
Membership of the Council rellects a wide range of community interests, including ethnic groups, service organisations, trade unions, industry and commerce. Several members are academics in disciplines closely related to the socio-economic aspects of population growth and the settlement of migrants and refugees. In addition the Opposition Spokesman on Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, and the Chairman of the Government Members Committee on Immigration and Ethnic Affairs are invited to attend Council Meetings as Parliamentary observers.
(2) Although members are not chosen specifically to represent the ethnic community some nine members, that is half the Council membership, are either actively involved in ethnic affairs or are able to express an ethnic community viewpoint. A list of the current membership of the Council is below.
(3) I presume that the honourable member is referring to membership of the Task Forces through which the Council pursues specific objectives determined by the Councilor myself. Current Task Forces deal with the Migration Program, Population, Ethnic Affairs Policy, Citizenship and Refugees.
Membership of the Task Forces is determined by the Full Council, on the basis of the particular expertise or interest of members in the matters to be considered by each Task Force.
(4) The Council is particularly mindful of the need to provide me with independent advice and is neither unduly influenced by nor bound to accept material provided by my Department in formulating this advice. This is something I value greatly.
The secretariat, research and other information services provided to the Council by my Department form part of the resources drawn upon by the Council in formulating its advice to me. Other elements in this process are considerations with migrants and other community groups and exchanges with relevant advisory bodies and Government organisations.

AUSTRALIAN COUNCIL ON POPULATION AND ETHNIC AFFAIRS

List of Members

Mr L. Ah Toy

President, Northern Territory
Confederation of Industry and Commerce;- Partner, Price Waterhouse & Co., Darwin, Northern Territory

Professor R. J. Blandy

Professor of Economics, Flinders University, South Australia

Professor J. C. Caldwell

Head of Department of Demography, Research School of Social Sciences, Australian National University, Australian Capital Territory

Miss B. Con

Labour Economist, Colonial Sugar Refineries Ltd, Con-
venor, Industrial Relations Sub-Committee, N.S.W.
Ethnic Affairs Council 1978-79, New South Wales

DrD.R.Cox

Lecturer, Department of Social Studies, University of Melbourne, Member ACOSS Committee on Im-
migration, Integration and Population Issues, Victoria

Mr C. O. Dolan, A.O.

President, Australian Council of Trade Unions, Victoria

Mr A. Freeleagues, CBE., A.M. . . . . . . . Solicitor and Company Direc-
tor, Honorary Consul-
General for Greece; Brisbane, Queensland

The Hon. Mr Justice J. A. Supreme Court of Victoria,

Gobbo

President, Co-As-It, Vic-

toria

Professor W. P. Hogan

Professor of Economics, University of Sydney, New South Wales

MrB. Loton

Chief General Manager, Broken Hill Pty Ltd, Director, Australian Iron and Steel, Victoria

Sir Bruce MacKinley, OBE.

Company Director, Formerly President, Confederation of
WA. Industry, Western
Australia

Mr I. H. Naqvi

Senior Scientific Advisor, Tasmanian Hydro-Electric Commission, Member of NAATI, Treasurer, Indian Cultural Society of Australia (Tasmania), Tasmania

Professor C. M. Neutze

Director, Research School of
Social Sciences, Australian National University, Australian Capital Territory

Mr G. Polites, M.B.E.

C.M.G.,

Director-General, National
Employers Industrial Council, Confederation of Australian Industry, Victoria

MrA. Vella

Assistant Secretary, Victorian Trades Hall Council, Victoria

Ms C. Zampatti

Director, Carla Zampatti Pty Ltd, New South Wales

Professor J. Zubrzycki,

CBE.

Professor of Sociology, Aus-

tralian National University,

Australian Capital Territory

3132 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Ms Susan Ivany

Executive Director, Aus-
tralasian Union of Jewish Students

Australia Post Courier Service
(Question No. 3582)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) Did his Department allocate $30,000 for the Australia Post courier service in 1980-81.
(2) Has $30,000 been allocated for Australia Post express charges in 1981-82.
(3) If so, what way does that represent a 43 per cent increase, as indicated in his Department's estimates of expenditure explanatory notes.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) In 1980-81 the Department used the services of Australia Post Courier and private organisations covered by Commonwealth Contracts for the delivery of parcels and other freight. In accordance with Finance Directions expenditure on private organisations was chargeable to item 360.2.08 Freight and Cartage while expenditure for Australia Post Courier was chargeable to item 360.2.03 Postage, Telegrams and Telephone services which included $30,000 for that purpose.
(2) The Department of Finance has directed that costs for Australia Post Express which replaced Australia Post Courier will be a charge against item 360.2.08 in 1981-82 and an amount of $30,000 has been provided in that vote.
(3) The amount provided in item 360.2.08 for 1981-82 is $116,000 which represents an increase of 43.2 per cent over the 1980-81 expenditure in that item. As stated in the Department's explanatory notes $30,000 of that amount is a transfer from 360.2.03. If this is excluded the increased provision for freight is $4,976 or approximately six per cent.

Immigration: Timorese
(Question No. 3584)
Mr Young asked for the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
Further to his answer to my question No. 2444 ( Hansard, 20 August 1981, page 662), (a) how many Timorese were on the agreed list, (b) of this number how many have been reunited with their families in Australia and (c) how many of those on the agreed list who have arrived in Australia are full blooded Timorese.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) A total of 625 persons were on the list of East Timorese whose entry to Australia was agreed between the Australian and Indonesian Governments in 1978.
(b) By 31 October 1981, 350 of these had arrived.
(c) Statistics of the ethnicity of migrants are not collected.
Australian Federal Police
Mr Newman-On 29 October 1981 (Hansard, page 2671), Mr Mildren asked the Acting Minister for Administrative Services the following question without notice:

I refer the Acting Minister for Administrative Services to the Minister's responsibility to the Australian Federal Police. I ask: In what circumstances does the Minister relinquish to other Ministers his responsibility to the Federal Police? Did he formally relinquish this responsibility to the Minister for Primary Industry in the Federal Police investigation into the Australian Dairy Corporation and Asia Dairy Industries (Hong Kong) Ltd? In this instance, have the Australian Federal Police reported only to the Minister for Primary Industry and not to the Minister for Administrative Services? Is it a regular practice that Ministers other than the Minister for Administrative Services are responsible for the conduct of police inquiries into activities for which those Ministers themselves are ultimately responsible, or was special exemption made for National Country Party Ministers?
The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
By administrative arrangements ordered by the Governor General in Council I administer the Australian Federal Police Act 1979, except for certain limited sections administered by my colleagues, the Ministers for Industrial Relations and Capital Territory. I do not relinquish this responsibility, except to an Acting Minister when ordered by the Governor General in Council.
Sir Robert Mark in his Report to the Minister for Administrative Services on the Organisation of Police Resources in the Commonwealth area and other related matters, stated that the AFP should be and be seen to be operationally independent from political influence and yet be and seen to be administratively accountable to the Governmemt.
This principle of administrative accountability yet operational independence is embodied in the Australian Federal Police Act which delineates the relationship between the Commissioner of the AFP and the Minister given the portfolio responsibility for the AFP, inter alia, as follows:
'13. (I) Subject to this Act, the Commissioner has the general administration of, and the control of the operations of, the Australian Federal Police.
(2) The Minister may, after obtaining and considering the advice of the Commissioner and of the Secretary (of the Department of Administrative Services), give written directions to the Commissioner with respect to the general policy to be pursued in relation to the performance of the functions of the Australian Federal Police.
(6) The Commissioner shall furnish to the Minister such reports as the Minister requests relating to the administration and the performance of the functions of the Australian Federal Police.'
These legislative arrangements support the underlying responsibility of the police to enforce the law and be accountable for their actions to the courts.
Consistent with these arrangements, in relation to the particular police inquiry referred to by the honourable member, a brief was forwarded to the Crown Solicitor for advice as to whether prosecution action should be taken and the results of the inquiry were provided to the complainant-in this case the Department of Primary Industry-and to me for information.
Trade Practices Act
(Question No. 727)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 5 March 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the criticisms contained in the Trade Practices Consultative Committee's Report of the effectiveness of the monopolisation provisions of the Trade Practices Act.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3133

(2) [s he concerned by the criticisms; if not, why not.
(3) [f he is concerned, will he ensure at the very minimum that the Government will act to implement without further delay the recommendations of the Committee concerning section 46 of the Act.
(4) Was the report referred to in part (I) received by the Government in December 1979; if so, why has he and the Government so far failed to act on this and other recommendations contained in that report on the relationship between the Trade Practices Act and small business.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I), (2) and (3)-The Trade Practices Consultative Committee recommended an amendment to section 46 of the Trade Practices Act which is considered would change, and extend, the basis of application of that section. The Government has decided not to adopt that recommendation. After very careful examination of the proposal, the Government was not satisfied that its adoption would benefit small business. Further, it considered that the proposal could lead to uncertainty and thereby inhibit quite legitimate and proper competition. The Government will of course, continue to monitor the operation of section 46.
(4) Yes; the report raised a number of complex issues for consideration and after very careful examination the Government has decided, in additional to the matter referred to above, on the following course:
The Government will not implement the Committee's recommendation that section 49 be repealed. The Government considers that the section has an important role in regulating anti-competitive price discrimination and is of particular benefit to small business.
The Trade Practices Act will be amended to provide protection from intimidation to persons providing information to the Trade Practices Commission.
The Trade Practices Commission has already taken action to enhance its information program and this action is supported by the Government.
The Government will not be increasing the amount of legal aid being made available to assist small business take private actions under Part [V of the Act. The Government is satisfied that funds currently made available are adequate.
Before any action is taken on the Committee's proposal to introduce franchise legislation, the Government requires further information on franchising and franchising practices. The Department of Business and Consumer Affairs will conduct further studies into franchising.
A seperate announcement will be made on whether lower courts are to have jurisdiction in matters under the Trade Practices Act.
Dispensing Pharmacy at Melba, Australian Capital Territory
(Question No. 758)
Mr Hodges asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 11 March 1981:
(I) What has been the annual (a) profit or loss figures, (b) number of prescription items dispensed, (c) turnover, (d) number of employeer. and (e) wages bill of the Governmentowned dispensing pharmacy at Melba, Australian Capital Territory, since its opening.
(2) Has the Government given consideration to (a) closure of the pharmacy, (b) selling the pharmacy to private enterprise or (c) carrying front shop lines.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) (a) [n accordance with the general accounting arrangements of the Capital Territory Health Commission only direct costs were recorded against the Melba Health Centre Pharmacy during the years it has been operated by the Commission. Additionally the pharmacy did not receive payments from the Commonwealth for dispensed National Health Scheme prescriptions from 1975-76 onwards. Profit or loss figures are not readily available and would require a detailed costing exercise.

(b)-
1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 [979-80 1980-81

$ 13,058 28,652 36,033 39,233 26,879 25,651 22,421
25,255

(c)1973-74
[974-75
1975-76" 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

25,657 plus $29,062 NHSpayment
55,763 plus $69,330 NHSpayment
86,257 87,287 73,876 78,921 76,073 80,668

"From 1975-76 NHS payments discontinued.

(d) Full-time equivalent staff-

Pharmacists

Clerical assistant

1973

2

1974

2

1975

2

1976

3

1977

3

1978

3

1979

3

1980

2

1981 (to September)

2

(e)-

1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

$ 17,675 30,326 39,900 40,156 46,234 50,774 51,990 48,105

(2) The pharmacy began operating under private management from 14 September 1981.

Development of Banana Plantation in Western Samoa
(Question No. 1643)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 9 April 1981 :

3134 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) Did the Prime Minister of Western Samoa state that costs of development of a banana plantation in Western Samoa were solely the responsibility of the Australian Government.
(2) What sum has been expended by Australia on this project to date.
(3) What monitoring and accounting of expenditure is and has been made by the Australian Government.
(4) What income has been derived from the plantation.
(5) What advisory fees have been paid in respect of the project and to whom.
Mr Street-The honourable member's question was referred to the Western Samoa Government for information and advice before preparation of a reply. The honourable member will no doubt be aware that a public service strike commenced in Western Samoa on 6 April 1981 and continued for approximately twelve weeks. The Western Samoan authorities have consequently only recently provided the information requested.
The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The Western Samoa Government has advised that the Prime Minister did not make this statement.
(2) For 1979-80 and 1980-81 some $493,000 of the Development Import Grant allocation has been utilised by Western Samoa to purchase goods and services in Australia to assist with development of a banana plantation.
(3) Under the guidelines for Development Import Grants, competitive tenders are called in Australia by the recipient government or its appointed agent. Copies are sent to the Australian Development Assistance Bureau. The letting of contracts is the responsibility of the recipient government which is required to follow similar guidelines to those for Australian Government procurement. Payment is made to the Reserve Bank by the Bureau and is released for payment of claims on evidence that the goods and services have been supplied in accordance with the conditions laid down in the Memorandum of Understanding.
(4) The Western Samoa Government advises that from January 1980 to July 1981 net sales were WS $175, III. .
(5) An amount of $79,708 was paid by the Western Samoa Government for consultancy services of a banana plantation manager and quality control officer. This payment was part of the total DIGs amount spent by Western Samoa over two consecutive years.
Cocos Island Quarantine Station
(Question No. 1700)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice; on 9 April 1981 :
(I) Have charges been determined for stock passing through the Cocos Island quarantine station when it is completed; if so, what will be the charges; if not, when is it likely the charges will be made pUblic.
(2) Will he upgrade the figures given in answer to Question No. 543 (Hansard, 2 May 1978, page 1671) which showed estimates of the annual operating costs and receipts of the Cocos Island quarantine station.
(3) Will he also upgrade the estimate given in answer to Question No. 544 (Hansard, 2 May 1978, page 1671) of the costs to an importer of bringing adult cattle from Europe

through the Cocos Island quarantine station excluding the value of the animal and transport costs.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes, quarantine charges have been determined for cattle being imported into Australia through the Cocos Islands Animal Quarantine Station. The quarantine fee that has been set is calculated to recover the operational costs of the Station for the period of quarantine the cattle are required to serve. In the case of cattle from North America/Canada the quarantine fee has been set at $11.50 per day per head of cattle. As these animals are required to serve a minimum quarantine period of 90 days a total fee of $1,035 per head of cattle will be payable. Fees are subject to review annually.
Information concerning these charges has been circularised to all cattle breed societies, prospective importers and interested parties. Fees for other species of livestock will be determined as the need arises.
(2) Set out below is an updated table showing estimates of expenditure and receipts. The 1980-81 figures have been provided in the same format as figures previously set out in the response to Question No. 543 of 8 March 1978.

1980-81

1978

1973

Item

estimate estimate estimate

Expenditure Salaries Health tests Feed and bedding Transport of drugs and specimens
Purchase and transport of sent inels
Administration (local charges, hire and plant, staff travel)
Miscellaneous Equipment and
building maintenance

$
165,200 70,500 37,800 (i ncl uded in health tests)
26,490
38,000 5,000
2,500

$ 160,800 48,000 48,000
7,200
33,600
45,600 34,320
90,240

$ 170,000 60,000 83,000
9,000
60,000
21,000 70,000
27,000

Total expenditure

345,000 468,000 500,000 (rounded) (rounded)

ReceiptsSale of sentinels
Rental from homes
Recoveries from OwnersUSA
Europe
UK

1,600 10,800

6,000 8,000

36,000 4,000

190,800 142,200

378,000 76,000

260,000 200,000

Total receipts

345,400 468,000 500,000

It should be noted that the 1980-81 projected figures were based on three shipments of approximately 90 cattle per consignment over the first 12 months, two from the USA/Canada and one from Western Europe.
(3) The present estimate of costs to an importer to bring adult cattle from Europe through the Cocos Islands Station excluding the value of the animal and transport costs would be $3,500-$4,000. This estimate includes the quarantine fee of $1,725 (i.e. 150 days at $11.50 per day) and an estimated cost of $2,000 for testing and on-farm isolation in Europe.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3135

European cattle have longer quarantine periods and consequently higher quarantine charges than do North American/ Canadian cattle mentioned in answer to question (I).
Quarantine Inspection of Imported Goods
(Question No. 1702)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
Have systematic additional random inspections to assess the effectiveness and efficiency of quarantine inspection of imported goods been carried out as recommended in the report entitled 'Review of Australian Quarantine Arrangements' prepared by the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet in 1976; ifso, what were the results of inspections.
Mr Mackellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
My Department has advised that the recommendation referred to was not taken up because it became apparent, after careful consideration, that quarantine screening and other procedures for imported goods did not lend themselves to the systematic, randomly based evaluation techniques proposed.
As indicated in the recommendation referred to, the quarantine arrangements applying to goods imported into Australia are self regulating to an extent. Quarantine procedures for particular goods from different countries are determined in the light of assessments of the pest and disease risks which these goods present. If any matters of quarantine significance are located during routine or random inspections which are not already catered for, appropriate corrective measures are taken immediately to meet any perceived risk. These measures may involve mandatory treatments, new or increased levels of inspection for particular goods, or a shift in the emphasis of quarantine screening arrangements. Where inspections indicate, for example, inaccuracies in documentation, goods of similar origin are subject to particular attention in the future.
This approach ensures that quarantine procedures are in effect, subject to continuous review and as far as practicable, kept up to date with quarantine needs.
Registration of Chiropractors
(Question No. 1710)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) Are qualified chiropractors required to be registered in the Australian Capital Territory; if so, under what Ordinance.
(2) Are qualified chiropractors eligible to vote or contest elections for any of the Boards referred to in the 'Health Professions Board (Elections) Ordinance 1980'; if not, why not.
(3) Will he arrange for registration in the Australian Captial Territory of chiropractors possessing qualifications similar to those now recognised for registration purposes in Western Australia.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No.
(2) No. A health professional is only qualified to contest and vote in an election conducted in respect of a Board covering his or her profession. Because there is no board covering chiropractic in the Australian Capital Territory, there are no related elections in which chiropractors may participate.
(3) An Ordinance for the purpose of registering chiropractors and osteopaths in the Australian Capital Territory is expected to be introduced later this year. Under this proposed

legislation a chiropractor will be entitled to apply for registration if-

he is a fit and proper person to be registered as a chiropractor,

he has an adequate knowledge of the English language, and

(a) he holds a qualification in chiropractic granted by an

institution in a State or Territory after a course of

study and training that is recognised by the registration

-authority in that State or Territory; or

(b) he holds a qualification in chiropractic-

(i) that is granted by an institution in a place outside

Australia and that would entitle him to be regis-

tered in that place under a law of that place pro-

viding for the registration of chiropractors; and

(ii) that is a qualification declared by the Minister, on

the recommendation of the Board, by notice

published in the Gazelle, to be an acceptable

qualification; or

(c) (i) he lodges an application within six months after

the date of commencement of the Ordinance;

(ii) he has within the period of five years immediately

preceding the date on which he lodges his appli-

cation with the Board, practised chiropractic in

the Territory for a period of, or periods totalling,

not less than 12 months; and

.

(iii) he has passed to the satisfaction of the Board an

examination conducted by or on behalf of the

Board in accordance with a determination made,

on the recommendation of the Board, by the Min-

ister and published by notice in the Gazelle.

Quarantine Prosecutions
(Question No. 1717)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April 1981:
(I) What (a) meat, (b) meat products, (c) hides and (d) other animal products were confiscated because of quarantine risks during 1979-80.
(2) How many prosecutions were launched during the same period for breaches of the quarantine requirements.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The table below sets out the quantities of meat, meat products, hides and other animal products which records show were confiscated following detection, surrender or declaration, because of quarantine risks, during 1979-80. Some products intercepted, for example saddles, were treated appropriately to remove quarantine risks and then returned to respective owners.

Product

Quantity

Meat (kg) Tinned meat (kg) Cheese (kg) Milk products (kg) Eggs (ea) Egg products (kg) Edible birdnests (kg)
Trout/salmon (kg) Drums (ea) Rawhide pieces (ea) Hair/wool (kg) Honeycomb (kg) Snails (kg) Sandwiches (ea) Hides (ea) Saddles (ea)

4,592 1,463 2,248 1,898 3,918
703 39 189
324 1,028
62 86 13 706 63 117

3136 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Product
Horns/tusks (ea) Feathers (kg) Flywhisks (ea)

Quantity
170 3 2

(2) 515.
Animal Diseases
(Question No. 1726)
Mr Bungey asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 April1981:
(I) Is Australia and its territories currently free of (a) scrapie, (b) anthrax, (c) Newcastle, (d) rabies, (e) blue tongue and (f) foot and mouth diseases.
(2) If not, what incidents or outbreaks of each disease have been reported during the last three years, and what was the source of the infection in each case.
(3) If Australia is free of each disease, when was the last infection of each in Australia or its territories reported.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Australia is free from scrapie, rabies and foot and mouth disease. However anthrax, and avirulent strains of Newcastle disease virus and bluetongue virus have been reported here.
(2) The following diseases or disease agents have been reported in Australia during the past three years.
Newcastle disease-An avirulent Newcastle disease virus was first isolated in 1965 and is still present in Australian birds. This virus does not cause clinical disease. The source of the virus is not known.
Bluetongue-Several isolations of viruses which, by definition, fall within the bluetongue group have been made in Australia. None has been demonstrated to cause clinical disease. The sources of these viruses are unknown but from serological evidence it appears that some have been in Australia for many years.
Anthrax-Anthrax is believed to have made its first appearance in New South Wales about 1847. It is currently confined to isolated areas of New South Wales and Victoria.
(3) The following diseases have been reported or suspected in Australia in the past but have not been reported within the past three years.
Scrapie-Scrapie was diagnosed in 1952 in a small flock of Suffolk sheep imported from the United Kingdom twelve months earlier. The sheep and their progeny and all in-contact sheep were slaughtered and the area left unstocked for twelve months. It has not recurred in Australia.
Rabies-In Hobart in February 1867 a boy died 29 days after being bitten on the lip by a dog. Opinions expressed at the time indicated that several cases of a disease resembling rabies had occurred in dogs, and at least one pig, in the area.The affected animals were destroyed and a clean up of stray dogs was carried out by the local Municipal Council. Reports published at the time leave little doubt that the disease was rabies.
In 1883 a health officer in New South Wales reported several instances in which dogs presented the symptoms of rabies. No human case was reported and no later reports were made.
Foot and mouth disease-The only certain occurrence of foot and mouth disease in Australia was an outbreak in'Victoria in 1872 following the importation of eight bulls from

England. The diagnosis was confirmed by several veterinary surgeons. The outbreak was confined to two properties and was successfully eradicated by slaughter.
Trade Practices Act
(Question No. 1950)
Mr Hurford asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 28 April 1981:
(I) Further to the report of the Trade Practices Consultative Committee on the operation of the Trade Practices Act in relation to primary production in Australia, is it a fact that the Consultative Committee's case against the Banana Growers Federation was adjourned following a statutory direction to the Commission by the then Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs on IS September 1978.
(2) If so, was the reason given at the time for the seeking of the adjournment that the Government needed time to consider the report of the Consultative Committee.
(3) Was the Consultative Committee's report presented to the then Minister in May 1979.
(4) If so, what action has the Government taken on the report.
(5) Will the Government act on the report; if not, why not.
(6) Will the Government compensate any party who has suffered financial loss from the Government's delay in considering the report or the resultant continued adjournment of the Banana growers case.
(7) To what instances did the Trade Practices Commission refer at Paragraph 4.4.6 of its annual report for 1979-80 when it stated that other primary industry cases are being held up until the Government takes a decision on the Committee's report.
Mr Moore-The answer to thehcinourable member's question is as follows: .
(I) The Trade Practices Commission's case against the Banana Growers' Federation was generally stood over after the then Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs gave a direction on 15 Septem])er 1978.
(2) Yes.
(3) Yes.
(4) and (5) As I announced on IS November 1981, the Government has decided to adopt guidelines for use in determining whether or not to grant exemptions under paragraph 172(2) (a) of the Trade Practices Act. The principal features of the guidelines are that-
Exemption is to be limited to sections 45, 458 (both dealing with agreements) and 47 (exclusive dealing) (other than section 47 (6), (7), (8)(c) and (9)(d.
Exemptions are to operate for a maximum of five years, but will be capable of renewal, where appropriate, following further examination.
Exemptions must be necessary for promoting stability in the production or marketing of primary products or for purposes connected with export marketing.
An exempted scheme must be capable of achieving these purposes and involve the least reduction in competition necessary to achieve those objectives.
Other than in unforseen or exceptional circumstances, the Government will not consider any request for exemption where proceedings under the Act have been commenced in respect of conduct sought to be exempted. There will however be a period of grace. The Government will consider requests

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3137

for exemption already made, or made within the next three months.
The Government will now proceed to examine all applications for exemption, including the request from the Banana Growers' Federation. The direction to the Trade Practices Commission to have proceedings in the Federal Court against the Federation stood over will be continued, to enable the application for exemption to be determined.
(6) No.
(7) The Trade Practices Commission makes it a practice to not pUblicise the names of companies or industry organizations against whom allegations or complaints are made, .because the Commission is not in a position to know whether the allegations are well founded until its investigations are complete. The references in paragraph 4.4.6 of the Commission's annual report for 1979-80 were to two other primary industry cases in respect of which the Commission had deferred its investigations pending the Government's decision on the Committee's report.
South Africa: Use offacilities at North West Cape
(Question No. 2073)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 6 May 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to a newspaper article in the Sydney Morning Hearald of 24 April 1981 entitled 'Why South Africa could be plugged into North West Cape'.
(2) Can Australian authorities identify coded messages sent through the communications channels as originating in a particular country.
(3) If so, what third country users (a) use or (b) have used the Cape facilities.
(4) Can he give an assurance that South Africa has never used facilities at the Cape.
Mr KiIlen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) No, unless an Australian authority is part of the message address.
(3) .(a) and (b) The only third countries to have used the station's 'facilities have been the United Kingdom, New Zealand, Italy and the Netherlands. This use has been arranged when Naval ships of those countries have been operating in the Indian Ocean area.
There are no records of any third country messages being relayed through North West Cape as part of US message traffic. Although this possibility is improbable, it cannot be completely ruled out, but in any case South Africa has not had common user access to the Allied defence communications system since 1972.
(4) See answer to part (3).
Use of North West Cape Facilities
(Question No. 2195)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(I) Which countries, apart from Australia and the United States of America, have had use of the North West Cape facilities under Article IV of the Agreement as interpreted in the agreed minutes.
(2) What were the periods of use by each country.

(3) Does the United States advise the Australian authorities of the identity of third country governments whose communications are accepted into the United States channels for transmission through the North West Cape facilities.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 'and (2) The facilities at North West Cape have been made available for three ships of the Royal Navy (in 1975, 1977 and 1979), two of the Royal New Zealand Navy (in 1976 and 1980), one of the Italian Navy (1979) and four of the Royal Dutch Navy (1979).
There are no records of any third country messages being relayed through North West Cape as part of US. message traffic. Although this possibility is improbable, it cannot be completely ruled out.
(3) No. Such messages would be regarded as United States communications.
MANDATA System: Department of Defence
(Question No. 2217)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(I) Has the MANDATA System been introduced in his Department and Government instrumentalities under his control; if so, what was the (a) cost of (i) the equipment, (ii) installation, (iii) site preparation, (iv) acquiring or renting sites and (v) other additional factors associated with the introduction of the system and (b) total cost of introducing the system.
(2) Were any reductions in the staff of personnelJestablishment units achieved as a result of introducing this system; if so, what (a) reductions in staff and (b) cost savings were achieved in each year since its introduction.
(3) What staff (a) saving or (b) increase is expected with the termination of the MANDATA System.
(4) What is the anticipated (a) extra cost or (b) saving resulting from the termination of the MANDATA System.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I refer the honourable member to the answer to Question No. 2209 which he asked of the Prime Minister and provide the following additional information in relation to my Department.
(I) Yes.
(a) (i) Nil.
(ii) $9,200.
(iii) $100.
(iv) Nil.
(v) $36,900. Includes cost of relocation of equipment, overtime, stationery and travel expenses associated with training and implementation.
(b) $46,200.
(2) No.
(3) It is expected that there will be some staff savings with the introduction of the computerised alternative being developed (See 4 below). The level of staff savings cannot be identified until the precise nature and operation of the new system are finalised.
(4) (a) $55,000 during 1981-82 for the development and operation by ADAPS Limited, of an interim computerised alternative. $40,000 during 1981-82 for the development by external consultants, of a long-term computerised alternative

3138 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

that will operate on departmental equipment. It is planned that this system will become available in July 1982.
(b) Any savings would result from the staff reductions mentioned in 3 above.
MANDATA System: Department of Business and Consumer Affairs
(Question No. 2229)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(I) Has the MANDATA System been introduced in his Department and Government instrumentalities under his control; if so, what was the (a) cost of (i) the equipment, (ii) installation, (iii) site preparation, (iv) acquiring or renting sites and (v) other additional factors associated with the introduction of the system and (b) total cost of introducing the system.
(2) Were any reductions in the staff of personnel/establishment units achieved as a result of introducing this system; if so, what (a) reductions in staff and (b) cost savings were achieved in each year since its introduction.
(3) What staff (a) saving or (b) increase is expected with the termination of the MANDAT A System.
(4) What is the anticipated (a) extra' cost or (b) saving resulting from the termination of the MANDATA System.
Mr Moore-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I ) Yes, in the Department of Business and Consumer Affairs-
(a) (i) $ Nil. Please refer to the answer provided by the Honourable Ian Viner to QUestion 2209 (A) (i) and (ii), Hansard, page 2796, 29 October 1981.
(ii) $ Nil. Please refer to the answer provided by the Honourable Ian Viner to Question 2209 (A) (i) and (ii), page 2796, 29 October 1981.
(iii) $Nil.

(iv) $Nil. (v) The staff resources used in the planning, pickup
and purification stages of the introduction of the MANDATA Personnel and Establishments System. (b) $ 29,080.41. (2) No. (3) Nil, but see also answer provided by the Honourable Ian Viner to Question 2209 Part 3 (b). (4) (a) Nil-the withdrawal will be achieved within existing resources. (b) Nil-alternative systems to be introduced and maintained utilising existing resources.
Private Health Insurance Funds: Enrolment of New Members
(Question No. 2650)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) Do private health insurance funds pay commissions to agencies for the enrolment of new members.
(2) If so, which funds provide commission for (a) medical and (b) hospital insurance for (i) single and (ii) family enrolments.
(3) What rate of commission has applied in each case prior to the recent announcements of changes to the health insurance and hospital funding arrangements.
(4) Have there been any changes to the commission rates at any time since the announcement of changes, or have there been any further announcements of a proposed change to the rates since that announcement; if so, what are the details.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. Many registered health insurance funds do pay commissions to agents for the enrolment of new members.
(2), (3) and (4) Commission rates are set out in the following table:

Organisation
New South WalesGUOOF
HCF
HACBS IOOF MBF Medibank Private (I) NIB WDHF Wollongong NSWR& T QueenslandMedibank Private (I) MBF VictoriaAOF (2) ANA

Commission rates for new enrolments

Commission rates for new enrolments

prior to announced changes to arrangements since announced changes to arrangements

Medical or

Medical and

Medical or

Medical and

- hosp-ital-fun-d - - hospital fund

- hosp-ital-fun-d - - hospital fund

Single Family Single Family Single Family Single Family

I week's I week's I week's

contribucontribucontribu-

tion

tion

tion

$0.50

$0.50

$1.00

(plus $0.50 for ancillary cover)

$1.00

$1.00

$1.00

$0.50 $2.39 $1.00 $5.00 , $1.00 $5.00

$0.50 $2.39 $1.00 $5.00
$1.00 $5.00

$1.00 $2.39 $1.00 $5.00
$1.00 n.a.

I week's No change No change No change No change
contribution
$1.00 Nochange Nochange Nochange Nochange

$1.00 No change No change No change No change

$5.00

$5.00

$5.00

$5.00

$1.00 No change No change No change No change

$2.39

$5.00 $10.00

$5.00 $10.00

$1.00 No change No change No change No change

$5.00 No change No change No change No change

$1.00

$3.00

$3.00

$3.00

$3.00

n:a. No change No change

n.a.

n.a.

$2.39 $0.50

$2.39 $0.50

$2.39 $1.00

$2.39

$5.00 $10.00

$5.00 $10.00

$1.00 No change No change No change No change

$1.00 $1.00

$2.00 $1.00

$2.00 $2.00

$4.00

$5.00

$5.00

$5.00

$5.00

$2.00 No change No change No change No change

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3139

Commission rates for new enrolments

Commission rates for new enrolments

prior to announced changes to arrangements since announced changes to arrangements

Organisation

Medical or hospital fund

Medical and hospital fund

Medical or hospital fund

Medical and hospital fund

Single Family Single Family Single Family Single Family

Geelong HBA (3) HACBS Medibank Private (I) IOOF Latrobe MUIOOF(4)
OST (5) Western Australia-
HBF Medibank Private (I) HIF FSHS . . . . . South AustraliaMedibank Private (I) MHA NHSA TasmaniaMedibank Private (I) MBF St Lukes

$2.00 $1.50 $2.25 $2.39 $2.00 $1.00 $0.50 to $2.00 $2.00

$2.00 $1.50 $2.25 $2.39 $2.00 $1.00 $0.50 to $2.00 $2.00

$2.00
$1.50
$2.25 $2.39 $4.00
$2.00 $\.00 to $4.00 $4.00

0.50 $2.39 $3.00 $5.00

$0.50 $2.39
$3.00 $5.00

$\.00 $2.39 $3.00 $5.00

$2.39 $\.00 $0.50

$2.39 $\.00 $0.50

$2.39 $2.00 $\.00

$2.39

$2.39

$2.39

$0.50

$0.50

$\.00

$2.50

$2.50

$5.00

(plus $2.50 for ancillary cover)

$2.00 No change No change No change No change

$1.50

$7.00

$7.00

$7.00

$7.00

$2.25 No change No change No change No change

$2.39

$5.00 $10.00

$5.00 $10.00

$4.00 No change No change No change No change

$2.00 No change No change No change No change

$\.00

to $4.00 No change No change No change No change

$4.00 No change No change No change No change

$\.00 No change No change No change No change

$2.39

$5.00 $10.00

$5.00 $\0.00

$3.00 No change No change No change No change

$5.00 No change No change No change No change

$2.39

$5.00 $10.00

$5.00 $\0.00

$2.00 No change No change No change No change

$\.00 No change No change No change No change

$2.39

$5.00 $\0.00

$5.00 $\0.00

$1.00 No change No change No change No change

$5.00 No change No change No change No change

Notes-
\. Rates since announced changes to arrangements apply only from I June 1981 to 31 October 198\. Rates after I November 1981 have been determined at $2.53 for new single and family enrolments to either the medical and/or hospital fund.

2. Hospital rates of commission prior to announced changes to arrang~ments do not include additional commission of 25/50 cents for each $5.00 of supplementary hospital benefit cover insured for.

3. Rates since announced changes to arrangements apply only from I July 1981 to 31 October 1981, otherwise no change.

4. Commission rate depends on number of new enrolments per quarter.

5. Enrolment commission paid only on members joining at least two funds (could include unregistered funds).

6. The full names of the registered health organisations in the order listed above are as follows:

GUOOF

The Grand United Order of Odd fellows, Friendly Society of New South Wales

HCF

The Hospitals Contibution Fund of Australia

HACBS

Hibernian Australian Catholic Benefit Society of New South Wales

IOOF

Independent Order of Odd Fellows of the State of New South Wales

MBF

Medical Benefits Fund of Australia Limited

NIB

N.LB. Health Funds Limited

WDHF

Western District Health Fund Limited

Wollongong The Wollongong Hospital and Medical Benefits Contribution Fund

NSWR & T N.S.W. Railway & Transport Employees' Hospital Fund

AOF

The Ancient Order of Foresters in Victoria Friendly Society

ANA

Australian Natives' Association

Geelong

Geelong Medical and Hospital Benefits Association Limited

HBA

The Hospital Benefits Assocfation Ltd.

HACBS

The Hibernian Australasian Catholic Benefit Society, Victoria District No. I

IOOF

Independent Order of Odd Fellows of Victoria

Latrobe

Latrobe Valley Hospitals and Health Services Association

MUIOOF The Manchester Unity Independent Order of Odd Fellows in Victoria

OST

The Order of the Sons of Temperance National Division Friendly Society

HBF

The Hospital Benefit Fund of Western Australia Incorporated

HIF

Health Insurance Fund of WA.

FSHS

Friendly Societies Health Services

MHA

Mutual Health Association Limited

NHSA

National Health Services Association of South Australia

St Lukes

St Luke's Medical and Hospital Benefits Association

3140 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Pesticides: Use in Australian Agriculture
(Question No. 2729)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the statement that label directions safeguard the user, consumer, general public and environment by specifying the possible hazards associated with incorrect usage contained on page iii of the Report entitled 'Pesticides Used in Vietnam Hostilities and their Use in Australian Agriculture: A Comparative Study' if so, for what reason is possible irritation of the skin and eyes the only hazard listed on the labels of both Farmco D-80 Selective 2,4-D Weedkiller, produced by Chemical Industries, Kwinana, and Estercide 80 2,4-D herbicide, produced by Nufarm Chemicals Pty Ltd, when the same report listed the symptoms, described in scientific and medical literature, as being associated with 2,4-D as being (a) ex:cessive fatigue, (b) epigastric pains, (c) anorex:ia, (d) upper respiratory tract symptoms, (e) impaired taste sensitivity, (f) liver disease, (g) peripheral neuropathy and (h) contact dermatitis.
(2) [s he able to say whether the symptoms and conditions listed on page 6 of the report referred to in part (I) as being tox:ic effects of TCOD (diox:in) in man are all contained on labels of any product containing 2,4,5-T sold in Australia; if not, why not.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. Although State regulatory authorities carry responsibility for labelling of pesticides they closely follow the recommendations of the National Health and Medical Research Council's Uniform Poisons Standard. The herbicide 2,4-D is included in schedule 5 of that standard as a substance having a very low tox:icity. In this regard label warnings of possible skin and eye irritation are consistent with effects encountered in long ex:perience with the use of this material in cases where adequate care in usage has not been ex:ercised. The possibility of the additional adverse health symptoms from incorrect usage of 2,4-D, detailed in the report entitled 'Pesticides Used in Vietnam Hostilities and Their Use in Australian Agriculture: A Comparative Study', is ex:tremely remote and could be ex:pected to follow only massive ex:posure such as accidental or deliberate ingestion.
(2) Products containing 2,4,5-T sold in Australia are not labelled with tox:ic effects allegedly attributable to TCDD in man. The results of ex:tensive scientific investigation carried out to date do not indicate the likelihood of any such effects occurring in man through normal usage of substances incorporating 2,4,5-T.
Pensioners' Non-interest Bearing Accounts
(Question No. 2891)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 27 August 1981:
(I) Has the Department of Social Security prepared an estimate of the amount of savings of pensioners held in noninterest bearing accounts in banks and other financial institutions as a direct result of the existence of means tests on pensions.
(2) [s this placement of their savings by pensioners regarded by the Department as a fraudulent attempt to deprive themselves of ex:tra income for the purpose of obtaining full or higher rates of pension or fringe benefits; if so, does the Department intend taking recovery action against all pensioners with savings in non-interest bearing savings accounts.

(3) Is it a fact that in some cases pensioners are depriving themselves of thousands of dollars of interest and other extra income in order to qualify for fringe benefits within the means test.
(4) Is the Minister able to say whether this action has resulted in an enormous bonus to financial institutions in which pensioners have invested their savings interest free.
(5) [s it a fact that the pension means test has not been increased for eight years; if so, is this largely the cause of pensioners placing interest free deposits with financial institutions.
(6) What would the pension means test be if it had been increased in line with consumer price index increases during the last eight years.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The payment of pensions in Australia is subject to an income test, not a means test. The means test, which took account of the value of assets owned as well as certain forms of income received, ceased to be applied on 25 November 1976.
The Department of Social Security has not made any estimate of the amount of savings held by pensioners in noninterest bearing forms.
(2) No. The income test is a mechanism designed to ensure that welfare funds are directed to those in greatest financial need. However, the income test is being circumvented by a proportion of people who are forgoing the receipt of income available th~ough the normal and reasonable investment of their funds. In this way welfare funds are being misdirected to certain people who are not in need of assistance.
As pointed out in my second reading speech on the Social Services Amendment Bill 1981 people will be able to retain reasonable amounts in non-interest bearing accounts without being affected in any way by the proposed amendments to the Social Services Act. As a minimum these amounts will be not less than $2000 for a single person or $3000. for a married couple.
(3) Some pensioners do forgo considerable amounts of income.
(4) To the ex:tent that financial institutions are able to borrow funds free of charge, their profit margins would indeed be increased.
(5) Permissible income limits were last increased as from October 1972; however, since that date the upper limit of income which a pensioner may have before he ceases to be eligible for some pension has increased from $60 to $159.40 a week in the case of a single pensioner, and from $103.50 to $266.90 a week for a pensioner couple.
While it is evident that there is a growing incidence of pensioners artificially rearranging their affairs in order to qualify for pensions, to increase existing entitlements or to qualify for fringe benefits, it is not possible to attribute this to any single cause.
(6) If the present income limits were increased by the movement in the consumer price index: (CPI) from the September quarter 1972 to the June quarter 1981, they would become (rounded to the nearest five cents)-
(a) $51.45 a week for a single person;
(b) $44.40 a week for a married person.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3141

Hospital Bed Days: Alcohol-related Illness
(Question No. 3004)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(I) What is the estimated number of hospital bed days and the cost of this hospitalisation due to alcohol-related illness and injury and as a proportion of total bed days and costs.
(2) Are there any other estimated health costs to the country of alcohol-related illness and injury, for example, days lost through sickness.
(3) Are there any other related figures available on this problem, for example, prison admissions, etc.
Mr MacKellar-The honourable member will be aware that State health authorities do not routinely collect data on alcohol-related illness and injuries in morbidity data. However, in an effort to assist the honourable member as fully as possible, I have been advised that the following estimates are believed to be indicative:
(I) A. T. Williams, F. Harding Burns, and S. Morey, in their paper, 'Prevelance of Alcoholism in a Sydney Teaching Hospital', Medical Journal of Australia, 1978,2,608-611, and C. M. Peterson's 'Inpatient population and alcohol abuse', St Vincents Hospital Sydney, 1977-78, unpublished, suggested that in the order of 10 per cent of acute hospital beds may be filled with persons suffering from alcohol-related illnesses. Based on information available from public psychiatric hospitals, about 15 per cent or so of beds, not occupied by mentally retarded patients, appear to be used by people with a diagnosis of alcoholism or alcoholic psychosis. This estimate does not allow for those who are additionally treated by special institutions for people with alcohol-related problems or private institutions.
Extrapolation of these figures would indicate that between 2 million and 3 million public hospital bed days per annum could be involved in caring for people with alcohol-related problems. This would indicate an annual cost in the order of $220 to $300 million in public acute hospitals for 1977-78.
(2) There are no reliable estimates of the cost to the community of working days lost through alcohol-related sickness or injury. The NH & MRC estimated that, in 1972, the loss of potential earnings through premature deaths associated with alcohol was approximately $120 million per annum and the cost of alcohol-related traffic accidents was about $500 million annually (in 1972 terms).
L. Halchenko (Costs of Alcoholism in Industry in Australia, 1974-75, AFADD) estimated that, in 1975, alcohol related absenteeism cost industry $46 million each year.
(3) No studies have been made to enable an accurate estimate of the cost of alcohol-related crime to the community to be calculated. Evidence available from E. Oits, The Relationship between Alcohol and Violent Crime', Roneoed Material Chief Secretary's Office, Victorian Government; B. Roslund and C. Larson, 'Crimes of Violence and Alcohol Abuse in Sweden', International Journal of Addictions, 14, 8, 1103-1115, 1979; and N. Parker, 'Murderers'; a personal series', Medical Journal of Australia, 1,36-39,1979, suggests at least half, and possibly 75 per cent, of all violent crime is associated with alcohol use.
L. H. Drew, in 'Personal Responsibility and Alcohol Problems', Nursing Times, September 1976, estimated that, in 1972-73, alcohol related crime cost $120 million in a year direct outlay through the judicial and penitentiary system.

Tenosynovitis: Department of Health
(Question No. 3025)

Mr Les McMahon asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on September 1981:

(I) Have any cases of tenosynovitis been reported to date, in the Department or Statutory Authorities under the Minister's jurisdiction.

(2) If so, will the Minister state (a) how many cases have been reported, (b) in what types of work the affected persons
were angaged, (c) of the cases reported how many were in respect of (i) female and (ii) male employees and (d) what age brackets appear to be most affected, in the Department and
each Statutory Authority.

(3) Will the Minister provide similar information in respect of carpal tunnel.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Yes.

(2) (a) Records of confirmed cases are readily available in

only recent years and the number since January 1979 is as

follows:

Department of Health . . . . . .

6

Health Insurance Commission

7

Commonwealth Serum Laboratories Commission

2

Capital Territory Health Commission

2

(b) The people affected were engaged in clerical/ administrative, data processing, laboratory glassware and bottle cleaning, and kitchen duties.

(c) 15 females and 2 males.

(d) There is no identifiable pattern of occurrence which relates to age.

(3) Cases of carpal tunnel syndrome have been confirmed

as follows:

Department of Health . . . . . .

I

Health Insurance Commission

2

The people affected were in the data processing field and were females. There is no identifiable pattern of occurrence related to age.

Australian-based Coinpanies in the Philippines
(Question No. 3069)
Mr Howe asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 10 August 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to reports of the shooting, on 5 July 1981 at the military prison camp Tolentino, Balango, Bataan, The Philippines, of 3 Union organisers, Emiliano Paguio, Antonio Santa Ana and Vivencio Santos who were under arrest after being charged with spurious offences of subversion and boycotting the presidential elections in that country.
(2) Has his attention also been drawn to the reports that the charges of subversion reiate to work by these Union organisers, designed merely to improve intolerable working conditions in factories owned and operated by Australian companies, in particular Denzil Don, a subsidiary of Dunlop (Aust) which is administered from Melbourne, Ford Philippines Stamping Plant which is also administered directly from the Ford Asia-Pacific office in Melbourne and Southern Star Billiards, an Australian-owned company.
(3) If so, will he express his concern to the Philippine Government about this matter.

3142 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(4) Should Australian-based companies operate in an area such as The Philippines where this treatment is allegedly meted out to Union officials.
Mr. Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. Extensive enquiries by our Embassy in Manilla, through a number of different sources, about these allegations which you and others have passed to me have so far only been able to confirm the apparent disappearance of the three people-Jemiliana Paguio, Antonio Sta Ana and Vivencio Santos.
(2) Officers of our Embassy in Manilla, who recently visited the Bataan Export Processing Zone reported that the companies with Australian ownership or connections have not themselves specifically been the targets of action by workers or unions with which Paguio and Sta Ana are said to have been associated. As far as the Embassy officers could ascertain, these companies met Philippine labour code and wage requirements and they were told that the companies enjoy a reputation for fair dealing. Our Embassy understands that Vivencio Santos was arrested for alleged offences in connection with the boycott of the Presidential election of 16 June. He is understood not to have had any association with either unions at the Bataan Export Processing Zone or Australian companies in the Philippines.
(3) The Philippine Government is already aware of the Australian Government's views on human rights matters. Successive Australian Governments have placed clearly on record Australia's support for the principles set out in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
(4) The location of Australia-based private companies is a matter for the companies.
Child Care Services: Means Test
(Question No, 3097)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 15 September 1981:
(I) Will a means test apply on the provision of child care services; if so, what will the means test consist of.
(2) Were members of parliament invited to make submissions to the Minister or the Department of Social Security in respect of child care; if so, did any Member of Parliament make a submission.
(3) If submissions were made by Members of Parliament what was the nature of each of the submissions.
(4) Is it normal practice for the Department of Social Security to conduct reviews of its policy based on reviews undertaken by Government backbench Members of Parliament.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) All child care services funded.by the Commonwealth Government are currently required to apply a sliding scale of

fees to ensure that those in the greatest financial need receive the greatest benefit from government subsidies to such services. My department is currently examining the feasibility of introducing a common income test for all subsidised child care services, both centre-based and family-based. I have undertaken that consultations will occur with organisations in this process.
(2) to (4) I have instituted a number of reviews of Department of Social Security programs, involving the Social Welfare Policy Secretariat, officers of my department and parliamentary colleagues. These are entirely internal and are part of the continuing process of policy review undertaken by the Government within the Department.
The recently completed examination of the Children's Services Program is one such exercise. The recommendations made by the review group are internal working documents which will be subject to consideration by the Government.
Submissions were not invited from members of parliament.

Agent Orange: Information from Ex-Serviceman
(Question No, 3104)

Dr Cass asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 15 September 1981:
When seeking information from ex-servicemen and their families as part of the study into the effects of Agent Orange, is privacy between husband and wife protected; if not, how can the information elicited be accepted as accurate.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Yes. The recently enacted Epidemiological Studies (Confidentiality) Act 1981 covers the husband and wife situation.

Immigrant Intake

(Question No, 3158)

Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Immigration

and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 17 September

1981:

.

What has been Australia's immigrant intake expressed in
(a) refugee category, (b) family reunion category, (c) occupationally eligible category and (d) total intake by country of origin for each year since 1970.

Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Total migrant intake for the period concerned is shown in the two attached tables. Table A shows intake by eligibility category commencing in 1975-76. The information sought on eligibility categories is not available prior to this year. The figures are based on visa conditions as determined at overseas posts.
Table B shows the intake by country of last residence and has been prepared by the Australian Bureau of Statistics based on information provided on passenger cards. There are differences in the totals shown in the two tables due to differences between the definitions used.

Table A SETTLER ARRIVALS BY ELIGIBILITY CATEGORIES

Period

Family reunion

Refugee

Occupationally eligible
(general eligibility)

Special eligibility
(mainlyNZ)

Total

1975-76 1976-77

13,862 19,202

4,374 8,124

17,561 27,215

16,366 18,648

52,163 73,189

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3143

Period
1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

Family reunion
20,372 17,255 18,359 19,570

Refugee
9,597 13,450 19,953 21,847

Occupationally eligible (general
eligibility)
29,686 19,598 24,116 45,189

Special eligibility (mainly NZ)
16,077 18,476 18,843 24,584

Total
75,732 68,749 81,271 111,190

TableD COUNTRY OF LAST RESIDENCE OF SETTLER ARRIVALS

Financial years

Country of last residence

9months 1970-71 1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

Africa-

Mauritius

Other CommonwealLh Countries

Arab Republic of Egypt

South Africa

Other

America-

Canada

Other Commonwealth Countries

Argentina

Chile

Peru

United States of America

Uruguay

Other

Asia-

Bangladesh

Cyprus

Hong Kong

India

Malaysia

Singapore Sri Lanka

.

...

Other Commonwealth Countries

Burma

China

Indonesia

Israel

Japan

Lebanon

Pakistan

Philippines

Syria

Thailand

Turkey

Other

Europe-

UK and Ireland

Malta

Other Commonwealth Countries

Austria

Belgium

Czechoslovakia

Denmark

Finland

France

Germany

Greece

Hungary

Haly

Netherlands

Norway

Poland

Portugal

Roumania

Spain

Sweden

Switzerland

USSR

Yugoslavia

Other

n.a. 1,966 1,109 2,047
508
2,389 346 n.a. o.a. o.a.
5,875 o.a.
5,367
o.a. 1,054
716 3,168
910 727 832 41 602
63 113 260 112 4,005 146 382 190 174 3,705 1,012
65,535 1,262 298
10,268 255 137 710 870
2,587 4,872 9,759
117 7,473 2,266
244 179 1,094 45 1,604 711 1,325 33 14,096 88

n.a. 1,945 1,~39 1,695
423
2,957 327 n.a.
n.a. n.a. 6,947 n.a. 3,278
n.a. 979 715 2,390 1,007 973 1,219
35 488
78 68 195 108 3,048 168 429 278 77 2,406 1,138
55,760 1,371 238 3,142 256 48 579 394 2,312 2,879 5,570 50 5,798 1,696 166 414 1,100 26 1,224 875 1,142 77 7,475 34

n.a. 1,808
835 1,565
285

230 1,136
702 1,583
165

2,086 267
n.a. n.a. n.a. 4,044 n.a. 3,209

2,019 278
1,048
1,187
189 3,577 1,862 3,082

n.a. 818
734 1,720
689 769 1,386
34
195 103 69 170
84 2,661
162 512 177
90 2,243
781

35 947 1,130 1,959 731
1,180 1,948
31
58 106 120 230
128 3,444
209 496 227
118 3,104
886

48,681 1,847 287 2,430
185 28 336 189
1,262 2,364
3,272
87 3,460
955
157 319 1,039
24 1,212
790 634
69 4,911
37

46,372 2,253
126 1,029
160 28
' 380 223
1,075 2,335 3,915
102 2,744 1,194
159 237 944
24 1,453
512 697
116 5,338
40

236 803 327 1,530 151
1,695 275 927
1,805 271
3,406 2,156
656
66 1,489 1,593 1,585
942 949 - 887
21 312 115 120 348 114 2,408 129 1,026 137 132 1,591 1,107
38,313 1,190 17 1,000 115 13 345 154 691 1,583 2,507 52 2,454 823 108 167 464 25 602 396 548 126 3,131 18

110 372 165 1,029
63
840 52
804 1,774
152 1,690
546 307
35 2,685 1,302
611 1,183
864 436
5 319 136 116 196 88 1,556
83 1,105
85 732 1,019 475
17,550 382
257 80 19 222 100 344 1,015 1,632 38 1,532 426 32 116 348 39 259 83 235 161 1,618 32

137
450 276 1,986
76

116 668
194
2,858 65

799 74
1,286
1,667
49 1,486
584 141

897 60
1,081 1,215
117
1,274 526 349

39 4,064 1,633
561 1,644
910 492
18
200 114 214 211 76
10,614 60
1,639 231
949 1,158 1,483

43 482 2,313 630 4,575
837 404
17
91 204 277
152 86 2,567
106 1,411
145
1,232 1,093 4,141

18,714 305 5 287 55
38 121 88
394 874 \,856
37 1,545
653 33
141 330
26 264 137 253
96 1,444
20

21,540 426
I 315
70 22 184 199
356 1,004 1,315
30 2,115
951 28 142
556
54 144 164 314
96 1,648
27

215 810 218 2,871
72
899 35
881 810
80 1,331
427 262
28 286 1,836 562 9,205 713 266
13 135 294 1,204 208 107 1,124 61 1,333 87 427 722 3,879
12,767 518 3 396 42 4 167 127 305 938 910 26
1,950 791 30 143 541 58 -139 151 246 112
1,180 15

181 631 152 3,050
52
943 49 596
462 127 1,562 256 273
55 209 2,282 532 7,203 805 218
II 74 665 4,758 264 123 935 105 2,312 75 3,008 797 1,302
16,333 490 2
2,410 60 28 262 133 464
1,313 1,066
44 2,690 1,204
58 156 351 132 315 167 452 135 1,595 48

166 679 129 2,586
41
792 32 262
332 72 1,582 153 213
8 224 1,493 393 5,773 1,186 146 22
38 625 2,059 244 359 543 166 2,326
67 3,572
817 710
22,939 919 I
2,800 103 19 452 140 518
1,775 992 25
1,984 1,567
65 168 505 164 463 260 457 76 1,317 35

3144 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Financial years

Country of last residence

9 months 1970-71 1971-72 1972-73 1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

Oceania~
Fiji New Zealand Papua and New Guinea Other Commonwealth Countries Other Not Stated

300 5,454
455 67 88

261 4,258
662 90 112

291 3,943
881 114 101

270 4,864
1,180 224 III 462

374. 3,141
682 360
62 377

314 3,526
763 312
88 290

465 6,019
517 531
55 292

410 9,671
489 598
51 25

429 12,766
678 244 100
15

394 15,513
615 168 69
14

420 15,408
584 157 81
3

Total

170,011 132,719 107,401 112,712 89,147 52,748 70,916 73,171 67,192 80,748 82,207

Medical Fund Rates
(Question No, 3184)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 22 September 1981:
(1) Did registered private health funds lose over $190m in the full year following the Government's 1976 health insurance changes.
(2) [fso, was it unrealistically low medical fund rates which mainly contributed to this loss.
(3) [s it anticipated that similar losses will occur following the latest health changes, due to the unrealistically low rate increase he has approved, particularly in New South Wales.
(4) When does he estimate the next round of rate increases will occur.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The health insurance arrangements were revised with effect from I October 1976. For the twelve months ended 30 June 1978 registered medical benefits organisations and registered hospital benefits organisations incurred operating deficits of $175.2m and $15.lm, respectively, resulting in a combined operating deficit of $190.3m. However, after taking non-operating income into account, medical benefits organisations recorded a total deficit of $164.4m and hospital benefits organisations made a total surplus of $Il.lm, resulting in a combined total deficit of $153:3m.
(2) With the benefit of hindsight, it is clear that the contribution rates charged by the medical funds from I October 1976 were generally inadequate to meet total commitments. The operating deficits coming from the built up reserves of the health insurance organisations were of course used for the benefit of contributors through the lower contribution rates paid. It should be pointed out, however, that at the time the I October 1976 rates were set there was a considerable degree of uncertainty about the future claims utilisation by contributors, due to the lack of up-to-date and relevant data. (Health funds were not involved in the payment of basic medical benefits between July 1975 and September I 976, inclusive.)
It was generally considered that the best available data on which to base new contribution rates were those available in respect of the period up to 30 June 1975, when most Australians were insured privately. However, these data proved to be unreliable as the claims utilisation rate was significantly higher in 1977-78 than in 1974-75. This could well have been due to the Medibank Standard medical benefits being paid from I July 1975 to 30 September 1976 without the need for medical insurance, thus generating a heavy demand for services by consumers and extensive increases by providers.
(3) Unlike the situation in 1976, the contribution rates effective from I September 1981 were based on recent and reliable data. These provided a sound basis for forecasts of the outcomes of the rates. Whilst there is always some uncertainty

attached to proposals based on assumptions about future trends, [am optimistic that the contribution rates now in force in New South Wales will be variable for the various funds at current levels of charges and benefits. However the New South Wales Government has recently announced its decision to increase public hospital charges by 20 per cent from I January 1981. This means, for example, that the inpatient accommodation charge per day will rise by $16 from $80 to $96 per day. If the basic hospital benefits are to partly or wholly cover the increased charges then clearly there must be an increase in contribution rates.
(4) It is not expected that across-the-board increases in contribution rates will be necessary until the next general increases in either hospital charges or Schedule medical fees. It may be necessary to review hospital contribution rates in States which decide to increase public hospital charges in the same way as New South Wales before the next general increase in charges. Allowance was made for increases in Schedule medical fees in November 1981 when the contribution rates from I September 1981 were set. I should point out that the financial experience of the respective health insurance organisations often varies considerably. Where it is necessary to ensure that continuing viability of a fund, an organisation may at any time apply for approval to increase contribution rates.
Nowra Region Flight Manoeuvres
(Question No. 3187)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 22 September 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to compliants from Nowra residents concerning Hight manoeuvres in airspace over the residential areas in the Nowra region.
(2) Has there been any inquiry into operations in airspace over residential areas following these complaints.
(3) If so, have these inquiries shown any breach of current operational airspace regulations, or the need for a review of current operational airspace areas or regulations.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) No. However, the validity of these regulations is under question by a landowner in the Nowra district who has also initiated legal proceedings against the Commonwealth. Inquiries are also being made on his behalf by the Deputy Commonwealth Ombudsman.
Family Medicine Program
(Question No. 3193)
Mrs Darling asked the Treasurer, upon notice, on 22 September 1981:

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3145

. (I) Did his Department receive representations from the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners for an increase in real terms for the allocation in 1981-82 for the Family Medicine Program.
(2) Did he announce in the 1981-82 Budget that no increase in any form would be made to the allocation to the Family Medicine Program.
(3) Is it a fact that fewer medical practitioners are prepared to take trainees under the program because of the shortfall between the Government's reimbursement through the Family Medicine Program and the general practitioner's payment to the trainee.
(4) Does the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners state that a cut in real terms to the Program's allocation will result in more untrained or inadequately trained doctors being let loose on the community.
(5) Has the College pointed out that a cut of this kind is false economy because the cuts would produce untrained doctors who would waste expensive resources such as hospital care, specialist, investigations and therapeutic items.
(6) Will he give consideration to increasing the allocation to the Family Medicine Program; if not, why not.
Mr Howard-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Ministers have received representations by the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners seeking a review of the 1981-82 allocation for the Family Medicine Program.
(2) The Government decided that the 1981-82 grant for the Family Medicine Program should be set at the same level as the 1980-81 basic grant of $5.025m. The Government has also decided to institute an independent review of policy issues surrounding the post-graduate vocational training activities undertaken by the Family Medicine Program. After giving consideration to the outcome of that review, the Government will decide what, if any, future actions are warranted on its part in relation to post-graduate vocational training of general practitioners.
(3) It has been suggested by the College that this is the situation. There may, however, be other considerations and a better understanding of the matter will be possible when the findings of the independent review are available.
(4) and (5) These claims have been made by the College and will be considered in the proposed review.
(6) See (2) above.
Brisbane Airport: Air Traffic Control
(Question No. 3197)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 22 September 1981:
(I) Can he say whether the closure of the Brisbane Airport due to air traffic control problems has halted a $30m resort development in the Whitsunday area, Queensland.
(2) If so, can he also say whether the mainland resort developers have halted the project until they receive clarification of the effects on other areas in Queensland caused by the closure of the Brisbane Airport.
(3) What will be the effect on other Queensland airports as a result of the Brisbane Airport temporary closure.
(4) What action has he taken to immediately resolve the situation caused by a shortage of air traffic controllers.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1) No-indeed there is no total closure of Brisbane Airport but there is a limited closure from 9 pm to midnight daily which has had minimal effect on scheduled services to and from Brisbane Airport.
(2) Not applicable.
(3) There are no jet airline operations scheduled to depart to or from Brisbane or any of the Queensland coastal airports later than 9 pm and these are therefore unaffected by the 9 pm closure of Brisbane's airport.
(4) Action was initiated in 1979 to recruit air traffic control trainees to the maximum capacity of the training college. Between 110 and 120 trainees have been recruited each year since 1979. Because the training course takes three years for the bulk of these trainees, the benefit from this recruitment action will not be felt until late 1981 jearly 1982. It is anticipated that there will be an improving situation from this time onwards. On the specific problem at Brisbane arising from the acute shortage of controllers in Queensland, my Department has now transferred 17 permanent and seven temporary controllers to Queensland. These transferees, once trained, will release other controllers for training in the terminal area positions and so enable the airport to resume normal operations. My Department anticipates that this training will be completed early next year.
Hospitals: Acquisition by German Hospital Chain
(Question No. 3222)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 23 September 19,81:
(I) Is he aware of any large German hospital chain which is interested in acquiring a hospital in Australia as reported in the Australian Financial Review of 18 September 1981, page 19.
(2) If so, what is the name of the chain.
Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) I am aware of the report in the Australian Financial Review of 18 September 1981 concerning this matter and my Department sought advice from the Foreign Investment Review Board (FIRB) as to whether an approach had been made to the Board in respect of it. I am informed that there has been no approach to the FIRB but the Board's enquiries of the German-Australian Chamber of Industry and Commerce have indicated that the advertisement was placed in the Australian Financial Review as a means of determining what potential might exist for investment in Australia by a German company, experienced in the operation of hospitals, in advance of a visit to Australia by an executive of that company. The name of the company was not disclosed to the FIRB, but it was indicated that the company was aware that any such proposal would come within the scope of the Government's foreign investment policy requirements.
I should add that in the event that any proposal for acquisition of a private hospital in Australia by this or any other overseas company is put forward it will be subject to detailed examination by the FIRB in consultation with my Department and the health authorities of the relevant State. Further, no proposal would be approved unless it offered worthwhile benefits in the efficient provision of hospital services, complied with all Federal and State health requirements and provided scope for substantial Australian participation in the equity of the venture.

3146 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Department of Defence: Severance Pay Entitlements
(Question No. 3270)
Mr Scholesasked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:
(I) Does his Department withhold proportion of severance pay entitlements at the time of discharge
(2) If so, what is the purpose of withholding these funds and for what period are they retained by his Department.
(3) Is interest paid on funds of former service personnel withheld for his Department's convenience.
(4) Does any legal authority exist for the retention of moneys properly belonging to the former servicemen.
(5) If the withholding of moneys is not covered by statutory authority, what redress is available to service personnel.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Certain entitlements such as pay-in-lieu of recreation leave and furlough do not become due until after the member is discharged. However, on the day of discharge, members are advanced 80 per cent of their pay-in-lieu of leave entitlement and normally, payment of their pay-in-lieu of furlough entitlement less $200 is effected within three or four days.
(2) The Defence Force Pay systems whilst allowing for payment and some calculation of entitlements at unit level, are largely centralised and computer based. Variations to members entitlements are processed through the Defence Force Pay Accounting Centre in Melbourne which is also charged with final reconciliation of members accounts. Experience over many years has shown that errors do occur in calculations and can only be identified when all of the members records are brought together and reconciled. These records include details of leave entitlements. and amounts recoverable from the member which can be incurred up to and on the day of discharge. The current practice was standardized in August 1979 and was generally an improvement on previous procedures. Ex-members normally receive the balance of their pay in lieu of leave and furlough entitlements within three to four weeks of discharge.
(3) No.
(4) Advice from the Crown Solicitor's Office indicates the need for the Department to reconcile the accounts of retiring members and pay moneys due to them on retirement or as soon as possible thereafter. Reconciliation which is the basis of the current procedures, is necessary to ensure the correct 'and proper use of public funds.
(5) Redress through the Civil Courts is available to ex-members. However, an examination of current procedures is in progress with the aim of reducing the time taken to reconcile the pay accounts.
Rates of Workers' Compensation
(Question No. 3273)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:
(I) What rates of workers' compensation apply under the Compensation (Commonwealth Government Employees) Act.
(2) What are the comparative rates in each State, the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory.

Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The'Compensation (Commonwealth Government Employees) Act 1971 provides a comprehensive range of benefits payable in respect of work-connected injury or disease. The rates or amounts of the major benefits payable from I September 1981 are as set out below:
(i) Totallncapacity For the first 26 weeks of total incapacity for work, an injured employee receives weekly compensation payments at the rate equivalent to his full sick pay rate. During further periods of incapacity, the rate payable is the lesser of the employee's average weekly earnings or $114.00 a week plus $29.85 a week for a dependent spouse and $14.20 a week for each dependent child.
(ii) Partial Incapacity Where an employee is partially incapacitated, the rate of weekly compensation payable is calculated according to ability to earn. Generally, the payment is an amount equal to the difference between the employee's average weekly earnings before the injury (as adjusted) and the weekly amount he is currently able to earn, subject to a maximum rate of $114.00 a week.
(iii) Loss of Limb or Faculty Where an employee loses, or loses the use of, a part of the body or a faculty and he is not likely to become totally unfit for work, he may receive lump sum compensation. The maximum payment for anyone loss is $35,500. Actual amounts payable in respect of specific losses are shown in sections 39-42 of the Act.
(iv) Death of an Employee A dependant of a deceased employee may qualify for a lump sum payment. The basic death benefit of $35,500 is payable where there is a dependant wholly dependent on the deceased employee. A person partially dependent may receive up to $35,500. An additional weekly payment of $14.20 is payable in respect of each dependent child.
(2) Comparative rates and amounts of compensation payable under State or Territorial workers compensation codes are set out below.
New South Wales (effective from 1 October 1981).
(i) Totallncapacity For the first 26 weeks of total incapacity an employee receives compensation at the weekly rate of wages provided by his award or an award covering the nature of his work. If no award can be applied, an amount of $201.29 is payable.
Thereafter: Employee-$115,60 a week.
a Spouse-$26.50 a week.
Each child-$13.20 week.
(ii) Partial Incapacity The difference between the employee's probable earnings but for the injury and the average weekly amount he is able to earn, to a maximum of $115.60 a week.
(iii) Loss of Limb or Faculty Lump sum payment, payable on a similar basis to payments under the Commonwealth Act, with a maximum amount payable of $31,000.
(iv) Death Maximum lump sum to dependants-$45,200. Additional Child's Benefit-$22.60 a week.
Victoria (effective from 1 July 1981).

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3147

(i) Total Incapacity Adult Employee-$ 130.00 a week. Minor (under 21 )-$96.00 a week. Spouse-$37.00 a week. Each child-$12.00 a week.
These payments are subject to a maximum weekly limit of$ I93.00 (adult) and $167.00 (minor).
(ii) Partial incapacity Such weekly amount as bears the same relationship to total incapacity rate as actual loss of earnings bears to average weekly earnings before injury.
(iii) Loss of Limb or Faculty Lump sum payment, payable on a similar basis to payments under the Commonwealth Act, with a maximum amount payable of $23,260.
(iv) Death Maximum lump sum to dependants-$41,093.
An additional lump sum is payable in respect of each dependent child. The actual amount varies according to the child's age at the date of the worker's death. The maximum additional benefit is $10,023 for a child under one year of age.
Queensland (effective from I I May 198 I).
(i) Total Incapacity For the first 26 weeks of total incapacity an employee receives weekly compensation at the rate of wages provided by his award or agreement. If no award appropriate, an amount of $215.50 is payable.
Thereafter, the Queensland Basic Wage is payable-
Employee-$97. 10 a week. Spouse-$24.30 a week (25 per cent of Basic Wage). Each Child-$9.70 a week (10 per cent of Basic Wage).
(ii) Partial Incapacity Weekly payment calculated on a similar basis to Victoria.
(iii) Loss of Limb or Faculty Lump sum payment, payable on a similar basis to payments under Commonwealth Act, with a maximum amount payable of $34,020.
(iv) Death Maximum lump sum to dependants-$34,020. Additional lump sum child's benefit-$2,520.
South Australia (effective from 1 January 1974).
(i) Total Incapacity For any period of total incapacity, an employee receives compensation at the rate of his average weekly earnings over the previous 12 months (or his period of employment if less than 12 months) including overtime and allowances. Such payments are subject to a total limit of $25,000 in respect of anyone incident.
(ii) Partial Incapacity A weekly amount not exceeding the difference between the employee's average weekly earnings before injury and the average weekly amount he is able to earn after injury and bearing such relation to the amount of that difference as under the circumstances of the case appears proper. Such payments are subject to a total limit of $18,000 in respect of anyone incident.
(iii) Loss of Limb or Faculty Lump sum payment, payable on a similar basis to payments under the Commonwealth Act with a maximum amount payable of $25,000.

(iv) Death Maximum lump sum to dependants-$25,OOO. Additional lump sum child's benefit-$500.
Western Australia (effective from I July 1981).
(i) Totallncapacity For any period of total incapacity, an employee receives compensation at the rate of his weekly earnings at the time of injury excluding overtime and allowances. Such payments are subject to a total limit of $58,885 in respect of anyone incident.
(ii) Partial Incapacity A weekly amount not to exceed the difference between the employee's weekly earnings before the injury and the weekly amount he is able to earn after injury.
(iii) Loss of Limb or Faculty Lump sum payment, payable on a similar basis to payments under the Commonwealth Act, with a maximum amount payable of $58,885.
(iv) Death Maximum lump sum to dependants~$50,052.25. Additional Child's Benefit-$7.50 a week.
Tasmania (effective from I January 1981).
(i) Total Incapacity For any period of total incapacity, an employee receives compensation at the rate of his average weekly
a earnings over previous 12 months including overtime
and allowances. Such payments are subject to total limit of $41,634 in respect of anyone incident.
(ii) Partial Incapacity A weekly amount calculated on the difference between the amount payable for total incapacity and the amount an employee is able to earn after injury.
(iii) Loss of Limb or Faculty Lump sum payment, payable on a similar basis to payments under the Commonwealth Act, with a maximum amount payable of $41,634.
(iv) Death Maximum lump sum to dependants-$41,634. Additional lump sum Child's Benefit-$I,026.
Australian Capital Territory (effective from I October 1981 ).
(i) Total Incapacity For the first 26 weeks of total incapacity, an employee receives compensation at the equivalent of this full sick pay rate or his normal weekly earnings whichever is greater. Thereafter.
Employee-$116.82 a w.eek (or weekly earnings if less than $116.82). Spouse-$30.74 a week. Each Child-$14.34 a week.
(ii) Partial Incapacity The greater of: $1 16.82 or the difference between pre-accident earnings and post-accident earnings, whichev~r is less OR
The difference between the total incapacity rate and the amou nt he is able to earn.
(iii) Loss of Limb or Faculty Lump sum payment, payable on a similar basis to payments under the Commonwealth Act, with a maximum amount payable of $40,991.1 O.
(iv) Death Maximum lump sum to dependants-$40,991.1 O. Additional Child's Benefit-$14.34 a week.
Northern Territory (effective from I July 1981).

3148 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(i) Totallncapacity For the first 26 weeks of total incapacity an employee receives weekly compensation at the rate equivalent to his sick leave rate or normal weekly earnings, whichever is greater. Thereafter.
Employee-$I 0 1.70. Spouse-$26.67 Each Child-$12.71.
(ii) Partial Incapacity The greater of: $101.70 or the difference between pre-accident earnings and post accident earnings whichever is less OR
The difference between the total incapacity rate and the amount he is able to earn.
(iii) Loss of Limb or Faculty Lump sum payment, payable on a similar basis to payments under the 'Commonwealth Act, with a maximum amount payable of $31 ,640.
(iv) Death Maximum lump sum to dependants-$31 ,640. Additional Child's Benefit-$12.71 a week.
Review of Commonwealth Functions: Effect on Commissioner for Employees' Compensation
(Question No. 3286)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that delays of up to six months are being experienced by the Office of the Commissioner for Employees' Compensation in the processing of claims for compensation.
(2) In what way has this office been affected by the recommendations of the Committee of Review of Commonwealth Functions.
(3) Is it a fact that the recommendations of the Committee of Review have caused or contributed to the delay; if not, what other factors have caused the delay.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The Commissioner for Employees' Compensation has informed me that no statistics are kept regarding the specific length of time each individual case takes to be processed in the Office of the Commissioner for Employees' Compensation (OCEC). However, in the light of complaints about delays received from various sources, e.g., members of the Parlia, ment, the Commonwealth Ombudsman, the Commissioner acknowledges that it is a fact that, despite attempts to improve the situation, delays of up to six months have occurred in the determination of claims under the Compensation (Commonwealth Government Employees) Act 1971 ('the Compensation Act'). Measures adopted to alleviate the situation included:
increasing the number of delegates outside OCEC and widening the scope of the delegations;
the introduction of revised procedures in OCEC, together with the working of considerable overtime; and
the provision, this year, of some additional staff and an increase of 5 in staff ceiling.
(2) In the context of the Review of Commonwealth Functions the Government decided that, in the interests of efficiency, effectiveness and rationalisation in relation to the administration of the Compensation Act and OCEC operations, two ,measures should be introduced. These decisions and their effects are:

(a) the introduction, with effect from I July 1981, of a new appeal forum, namely, the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, in lieu of the review procedures previously operating. Some increase in the work load associated with the review of determinations has resulted and the provision of additional staff resources in this area of OCEC is under consideration; and
(b) the other decision was that the operations of OCEC be expanded in the Australian Capital Territory and extended to the States to take over work currently performed on OCEC's behalf by Commonwealth Departments and Authorities. Implementation of this decision is in the preliminary stages with work being carried out on the evaluation of systems and resources required. This in itself has not led to any disruption to the claims processing work in OCEC.
(3) No. The processing of claims has not been adversely affected. It is expected that, when implemented, the revised system of administration of the Compensation Act will minimise delays. The Commissioner has reported his views on the factors causing delays in his Annual Report for 1980-81.
Theft of Munitions or Bombs from Army Depots
(Question No. 3290)
Mr West asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:
What Army depots in Australia have had munitions or bombs stolen from them since I January 1976.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Army records show that in the period I January 1976 to 16 October 1981 there has been a total of thirty-one (31) separate incidents at twenty-five (25) depots involving the theft of weapons or ammunition from Army units in Australia. Complete recovery was effective in twelve (12) of these thefts.
Electricity Generating Capacities
(Question No. 3296)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:
(I) What was the actual electricity generating capacity in each state and Territory if 1980 and what is the projected generating capacity for (a) 1985, (b) 1990, (c) 1995 and (d) 2000.
(2) What was the actual electricity demand in each State and Territory in 1980 aljd what is the estimated demand in (a) 1985, (b) 1990, (c) 1995 and (d) 2000 for (i) all consumers, (ii) industry, (iii) residential consumers, (iv) commerce and (v) other consumers.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy, Senator Carrick, has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Table I shows actual capacity for 1980 and details of State plans of public authority electricity generating capacity for 1985 and 1990, consistent with information given in Table A4.1 in the Department of National Development and Energy publication 'Forecasts of Energy Demand and SupplyPrimary and Secondary Fuels Australia: 1980-81 to 1989-90'.
It should, however, be recognised that it is normal practice for State electricity authorities to keep under continual review the timing and content of their investment and plant retirement programs in the light of changes in forecasts of demand.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3149

These changes are in turn dependent on factors which include changing estimates of future income levels and relative prices, industrial development, and demand for the exports of certain electricity intensive industries notably aluminium smelters.
Electricity demand forecasts for the coming decade and beyond are particularly sensitive to the third factor. Supply arrangements to aluminium smelters typically involve long term contracts which, even after finalisation, may still allow varying degrees of Hexibility in timing and take or pay arrangements.
Since the table was prepared, there have been reports of deferrals of several aluminium smelter projects, notably in Queensland and Western Australia. As a result, there could be deferral or attenuation of some planned power station projects.
The State Electricity Commission of Victoria has recently announced the deferral of units of the Loy Yang A power station, the second and third units by six months and the fourth unit by nearly a year.
For such reasons, projections of planned installed capacity, particularly extending as far as 1995 and 2000, may be subject to considerable uncertainty and as a general rule are not published by the authorities. Exceptions have been noted in the initial submission of the State Electricity Commission of Victoria to the State Parliamentary Public Works Committee Inquiry on the proposed Driffield project (8 April 1981 ,p. 31) and publications of the Tasmanian Hydroelectric Commission and Tasmanian Directorate of Energy relating to future electricity supply options in that State.
(2) Data on electricity demand are included in the Department of National Development and Energy publication referred to in (I). Forecasts to 1990 are at pp. 122-131, and historical data are at pp. 163-169. The end-use classification presented in Table (2) is a summary of this information.

Table 1
PLANNED PUBLIC SUPPLY GENERATING CAPACITY: mW (installed)

1980 (actual) 1985 1990

New South Wales (a) (b) Victoria (a) Queensland (b) South Australia (b)
Western Australia (b) (c) Tasmania (b) Northern Territory (b)
Australian Capital Territory (b)

10,420
5,220 3,040
1,900 1,570 1,780
230

14,220 7,280 4,790
2,600 2,150
1,940
290

17,520(d) 9,780(e) 7,590
3,100 2,900 2,170
400

10

10

10

Australia

24,200 33,300 43,500(d)

Notes: (a) The capacity of the Snowy Mountains Scheme is included in the capacities of New South Wales and Victoria.
New South Wales includes the Australian Capital Territory share of the capacity of the Snowy Mountains Scheme. (b) Does not include allowance for plant retirement. (c) Accelerated program to provide for possible aluminium smelter in mid 1980s.
(d) New South Wales has not indicated its expansion plans beyond 1988.
(e) SECV's Initial Submission to the Victorian Parliamentary Public Works Committee Inquiry (8 April 1981) indicates installed capacity for 1995 of II 503 MW and for 1999 of 13 603 MW.
Source: 'Forecasts of Energy Demand and SupplyPrimary and Secondary Fuels Australia: 1980-81 to 1989-90, Department of National Development anrl Energy, June 1981 '

Table 2 END-USE DEMAND FOR ELECTRICITY (PUBLIC PLUS PRIVATE)
(gigawatt-hours)

New South Wales

Victoria

Queensland

South Australia

ASIC Title

I979-80p 1984-85 1989-90 I979-80p 1984-85 1989-90 I979-80p 1984-85 1989-90 I979.80p 1984-85 1989-90

Div-A Agriculture
Div-B Mining 29 Basic metal products
Div-C Total manufacturing
Div-D Electricity/gas/water 52 Rail transport

415 1,358 4,813 10,496 5,608
441

493 2.032 10,871 18,164 7,186
497

585 2,439 13,947 22,386 8,164
581

310 320 2,175 7,623 3,992 265

368
364 5,269 11,695 5,214
285

437
366 10,461 18,209 6,849
312

317 1,508 1,377 2.861 1,890
7

376 1,996 6,001 7,774 3,668
33

447 2,540 12,626 14.561 5,371
81

136 93 802 2.278 944
2

162
99 868 2,512 1,084
2

191 115 898 2,696 1,185
2

Div-G Transport/storage
public lighting <a> DivE. F, H-K Commercial Div-L Entertainment, domestic, etc

441 228 5,283 12,111

497 241 6,056 14,917

581 257 6,642 17,241

265 157 3.725 7,417

285 166 4,222 8,889

312 178 4,668 10,008

65 2.210 J,889

33 69 2.806 4,972

81 75 3.155 5,955

2 43 1,215 2,444

2 45 1,361 2,889

2 49 1,458. 3,211

Total

35,712 49,345 58,038 23,652 31.037 40,849 12,682 21,625 32,110 7.112 8,109 8,858

ASIC Title
Div-A Agriculture Div-B Mining
29 Basic metal products Div-C Total manufacturing Div-D Electricity/gas/water
52 Rail transport Div-G Transport/storage

Western Australia

Tasmania

Northern Territory

Australia

I979-80p 1984-85 1989-90 I979-80p 1984-85 1989-90 1979-80p 1984-85 1989-90 I979-80p 1984-85 1989-90

147 852 1,759 2,534 1,014

175 1,172 2,433 3,350 1,305
4 4

207 1,276 7,649 8,719 2,111
II II

61 451 3,714 5,025 693

72 492 4,204 6,076 828

86 504 4,404 6,488 903

1,391 1.652 1,961

94

194

257 4,676 86,349 7,497

217

271

271 14,357 29,917 50,256

223

277

278 31.040 49,848 73,336

162

193

211 14,303 19,478 24,794

715

821

987

715

821

987

3150 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Western Australia

Tasmania

Northern Territory

Australia

ASIC Tille

I979-80p 1984-85 1989-90 I979-80p 1984-85 1989-90 I979-80p 1984-85 1989-90 I979-80p 1984-85 1989-90

public lighting (a> Div-E, F, H-K Commercial Div-L Entertainment, domestic, etc

37 1,401 1,722

41 1,639 2,583

46 1,822 3,162

17 207 1,500

18 223 1,917

20 241 2,252

547 580 625

294

341

395 14,335 16,648 18,381

194 333 442 29,277 36,500 42,271

Total

7,670 10,228 17,308 7,937 9,608 10,474

972 1,344 1,591 95,737 131,296 169,227

(a> Included in Division J. Seouree: Forecasts of Energy Demand and Supply-Primary and Secondary Fuels Australia: 1980-81 to 1989-90. Department of National Development and Energy.

Military Aid to Indonesia

(Question No. 3319)

Mr Fry asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 14 October 1981:

(I) What military aid, in monetary terms, has been given by Australia to Indonesia since December 1975.

(2) What type and quantity of equipment has been given to Indonesia during the same period.

(3) Once such equipment has been given, does the Australian Government retain any control over how it is to be
used.

(4) Is he able to say whether any of this equipment has been used in hostilities; iFso, when and where.

(5) How many Indonesian officers are trained annually in Australian military establishments.

(6) What type oFtraining are they given.

Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) Total expenditure on DeFence Cooperation with Indonesia For the period I July 1976 to 30 June 1981 was
$48.770m.

(2) Principal equipments provided to Indonesia under the
DeFence Cooperation Program since December 1975 comprise:

Ten Nomad aircraft (two provided earlier in December 1975).
Six sixteen metre patrol boats. Twelve ex-Army Sioux helicopters.
250 Land Rovers. 261 PRC77 field radios (1975-76), together with radio test, repair and maintenance equipment. Ten fully equipped mobile vehicle repair workshops.

Further elements of equipment have been provided in re-
spect of DeFence Cooperation Program assistance to Indonesia in the following fields: survey and mapping, research and development, English language training and oxy-
gen drying equipment.

(3) The only restriction placed on the use of military equip-
ment provided under the Defence Cooperation Program to
foreign countries, including Indonesia, relates to sale or disposal to a third country without the prior consent of the Australian Government.

(4) No.

(5) The number of Indonesian servicemen who undertake various Forms of training in Australia and study visits to
Australia since 1975 has averaged over eighty each year. The
niajority of these were officers and senior NCOs. Total training figures are as Follows:

1976

81

1977

47

1978

81

1978-79

89'

1979-80

81

1980-81

70

"Note: Statistics converted to financial year basis From 1978-79.

(6) The main types of training provided For Indonesian Servicemen are:

Underwater medical techniques, Marine survey and hydrography training, Training in naval instruction tehniques, Army Staff College course, Military cartography and map production training, Training in the command of air defence artillery, Basic training in Armoured Corps equipment and orgsanisation, Training in inFantry combat instructors, Training of flying instructors, Air Force supply systems training, Training in packaging and loading air freight, and Flying saFety officer training.

'Towards an Australian Family Policy' Conference
(Question No. 3328)
Mr McLean asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 15 October 1981:
(I) Has an official report yet been received from the conFerence held in May 1980 to discuss the issue Towards An Australian Family Policy'.
(2) If a report has been Completed, has it been circulated.
(3) If a report has not been completed and circulated, what is the reason.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(1) No.
(2) and (3) The May 1980 ConFerence: 'Towards An Australian Family Policy' was sponsored by the Australian Council of Social WelFare Ministers. Membership of the Council comprises all State and Territory WelFare Ministers the Commonwealth Minister For Social Security and WelFare Ministers from New Zealand and Papua New Guinea. Responsiblity For production of a Report From the ConFerence rests with the New South Wales Department of Youth and Community Services. I understand the Report is nOw available.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3151

Brisbane Airport: Retention of Flight Path Information
(Question No. 3355)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 20 October 1981:
(I) Will he instruct the Brisbane Airport authorities to retain information concerning flight paths at that airport for a longer period than the present holding period of 30 days.
(2) Would retention of this information over a period of several years enable Departmental personnel, as well as the public, to compare and contrast air traffic patterns over the Brisbane metropolitan area.
(3) What is the reason for holding this information no longer than 30 days.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. The retention of flight strip records for a period of 30 days is sufficient for routine statistical and investigational purposes. The retention of these records for a period in excess of 30 days is arranged from time to time to assist in special studies.
(2) Yes, but to store and extract the information would require very large resources which would not be commensurate with the benefit gained. The new radar display to be ordered by my Department will permit automatic storage and analysis of data over long periods.
(3) The standard contained in an Annex to the Convention of International Civil Aviation requires such records to be held for a minimum of 30 days. Up to approximately 1978, these records were maintained by my Department for a period of 90 days. This period was reduced to 30 days after a twelve month trial, bearing in mind that special holding arrangements are made for special studies.
Improved Practices to Reduce Salinity
(Question No. 3378)
Mr Lloyd asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 21 October 1981:
(I) Who are the officials mentioned in the Prime Minister's Press statement of 16 October 1981 who will review the extent to which irrigators were adopting improved practices to reduce salinity and the possible need for additional incentives to hasten the adoption of new practices.
(2) When will the first meeting take place, what will be the terms of reference, and when is the committee expected to report to the Government.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Messrs T. E. Michell, Department of National Development and Energy; S. Pels, New South Wales Water Resources Commission; E. Corbin, New South Wales Department of Agriculture; A. H. Clegg, Victorian State Rivers and Water Supply Commission; J. Mullaly, Victorian Department of Agriculture; R. C. McKnight, South Australian Engineering and Water Supply Department and G. Thomas, South Australian Department of Agriculture.
(2) The Committee will meet on 9 December to determine a work plan to meet the following terms of reference:

review the appropriateness 'of current land use for irrigation in the Murray Valley
review existing irrigation and drainage practices and the rate of adoption of improved practices
determine constraints to the adoption of improved practices and the impact of recent taxation concessions 011 adoption of improved practices
assess the need and justification for possible additional incentives for farmers to adopt improved practices.
It is hoped to have the study completed by the end of March 1982.
Storage Charges on Overdue Containers
(Question No. 3380)
Mr Milton asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 21 October 1981:
(I) What sum did Australia Post pay for storage on overdue containers (sea mail) during the last 12 months.
(2) How many containers were overdue.
(3) What is the reason For the average delay of 7 to 14 days in the collection of containers.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's questions is as follows:
(I) The sum paid by Australia Post during the 12 months November 1980 to October 1981, for the storage of containers of overseas surface mail prior to collection, is not yet available. During 1980-81, however, an amount of $133,252 was paid.
(2) During 1980-81, 853 containers were overdue.
(3) Delays in collecting containers have resulted mainly from industrial disputes/stoppages within the maritime and transport industries and, to a lesser extent, industrial difficulties within Australia Post. In addition, the simultaneous arrival of large shipments of containers, particularly from the United States of America and the United Kingdom, has contributed to some delays.
Qantas: Carriage of Sporting Teams in Australia
(Question No. 3387)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 21 October 1981:
Will he permit Qantas to carry in and out of Perth, Western Australia sporting teams competing in recognised interstate championships or competitions.
Mr Hunt-The answer to' the honourable member's question is as follows:
There have been a number of recent developments affect' ing the availability of Qantas transcontinental capacity. A rearrangement of Qantas' schedules has meant that the number of Qantas flights terminating in Perth has increased, thus reducing to a large extent the amount of capacity available on Qantas services between Sydney and Perth.
On 28 September, I announced that Qantas had been given approval to introduce through fares between Perth and United States of America. From I November when these lower fares became effective it is expected that the stimulus to demand resulting from the lower fares will further reduce the number of empty Qantas seats across Australia. Moreover, Qantas now offers its Qantas/TWA round the world fare at the same rate from all Australian ports with unlimited stopover rights within Australia provided the basic conditions of travel are met. This is also expected to generate additional traffic across Australia.

3152 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

When the impact of these initiatives and seasonal variations in demand are taken into account, it is quite possible that unutilised Qantas capacity across Australia would be minimal.

Funding for Drug Addiction Treatment Agencies

(Question No. 3391)

Mr Armitage asked the Minister for Health, upon notice, on 22 October 1981:

What has been the extent of funding through the Com-
munity Health Program for Government and nonGovernment Drug Addiction Treatment Agencies, such as the Way Back Committee at North Parramatta, New South
Wales, for each year from 1976-77 to 1980-81.

Mr MacKellar-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Commonwealth funding under the Community Health Program for 42 Government and non-Government projects
specifically or primarily related to drug addiction and alcoholism was as follows:

1976-77

4,076,450

1977-78

4,377,908

1978-79

3,630,901

1979-80

3,881,518

1980-81

4,573;113

Total

20,539,890

Many other projects funded under the Community Health Program (for example, community health centres and community nursing services) have also undertaken activities related to drug addiction and alcoholism as part of the general community health services provided by them. It is impracticable to identify Commonwealth expenditure on these activities by such other projects.
Ethnic Television
(Question No. 3402)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 22 October 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that Channel 0/28 has loaned 6 programs to the Migrant Resource Centres for screening around Australia.
(2) If so, is it intended that these screenings will form the basis for assessing public reaction to experimental ethnic television programs .which have already been shown in Sydney and Melbourne.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) I am advised that a brief questionnaire has been devised to assess audience reaction after each showing of selected Channel 0/28 programs at Migrant Resource Centres around Australia. The responses will be forwarded to the Central Office of the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs and the results provided to the Special Broadcasting Service.
DSCC Terminals at Joint Defence Space Res~arch Facility, Pine Gap, Northern Territory
(Question No. 3418)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 27 October 1981:
(I) Did he say in answer to Question No. 3596 (Hansard, 3 May 1979, page 1892) that, inter alia, the radomes at Pine

Gap, Northern Territory, were installed in 1968, 1968, 1969, 1969, 1971 and 1977.
(2) Did he also say in answer to question No. 492 (Hansard 20 October 1981, pages 2248-9) that, inter alia, 2 DSCS terminals, designated SCT-35 and SCT-8, were installed at the Joint Defence Space Research Facility, Pine Gap, Northern Territory, in 1973 and 1980.
(3) Is there any conflict between these 2 answers; if so, what is the reason for, and the details of, this conflict.
(4) What antennae system at Pine Gap was used for satellite communication before the installation of the 2 DSCS antennae, what was the formal designation of this antennae system, and what was the satellite communication system with which it operated.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) No. The apparent inconsistency arises because a satellite terminal used for research that was installed in 1969 was later dismantled and replaced by the SCT-35 communications terminal in 1973.
(4) Prior to 1973, surface communications links were used between the facility and the United States. For reasons of security I will not provide details of other satellite communications equipment at the facility.
Growth in Defence Outlay
(Question No. 3420)
Mr Morrison asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice; on 27 October 1981:
(I) Did the Defence Report 1981 state that the 1980-81 Budget provided for an outlay of $3,541 m representing an increase of 7% in real terms over 1979-80.
(2) Did he, in response to a question raised in Estimates Committee A, advise that the real growth in defence outlay in 1980-81 over 1979-80 was 5.6%.
(3) In view of these apparently conflicting statements what was the actual growth in real terms in 1980-81 over 1979-80.
(4) What steps will be taken to rectify the record in either or both of the sources referred to in parts (I) and (2).
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) There is no conflict. As I told Parliament on 20 October 1981, while the 1980-81 Budget provided for real growth of about 7 per cent, a number of factors including deferral of the decision on the new tactical fighter resulted in a somewhat lower growth of 5.6 per cent actually being achieved.
Uranium Information Centre Ltd
(Question No. 3428)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister representing the Minister for National Development and Energy, upon notice, on 27 October 1981:
(I) What sum is spent by the Government on support for the Uranium Information Centre Limited via (a) direct subsidy and (b) advice information or any support from any Government Department.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3153

(2) If there is money spent on the Centre, does the Government make any stipulation as to how it will be spent.
(3) Does the Government provide any support for publi non-nuclear energy agency information services; if so, for what agencies and what is the nature of the support.
Mr Anthony-The Minister for National Development and Energy has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) Nil.
(3) There is no non-Governmental agency providing information on non-nuclear energy matters to the public in receipt of Government support. In conjunction with the States, however, the Department of National Development and Energy participates in and contributes to the National Energy Conservation Program and the National Industrial Energy Management Scheme which, inter alia, provide information to the public and industry on energy matters.

(4) What sum was spent for each individual in respect of each visit abroad for (a) travel, (b) accommodation, (c) other associated and incidental expenditure and (d) total expenditure.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) to (4) Neither I nor any member of my staff has officially travelled abroad since I January 1981.
Brisbane Airport: Control Tower
(Question No. 3500)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) What is the proposed height of the new control tower to be constructed under the Brisbane Airport Redevelopment Scheme.

DCSC Terminal, Nurrungar, South Australia
(Question No. 3454)
Dr Blewett asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 28 October:
Further to his answer to Question No. 492 (Hansard, 20 October 1981, pages 2248-9), what is the formal designation of the (a) Defence Satellite Communications System (DSCS) terminal at the Joint Defence Space Communications Station (JDSCS) at Nurrungar, South Australia and the date of its installation and (b) ground station at Salisbury, South Australia operated by the Advanced Engineering Laboratory of the Defence Science and Technology Organisation and used to communicate with the DSCS I satellite 93-26 and the date of the installation of this terminal.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) AN/MSC-46, installed in 1974.

(2) Is it a fact, as reported, that a ground radar system will have to be installed to enable air traffic controllers operating from the new control tower to determine location of aircraft on the ground when fog occurs at the airport.
(3) Is it also a fact that, under the conditions of operation during periods of fog at the new control tower, aircraft will not be visible to air traffic controllers in the control tower because of the height of the tower and the intervening fog.
Mr Hunt-The answers to the honourable member's question are as follows:
(I) The proposed height of the new control tower to be constructed under the Brisbane Airport Redevelopment Scheme is still subject to a final decision.
(2) No. Location of aircraft on the ground when fog occurs is determined by procedural (that is, non radar) control methods.
(3) No. Visibility of aircraft in fog from various heights of control tower depends on the visibility profile of the fog.

(b) The ground station at Salisbury does not have an official nomenclature. It was designed and developed at the Advanced Engineering Laboratory and is known as the Advanced Engineering Laboratory Satellite Communications Experimental Facility. It was first used experimentally in August 1974.

Australian Shipping Commission: Loan Repayments
(Question No. 3503)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:

Overseas Travel by Ministers or Ministerial Staff
(Question No. 3479)
Mr Morris asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 29 October 1981 :
(I) On what occasions has the Minister or members of the Minister's staff travelled abroad since I January 1981 to the date of preparation of the answer to this question.
(2) What places and organisations were visited during the travel abroad and on what dates did the Minister depart from. Australia and arrive and depart at each of the places visited during travel abroad, and on what date did the Minister and associated staff return to Australia.
(3) What were the names and classifications of persons associated with the Minister's travel abroad referred to in parts (I) and (2) ..

(I )In relation to the repayment of loans amounting to $30m by the Australian Shipping Commission in 1981-82 being interest bearing borrrowings from previous Budgets, why was this course of action necessary and what will be the' financial impact on the Australian Shipping Commission of the early repayment.
(2) What will be the financial impact upon the Australian Shipping Commission of the early repayment of the loans referred to in Item 7 (b) on page 4 of the Estimates of Receipts and Expenditure explanatory notes for his Department 1981-82 and, in particular, what are the specific amounts of interest charges involved and will he indicate whether the action being taken will result in interest charges of the Commission being higher or lower in 1981-82 had this course of action not been followed.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Following consideration of ANL's Corporate Plan earlier this year, the Government agreed to allow ANL

3154 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

to develop commercial refinancing packages to restructure its long term debt portfolio. The $30m repayment of Budget Advances in 1981-82 will result from the first of these refinancings.
As the refinancing arrangements will not be finalised until towards the end of the current fiscal year they are not expected to have a financial impact on the Commission in 1981-82.
Australian Shipping Commission: Darwin Service Subsidy
(Question No. 3514)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
With reference to the subsidy paid to the Australian Shipping Commission for the operation of the east-coast Darwin shipping service, what specific information is he able to provide on the alternative proposals being considered for the provision of an alternate shipping service to Darwin by the Australian Shipping Commission and the Northern Territory Government or proposed to be considered by the Australian Shipping Commission and the Northern Territory Government.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Australian National Line (AI"L) is currently investigating, in conjunction with Northern Territory interests, alternative proposals for the continuation of shipping services between the East Coast and Darwin. It would be inappropriate to make interim comments on these proposals before the studies are completed.
Australian Shipping Register
(Question No. 3521)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) How many vessels have been registered on the newly established Australian Shipping Register since its commencement.
(2) How many vessels are eligible for registration on the Australian Register and what is the anticipated number of vessels that will be registered by the end of 1981-82.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) As the honourable member will be aware I announced on 6 November that the Government is aiming to bring the Australian Register of Ships into operation on Australia Day 1982.
(2) My Department does not have details of the total number of vessels that will be eligible for registration on the Australian Register as the eligible vessels include all pleasure craft owned or operated in Australia and capable of navigating the high seas. However, it is anticipated that 5,200 vessels will be registered by the end of 1981-82.
Adult Migrant and Refugee Education Courses
(Question No. 3573)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
In relation to the Adult Migrant and Refugee Education courses what provision has been made for (a) certificates at

the completion of the courses, (b) permanent teachers in all States, (c) curriculum materials specifically designed for adults as distinct from children's books and stories and (d) English language classes for the increased number of immigrants.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(a) Most courses available in the Adult Migrant Education Program are provided through State Adult Migrant Education Services or their equivalents in the Australian Capital Territory and the Northern Territory. Those services in New South Wales, Victoria, Western Australia, Tasmania, Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory issue certificates to migrants who complete courses. The State Adult Migrant Education Services in Queensland and South Australia have not yet decided to issue certificates.
(b) Teachers in the Adult Migrant Education Services are employed by the State or Territory Education authorities. In New South Wales there are some 120 permanent teachers, in Queensland 12; South Australia II; Northern Territory 6 and the Australian Capital Territory 15. There are no permanent teachers in the Victorian Adult Migrant Education Services and the Officer-in-charge is the only permanent professional officer if the Western Australia Adult Migrant Education Service. Victoria, South Australia and Western Australia employ some full-time temporary teachers and in New South Wales about 200 hourly paid staff work on a full-time or nearly full time basis. All States and each of the Territories employ staff who are paid on an hourly basis.
(c) Curriculum material has been designed specifically for the Adult Migrant Education Program under the guidance of the Joint Commonwealth/States Committee on professional aspects of the Adult Migrant Education Program. The production of t;.ducational material in support of that curriculum development is continuing at Commonwealth, State and local levels under the guidance of the National Materials Steering Committee. Funds have been provided to States to support that development.
(d) The Government has substantially increased the level of funding for the Adult Migrant Education Program in Australia. Operational funding has increased from $8.8m in 1976-77 to $31.3m in 1981-82. Other funds have been made available through the appropriations to the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs and the Department of Administrative Services for the provision of classrooms and associated facilities to accommodate the expanded program.
Immigration: Joint Commonwealth-State Research Program
(Question No. 3574)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) Was $30,000 allocated for the Joint Commonwealth State Research program in 1980-81 and the same sum allocated for 1981-82.
(2) On what was this sum spent during 1980-81 and on what will it be spent in 1981-82.
(3) Which States (a) have and (b) will participate in these projects.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. In 1980-81 and 1981-82 $30,000 was allocated by the Commonwealth and $30,000 in total by the States (with

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3155

the contribution of each State calculated on a per head of population basis) to the Joint Commonwealth-State research program.
(2) During 1980-81 and 1981-82 the funds have been spent on a longitudinal survey of settlers in the general eligibility category. Further projects in this program are currently being discussed with the States.
(3) All States have participated and have indicated that they will continue to participate in the research program.
Australian Population and Migration Research Trust Account
(Question No. 3575)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
What is the Australian Population and Migration Research Trust Account and who are the trustees.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Australian Population and Migration Research Trust Account holds the funds contributed by the Commonwealth and the States for the Joint Comm'onwealth-State Research Program. The trustees are officers nominated from each State

Immigration and/or Ethnic Affairs Ministry and the Commonwealth Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs.
Immigration Studies and Research
(Question No. 3576)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) Has $210,000 been provided for immigration studies and research to be carried out on behalf of his Department in 1981-82.
(2) Who were the recipients of funds for immigration studies and research during 1980-81.
(3) What research did they undertake.
(4) What was the outcome of their research or studies.'
(5) What bodies or individuals will be entrusted with these studies and research in 1981-82.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2), (3) and (4) Details of the recipients of funds for immigration studies and research during 1980-81 and the nature and outcome of their research are set out below. The costs shown include final payments for studies commenced in 1980-81 but not due for completion until 1981-82.

Consultant
University of LaTrobe (Dr R. Wearing) Sociology
(Dr R. Wearing)
(Dr F. Mackie)
University of Melbourne (Professor Wearing and Dr Headey)
(Dr D. Cox)
(Dr. J. Hearn)
Australian National University (Dr C. M. Young) Sociology
Dr C. A. Price Demography
Macquarie University (Dr Tenezakis) Australian Council of the Ageing MSJ Keys Young Planners
Frank Small and Associates

Details of Project
Cultural Identity and Citizenship Study ($33,\00)
Cultural preservation study ($5,000)
Moslem Community Development ($12,000)
Migrant use of Government services study ($15,000)
Welfare needs of Moslem and Buddhist migrants ($5,000)
Role of migrant small businesses in settlement and community development ($15,000)
Employment needs and aspirations of migrant youth-undertaken amongst Italian, Greek, Lebanese and Turkish youth ($34,950)
Marriage and fertility patterns in overseas born populations based on 1976 Census and subsequent data ($27,800)
Study of Ethnic Urban Press ($6,120) Special needs of aged migrants ($25,000) Review of the Community Refugee
Settlement Scheme ($32,000) Eastern European Refugees-a review of
hostel programs and services ($25,000)

Outcome to date
Report presented to Department for analysis
Fieldwork completed, report being prepared
Fieldwork completed, report being prepared
Fieldwork completed, report being prepared
Fieldwork underway
Fieldwork underway
Final report being prepared
Final report being prepared
Report prepared Data being analysed Report presented and being reviewed
Draft report received

(5) Details of the 1981-82 studies and research program are not yet finalised. Projects so far approved are research to be undertaken by the Australian Institute of Multicultural Affairs in connection with an evaluation of the implementation of the Report on Migrant Services and Programs (allocation of $50,000); and a study to be undertaken by Dr Cox, University of Melbourne, Social Studies, into the recognition in Australia of the qualifications of Indo-Chinese refugees (allocation of$3,920).

Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs: Computer Arrangements
(Question No. 3577)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) Why does his Department have to absorb the overhead costs in computer equipment.

3156 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(2) [s there a 150 per cent increase in maintenance and equipment costs and a $203,500 increase in the purchase of computer time in 1981-82, ifso, why.
(3) Are other departments opting out of the present computer arrangements with the Department of the Capital Territory, ifso, why.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) [n accordance with the procedures laid down by the Department of Finance, the total costs of running the Department of the Capital Territory computer installation are apportioned between user departments on the basis of their proportional usage. Accordingly, where the number of users is reduced, the remaining users must absorb that proportion of fixed costs apportioned to the former users.
(2) Maintenance costs for ADP equipment are expected to increase by approximately 150 per cent because to date the department has met maintenance costs only for a small number of remote terminals and a mini-computer installation. [n 1981-82 the department will be liable for additional maintenance costs for increased numbers of remote terminals and maintenance costs for recently purchased computer hardware.
Expenditure on computer time is expected to increase significantly because the Department of the Capital Territory has introduced a revised charging structure based on the procedures outlined in (I) above and based on actual rather than notional usage. The new charging structure will result in an effective increase in the rate paid by the Department of [mmigration and Ethnic Affairs for its computer time and accordingly an increased provision has been made.
(3) The other departments are moving from the Department of the Capital Territory equipment to their own equipment.
Department ofImmigration and Ethnic -i\ffairs: Reductions in Staff
(Question No. 3579)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 29 October 1981 :
(I) Are the only areas in his Department which will not suffer staff cuts (a) the Executive, (b) Central Office and (c) the Population Branches.
(2) Have all other branches had staff cuts ranging from I to 52 persons.
(3) [n 1981-82 will there be (a) a potential 1.2. million applicants for Australian citizenship, (b) new regulations introduced regarding travel between Australia and New Zealand and (c) an increased number of applicants both in Australia and overseas for permanent, temporary and tourist visas.
(4) [f so, on what basis were these cuts recommended, and what is the rationale behind them at a time of increased immigration intake.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No. For further details see Table A below.
(2) No. See Table A.
(3) (a) Yes; (b) Yes. New requirements have already been implemented; (c) Yes.
(4) 1981-82 staff ceiling allocations were set in the context of decisions emanating from the Review of Commonwealth

Functions resulting in a reduction of 74 in the Department's staff ceiling.
The internal distribution of the total staff ceiling is determined in accordance with assessed priorities and is subject to regular reassessment to take account of workload distribution, changing priorities and other exigencies. Ceiling figures are formally allocated to Divisions and regions. Whether within these categories particular Branches are allocated a ceiling is an internal management matter.
Table A
DEPARTMENT OF [MM[GRATION AND ETHN[C AFFA[RS STAFF CE[LING ALLOCATIONS FOR 1980-81 AND 1981-82

1980-81 1981-82

Central OfficeExecutive Legislation and Review Division Co-ordination and Research Division Operations and [nternational Division
Ethnic Affairs Division Management Division

16

16

70

68

86

81

82

90

101

96

250

240

Sub Totals

605

591

Regional Offices-
New South Wales
Victoria Queensland
South Australia Western Australia
Tasmania Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory
Albury/Wodonga Area Office
Overseas

398

387

315

303

95

89

76

69

105

101

24

21

30

27

26

21

I

I

155

146

Totals

1,830 1,756

Note: Staff ceilings were reduced for 1981-82 in all areas
except for the Executive and the Albury/Wodonga Area Office. The Executive ceiling had earlier been reduced from
19 to 16 following the Department's top structure reorganisation effected in May 1981.

Telephone Interpreter Service
(Question No. 3580)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 29 October 1981.
(1) Has the telephone interpreter service experienced a considerable growth pressure in the last 2 years.
(2) Was a staff cut in this area recommended to the members of the Committee on the Review of Commonwealth Functions; if so, on what basis.
(3) What is the rationale behind the charges to be introduced in certain interpreting and translating services.
(4) How will the automatic switching devices operate between say Umbakumba, Northern Territory and Sydney.
(5) How will the charges for telephone interpreting be collected.
(6) Could private enterprise better manage the telephone interpreting service than the present Government.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3157

(I) Yes. The total number of calls has increased from 168,205 in 1979-80 to 214,089 in 1980-81.
(2) and (3) The principal purpose of the changes made to the Telephone Interpreter Service was to improve its efficiency by taking advantage of the available telecommunications technology and, where appropriate, utilising the wide range of interpreting skiils available in the community in the larger population centres.
The imposition of charges for certain services was expected to encourage individual Government Departments and other bodies to develop their own interpreting and translating capacities. It is hoped that in due course both the public and private sectors will come to realise that the ability to communicate in languages other than English is essential to providing an effective service to clients or customers and to the conduct of management/labour rehitions.
(4) The Department is assessing and considering the use of Telecom's INWATS system. This will mean that a client in a remote location will be connected automatically to a TIS centre for the cost to the client of a local call.
In respect of the Northern Territory, all calls to TIS Darwin are presently connected automatically to Perth outside the normal hours of operation of the Darwin centre at a cost to the client of the charge for the link from the location to Darwin. It is expected that arrangement will continue.
(5) No charges have been introduced or are planned for telephone interpreters.
(6) The possibility of another agency or private operator managing the Telephone Interpreter Service has not been examined.
Transport Planning and Research: Funding
(Question No. 3589)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) What is the percentage monetary change and real change in Government expenditure on transport planning and research planned for 1981-82 compared to expenditure in 1980-81.
(2) What are the Government's reasons for the changes in expenditure.
(3) If a reduction in expenditure is planned, does this represent reduced Government concern with transport planning and research.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) In 1980-81, $6.25m was provided by way of grants to the States for land transport planning and research. This program has been discontinued as from 30 June 1981. However, the Commonwealth is providing $2.42m in 1981-82 as direct assistance to the Australian Road Research Board (ARRB) and the Australian Railway Research and Development Organisation (ARRDO) in lieu of Commonwealth assistance previously provided through the States under the transport planning and research grants. Commonwealth grants to ARRB and ARRDO in 1981-82 are in total 61 per cent less in money terms than the amount provided in grants to States for transport planning and research in .1980-81. There is no specific index for measuring changes in transport planning and research expenditure in real terms.
(2) and (3) The Government is confining its assistance for transport planning and research to programs which are of national significance.

Stevedoring Industry: Industrial Disputes
(Question No. 3591)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Industrial Relations upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) What percentage of man-hours lost in the stevedoring industry, for the years 1975-76 to 1980-81, were caused by (a) employer-employee disputes, (b) demarcation disputes and (c) other causes.
(2) Is it a fact that the Waterside Workers' Federation of Australia is the only union which is party to the existing waterfront disputes settlement procedures.
(3) What union, other than the WWF have members working in the stevedoring industry.
(4) What percentage of man-hours lost in the stevedoring industry, for the years 1975-76 to 1980-81, were caused by each of the unions represented in the industry.
(5) What (a) advantages and (b) disadvantages exist in extending present waterfront disputes settlement procedures to the other unions represented on the waterfront.
(6) What (a) advantages and (b) disadvantages exist in a policy of industry unionism on the waterfront.
(7) Does the Government support such a policy; if so, what measures is it taking in this regard.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) The Australian Bureau of Statistics publishes a quarterly analysis of industrial disputes according to duration, cause, method of settlement, analysis by number of workers involved and analysis by total working days lost. The statistics of causes of industrial disputes are classified under the following headings: wages, hours or work, leave, pensions, compensation provisions, managerial policy, physical working conditions, trade unionism and other.
. There is no separate breakdown by employer-employee nor demarcation classification. However managerial policy is defined as disputes concerning the managerial policy of employers and this classification would embrace employeremployee disputes.
Similarly there is no separate classification of demarcation disputes but inter-union and intra union disputes are included under the classification of trade unionism along with employment of non-unionists, sympathy stoppages in support of employees in !lI1other industry, recognition of union activities, etc.
The. ABS statistics in respect of industrial disputes in stevedoring services reveal the following details for 'managerial policy' and 'trade unionism' disputes for the years 1975-76 to 1980-81:

Managerial Trade policy unionism Other

1975-76
1976-77 1977-78 1978-79
1979-80 1980-81 (-9 months to
30.3.81)

percent 12.8 20.5 52.2 45.0 59.7
30.1

percent percent 4.8 82.4 14.6 64.9 1.3 46.5 13.0 42.0 0.5 39.8
7.7 62.2

- most recent ABS statistics.
(2) The Waterside Workers' Award contains, at clause 28, a detailed dispute settlement procedure. A feature of that procedure involves the operation of a Port Conciliator Service

3158 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

whereby, if agreement does not arise between the employers and the Federation, the parties may exercise a right to involve a Port Conciliator to reconcile the matlers in dispute. For this purpose, the Port Conciliator may make a recommendation or, where the parties mutually agree, arbitrate on the matler. The operation of the Port Conciliator service is monitored by a Deputy President of the Conciliation and Arbitration Commission. The establishment of the Port Conciliator service was entered into by the AEWL and the WWF at the time of the rationalisation of the industry in 1977.
A number of awards covering the unions involved in waterfront activities contain disputes settlement procedures ego the Australian Foreman Stevedores Association, the Federated Clerks Union and the Federated Storemen and Packers Union. In addition some other unions have written into the awards to which they are parties specific grievance procedures and/or provision for the appointment of Boards of Reference to resolve disputes.
(3) Unions, other than the WWF, with members employed in the stevedoring industry include:
Australian Stevedoring Supervisors Association (ASSA). Federated Clerks Union (FCU). Australian Foremen Stevedores Association (AFSA). Australian Shipping Officers Association (ASOA). Federated Engine Drivers and Firemen's Association (FEDFA). Federated Storeman and Packers Union (FSPU). Transport Workers Union (TWU). Amalgamated Metal Workers and Shipwrights Union (AMWSU). Federated Iron workers Association (FIA). Electrical Trade Union (ETU). Federated Miscellaneous Workers Union (FMWU). Australian Workers Union (AWU). Australasian Society of Engineers (ASE). Building Workers Industrial Union (BWIU).
(4) Since December 1977, the Department of Transport has published monthly reports of manhours lost by operational employees of stevedoring companies due to industrial disputes. The DOT statistics are compiled from returns submitted by the Association of Employers of Waterside Labour and by stevedoring companies. They measure manhours lost by operations employees of stevedoring companies directly or indirectly involved in disputes. The statistics do not reveal time lost in the industry occasioned by industrial action by union members not employed by stevedoring companies.
(5) The Government supports the adoptions of disputes settlement procedures by recognises that it is for the parties directly involved to determine what is most appropriate for particular areas. I am aware that stevedoring employers are at present exploring ways to improve the various dispute settlement procedures operting under awards and agreements in the industry. Any extension to other areas of the precise arrangements involving waterfront employers and the WWF is a matter for the parties concerned and judgment as to the advantages or disadvantages of such a course must necessarily rest with them.
(6) The advantage of an industry-based union on the waterfront include a likely diminution in interunion disputes, the possibility of a more orderly system of negotiation and greater ease and more effective consultation. There are no obvious disadvantages associated with an industry-based union for the waterfront.
(7) It is the policy of the Government to encourage the formation of industry-based unions. I note also that the ACTU supports the establishment of industry-based unions. In consultation with industry, employer and union interests, the Government is actively encouraging acceptance of this policy

and it will continue to examine legislative measures to ensure consistency with its policy objective.
United Nations Convention on the Carriage of Goods by Sea
(Question No. 3592)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) What advantages and disadvantages are there to Australian exporters acceding to the UN. Convention on the Carriage of Goods by Sea, 1978, generally known as the Hamburg Rules, rather than the present Hague-Visby Rules.
(2) What are the principal provisions of the (a) Hamburg Rules and (b) Hague-Visby Rules.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) For the purposes of seeking Australian industry views on the UN. Convention on the Carriage of Goods by Sea, the so-called Hamburg Rules, my Department has prepared a background paper which includes a comparison of the Hague-Visby Rules and the Hamburg Rules.
A copy of that paper was incorporated in the Annual Report of the Australian Shippers' Council (pages 57-63) which I tabled on 29 October J981.
Trade Practices Act: Controls on Freight Rates
(Question No. 3593)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
What progress has been made in discussions and Government action to amend Part X of the Trade Practices Act, relating to strengthening Australian control over freight rates on its liner exports.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Government's proposals for amendments to Part X of the Trade Practices Act were primarily aimed at increasing its capacity to protect Australian shippers' interests. In response to my invitation to industry to comment on the proposed amendments I have received extensive industry submissions from, and held discussions with, both shippers and shipowners.
As part of this consultative process, I have recently been advised by the principals of both sectors of the industry that they are satisfied appropriate commercial arrangements can be concluded under the existing legislating framework. The future of the proposed amendments is being assessed in the light of the comments received.
Returned Services League Hall, Bacchus Marsh, Victoria
(Question No. 3600)
Dr Theophanous asked the Minister, for Defence, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) Has it been drawn to his attention that the 2nd Battalion, Royal Victorian Regiment, D Company, has been parading in the RSL hall at Bacchus Marsh, Victoria for a period of approximately 8 weeks.
(2) Uso, is he able to say whether the RSL charges $20 per week for use of the hall by this Army Reserve Unit.
(3) Did the unit resume use of the hall on the understanding that costs would be met by the Government.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3159

(4) Is it a fact that the men of this Unit have had to pay for the hall from their private mess fund.
(5) Is a lease for the hall currenlly being negotiated between his Department and the Department of Administrative Services; if so, why are the negotiations so protracted when the matter appears a simple one and the cost involved so small.
(6) Can he reassure the members of the 2nd Battalion, Royal Victorian Regiment D Company, that the lease will be finalised speedily and aII money personally expended reimbursed.
Mr Killen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) D Company 2nd Battalion, the Royal Victorian Regiment(2 RVR) has been parading at the RSL hall, Bacchus Marsh since 4 June 1980 except for the period 8 July 1981-19 August 1981. The unit arranged for use of the RSL hall without reference to either my Department or the Department of Administrative Services.
(2) and (3) The unit resumed occupancy of the hall in a private arrangement with the RSL whereby the unit would continue to parade upon a weekly payment of $20 in anticipation of a formal agreement being concluded between the Department of Administrative Services and the RSL. The RSL has proposed an annual rent of $1,820.
(4) Yes. The $20 weekly payment has been made from the Other Ranks mess fund.
(5) Leasing arrangements are near completion. Difficulties arose in the unit's occupation of the RSL premises which was arra"nged in an irregular manner outside Service channels and procedures. Subsequent administrative delays contributed to the formal leasing arrangement being deferred until the 1981-82 financial year.
(6) Both my Department and the Department of Administrative Services are endeavouring to regularise this situation as speedily as possible. Although payments to the RSL by unit members is a private arrangement, I understand that the RSL will re-imburse the members upon receipt of lease payments from the Commonwealth.
Chilean Regime
(Question No. 3603)
Dr Theophanous asked the Minister for Foreign Affairs, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the recent statement by the Deputy Prime Minister in which he described the Children regime as one that has the respect of the people (Hansard, 20 October 1981, page 2184).
(2) If so, does this statement reflect the official Government attitude.
(3) Does the Government support this regime which numerous international reports have described as one of the most reactionary and oppressive regimes in the world.
(4) How does the Government reconcile the Deputy Prime Minister's statement wit.h the Human Rights Reports which condemn the Chilean regime, as evidenced by the 1980 Amnesty International Report which said that there was a marked deterioration in the human rights situation, and there were many arbitrary detentions, allegations of torture and harassment of trade unionists, members of youth organisations, human rights activists, members of church organisations, political opponents and the poor.
Mr Street-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.

(2) and (3) Australia recognises the Government of Chile and conducts normal diplomatic and trade relations with that country.
(4) The Government has expressed to successive Chilean Governments and in international forums its concern at human rights violations in Chile.
Refugees: Financial Assistance
(Question No. 3604)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) Is a 46 per cent reduction in expenditure proposed for 1981-82 to voluntary agencies for the Refugee Resettlement Assistance Loan.
(2) If so, what is the reason for these cuts.
(3) Who are the members of the Committee for Allocation of Loan Funds to Refugees from Indo-China.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) No. The $200,000 appropriation for the refugee loan scheme in 1981-82 brings to $1,213,000 the amount provided by the Government to a revolving fund, from which interest free loans are made available to refugees and into which repayments return. The annual appropriation is therefore added to earlier Commonwealth funding which began with an amount of $200,000 in 1978-79. It is expected that loans made during 1981-82 will, in total, be of a similar order to those made in 1980-81.
(3) The Board of Directors of CALFRIC Ltd c_omprises representatives of the following agencies: .
AUSTCARE Australian Council of Churches Australian Council of Social Services Indo-China Refugee Association St Vincent de Paul Society Salvation Army, and Smith Family
CALFRIC Ltd releases funds through the voluntary agencies participating in the loan scheme around Australia.
CSIRO: Building Research Division
(Question No. 3610)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Science and Technology, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that the activities of the Building Research Division of CSIRO have been cut by 30 per cent in the past five years.
(2) What were thestaff levels and financial allocation of this Division for each of the last five years.
(3) Are the publications, information and consulting services of this division highly regard~d by local government bodies and the building industry, and do they make an important contribution to the maintenance of high standards for public safety and well-being in the industry.
(4) Is it a fact that an internal review ofCSIRO activities is currently assessing, or will shortly assess, the activities of this Division.
(5) If so, will he take steps to ensure that the work of this Division is not further curtailed.
(6) If he will not undertake to do this, can he give an assurance that the division will retain at least its current standing withinCSIRO.

3160 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Mr Thomson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) No. Part (2) below gives staff levels and financial allocations for the Division of Building Research for the past five years. Since 30 June 1981, approximately 45 staff of the Division have been transferred to another Division of CSIRO. This does not, however, represent a decrease of CSIRO's efforts in support of the building industry. Transfer of the staff, and the forthcoming formation of a new Division of

Cellulose Research will in fact sharpen the focus of CSIRO's research in wood science, including research for the building industry. The overall staff decrease in the Division since 30 June 1977, including transfer of these 45 staff, is less than 20 per cent, although the Division's capacity to employ has decreased as shown in part (2) below.
(2) The staff levels and financial allocations of the Division of Building Research in the last five years is set out in the table below.

CSIRO DIVISION OF BUILDING RESEARCH Staffing and Funds 1976-77 to 1980-81 Staffing at 30June

Year

Funds from all sources

Approprialionrunded rull-lime
staff

Part-lime and staff in training

Contributoryrunded slalf

TOlalslalf

Vacant appropriationfunded positions

Tolalslalf capability

1980-81 1979-80 1978-79 1977-78 1976-77

$'000 6,206 5,642 5,209 5,232 4,903

245

18

251

18

251

15

245

15

256

17

12

275

9

278

12

278

13

273

7

280

2

277

0

278

3

281

22

295

19

299

(3) Yes.
(4) The CSIRO Division of Building Research is to be reviewed later this month. Such divisional reviews are conducted as circumstances dictate, and the CSIRO Executive has decided that it is apportune now to review this Division. While the Review Committee appointed by the Executive consists of an industrialist part-time member of the Executive and two CSIRO Institute Directors, external consultation, in particular with the Building Research and Development Advisory Committee, will be an important facet of the review.
(5) and (6) The determination of research priorities, consequential resource allocation and internal organizational arrangments are statutory responsibilities of the Executive of CSIRO.
Naturalisation Service: Ballarat
(Question No. 3629)
Mr Mildren asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 17 November 1981:
(I) Is the service previously supplied by his Department in which naturalisation interviews were conducted at the Ballarat Office, Victoria, of the Commonwealth Employment Service still being provided at that office.
(2) If not, is it a fact that applicants for naturalisation from Ballarat and district are now required to travel to Melbourne for these interviews.
(3) If the service in Ballarat has been terminated is this a result of reductions in his Department.
(4) Will he ensure that this service will continue to be provided for the people of Ballarat.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. The Commonwealth Employment Service of the Department of Employment and Youth Affairs previously made available its staff for citizenship interviewing purposes at its Office in Ballarat. This service has now been withdrawn.
(2) Applicants for citizenship from Ballarat and district are now required to travel to either Geelong or Melbourne for interview.

(3) No.
(4) The Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs in conjuction with the Public Service Board is currently undertaking a joint review of citizenship procedures, including the interviewing of applicants for citizenship from outside the metropolitan areas. The report of the review is expected in the near future and I expect that n<;w procedures developed will meet the needs of applicants from Ballarat and other nonmetropolitan locations.
Community Agencies: Grants-in-aid Scheme
(Question No. 3632)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic A"ffairs, upon notice, on 17 November 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the dire financial situation that community agencies funded through the Grants-inAid scheme find themselves in as a result of various awards such as the recently gazetted charitable institutions professional staff social workers award.
(2) Will the Government change the funding arrangement of the Grants-in-Aid scheme from a subsidy grant to a total grant covering award rates in States and Territories where they are applicable.
(3) Has his attention also been drawn to the fact that the smaller ethnic communities which have few resources, such as the Armenians, Finns, Afghans, Koreans, Pacific Islanders and Romanians, receive no funding as these groups are not covered by existing departmental services, either at State or Commonwealth levels.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) I am aware of the implications of the various awards under which Grant-in-Aid workers are employed and of the financial pressures that agencies are experiencing as a result of recent salary increases.
(2) The Galbally Report formulation for the Grant-in-Aid scheme specifies that funding provided under the scheme is designed to subsidise the employment of social welfare workers through community agencies. It was not intended that grants should meet all the costs incurred by organisations

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3161

in employing workers. An important feature of Grants-in-Aid is the stimulus given to sponsoring agencies to develop the appropriate resources to attract and maintain grants. Self-help was one of the key principles contained in the Galbally Rec port. The wish of communities to contribute to welfare service delivery, both financially and through their skills and manpower, should not be underestimated.
(3) It is the policy of the Government to help small emerging ethnic groups who may find it difficult to seek and manage Grants-in-Aid. For this reason, a number of grants have been made to generalist social welfare agencies such as the Red Cross, St Vincent de Paul, Care Force and a variety of church organisations to provide services to such groups.
There are over 100 different ethnic groups in our multicultural society, and the locations and concentrations of these groups vary. While it has been possible to fund some small ethnic communities directly, it is not possible to cater for all nationalities in all areas through the provision of specific workers.
The Grant-in-Aid scheme is only one component of a total welfare strategy for addressing the needs of migrant communities. The migrant services units and the Telephone Interpreter Service within the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs play and important role, as do State and community welfare agencies.
Migrants: Information Needs
(Question No. 3633)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 17 November 1981:
Is he able to say what steps have been taken by Commonwealth Departments following the recommendations of the Scott Survey for the information needs of migrants; if so, will he provide detai Is.
Mr MacPhee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
When tabling the summary of findings on 28 August 1980, I noted that the Survey of Information Needs of Migrants had produced findings and data of relevance to information delivery at all levels in the Australian community. Accordingly, the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs distributed some 1000 copies of the full report and 1200 copies of the summary of findings to a wide range of Commonwealth, State, community and private organisations with responsibilities which included delivery of services to the migrant communities.
A further 1000 copies of the full report and nearly 400 copies of the summary findings have been purchased through the Australian Government Publishing Service bookshops.
The major changes in information delivery within the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs following the survey have been:
(i) revision and simplification of information material produced for prospective migrants overseas.
(ii) introduction of group counselling for prospective migrants.
(iii) the production of specialised audio-visual material for migrant counselling overseas.
(iv) the use of Bilingual officers to explain, through ethnic radio stations, changes to policy and to provide information on available services.
A special task force of the Ethnic Liaison Officer Scheme has examined the report to identify its implications for Commonwealth agencies. Since the completion of the report,

changes in the Commonwealth Government agencies' approaches to information delivery have included:
(i) greater use of multilingual publications about facilities, services and obligations.
(ii) greater emphasis on ethnic media for Government advertising.
(iii) greater attention to relaying Ministerial and Departmental announcements to the ethnic press.
Migrant Resource Centres
(Question No. 3635)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 17 November 1981:
(1) Has his attention been drawn to the fact that without appropriate funding for migrant resource centres, hostility could be created at the local level since agencies and communities will have to compete with each other for scarce voluntary and financial resources.
(2) Will he take steps to have additional funds appropriated for migrant resource centres.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) and (2) Funding of migrant resource centres is designed to cover basic operating costs such as core staff salaries, rental, and essential equipment. The intention is that these basics should serve as a starting point for the development of community support programs which mayor may not involve funds from sources outside the migrant resource centre program. Far from competing with other agencies for funds, migrant resource centres co-operate with agencies and individuals in the community in working to meet local community needs. The 1981-82 appropriation for migrant resource centres provides an average of $55,000 for each standard centre. That compares with the $50,000 p.a. allowed for in the Galbally Review Report: Migrant Services and Programs.
Ninth International Labour Organisation Asian Regional Conference
(Question No. 3640)
Mr Lionel Bowen asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 17 November 1981:
(I) Further to his answer to Question No 2430 (Hansard), 13 October 1981, page 1932), which countries attended the 9th International Labour Organisation Asian Regional Conference at Manila in December 1980.
(2) Which of these countries have ratified ILO Conventions on Freedom of Association which the Conference urged governments to ratify and effectively implement.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) The attached table lists the 19 countries attending the 9th International Labour Organisation Asian Regional Conference at Manila in December 1980 and sets out the information requested in respect of each country.

Country
Australia Bangladesh Fiji

Convention*

11 87 98 135 141 151

XXX

XXX

X

X

3162 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Convention*

Country
France India Indonesia Iran Japan Malaysia Mongolia New Zealand Pakistan Papua New Guinea Philippines Singapore Sri Lanka Thailand USSR United States

II 87 98 135 141 lSI

x XX X

X

X

X

X X-

X

XX

X

XXX

X

X

XX

X

X

X

X

XX

XXX

Footnotes:X: Denotes Ratification. *There are 6 International Labour Organisation Conventions which the International Labour Officer lists as freedom of association Conventions:
Convention No II: Right of Association (Agriculture), 1921
Convention No 87: Freedom of Association and Protection of the Right to organise, 1948
Convention No 98: Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining, 1949
Convention No 135: Workers' Representatives, 1971 Convention No 141: Rural Workers' Organisations, 1975 Convention No 151: Labour Relations (Public Service), 1978
War Service Pensions
(Question No. 3645)
Mr Beazley asked the Minister representing the Minister for Veterans' Affairs, upon notice, on 17 November 1981:
In view of the recent High Court decision in favour of Nancy Law, will he now allow war service pensions to be paid to ex-servicemen, who claim to have served in war zones, but whose claims are rejected on the grounds that inadequacies in military records do not permit the verification of their claims.
Mr Thomson-The Minister for Veterans' Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
I assume the question relates to eligibility for service pension of ex-servicemen who claim to have served in a theatre of war. If this is so, the matters mentioned are for determination by Repatriation Boards and the Repatriation Commission and not by the Minister. If the honourable member wishes to bring to my notice specific claims where he feels that the law has not been applied properly. I shall refer them to the Repatriation Commission for urgent examination.

Munitions Filling Factory, St Marys, New South Wales
(Question No. 3708)
Mr Free asked the Minister representing the Minister for Finance, upon notice, on 18 November 1981:

When may I expect to receive replies to my letters of 28 July, 4 and 6 August and 8 October 1981 and my telegram of 23 October 1981 concerning the elimination of the cash mode of payment to Commonwealth employees at the Munitions Filling Factory, St Marys, New South Wales.
Mr Howard-The Minister for Finance has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
The delay in replying to the honourable member was occasioned by the inter-related processes involved in implementing the decision to eliminate the payment of salaries to Commonwealth employees in cash.
A number of employee organisations, representing a variety of employment categories at widely spread locations, had requested me to exercise the power of exemption contained in the legislation. A detailed examination of each request was necessary to ensure an equitable and consistent application of the Government's decision. I can inform the honourable member that a reply to his letters is now being prepared and should be received within the next few days.

Reyiew of Community Development Employment

.

Projects

(Question No. 3740)

Mr Campbell asked the Minister representing
the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 18 November 1981:

Further to the Minister's answer to Question No. 3115
(Hansard, IS October 1981, page 2163) will the Minister indicate when it is anticipated that a decision will be reached following consideration of the review of community development employment projects.

Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs
has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

I am not in a position to add to the reply given to Question No. 3115, except to indicate that the Government hopes that
a decision can be taken on this matter as soon as possible.

Department of Aboriginal Affairs: Kununurra Area Office
(Question No. 3742)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister representing the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs, upon notice, on 18 November 1981:
(I) Further to the Minister's answer to question No. 3180 (Hansard, IS October 1981, pages 2163-4) will the Minister provide a detailed description of the 12 positions now attached to the Kununurra area office, Western Australia, and an indication of salary ranges that apply to these particular positions.
(2) How many motor vehicles will be allocated to the Kununurra area office of the Department of Aboriginal Affairs.
Mr Viner-The Minister for Aboriginal Affairs has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) In my response to question No. 3180 I made it clear that there are nine approved positions attached to my Department's Kununurra office. Details of the nine approved positions are:

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3163

Area Officer, Clerk Class 8, $22693/23609. Duties: administer, control and co-ordinate the operation of the Area Office and represent the Department on all mallers relating to Aboriginal affairs within the East Kimberley Arr.a.
Senior Project Officer, Clerk Class 7, $20542/21772. Duties: deputise for the Area Officer as required; assist the Area Officer with the formulation of development plans for the advancement of Aboriginal communities and with the control of field operations within the area (two positions).
Project Officer, Clerk Class 5, $16874/18246. Duties: in consultation with Aboriginal communities, assess and recommend projects for inclusion in functional expenditure programs for which the Department is directly responsible (two positions).
Administrative Clerk, Class 4, $15044/16415. Duties: provide administrative support to the Area Officer in the preparation and submission of the Area program; maintain systems for recording programming and project control documentation (one position).
Field Officer, Clerical Assistant Grade 6, $14186/14917. Duties: establish personal contact and maintain communications and consultation with Aboriginal communities and organisations to identify needs and aspirations and ensure a two-way How of information between Aboriginals and the Department (one position).
Assistant Field Officer, Clerical Assistant Grade 4, $12233/12737. Duties: maintain communications between Aboriginal communities and the Department as directed to facilitate development processes (one position).
Typist Grade I, $5102/10828. Duties: carry out typing, reception and general office duties (one position).
(2) There are five vehicles allocated to the Kununurra office. One of these is in Perth and will be transferred to Kununurra when the second Senior Project Officer position is filled.
Power Generation
Mr Thomson-On 27 October 1981 (Hansard, page 2460) Mr Barry Jones asked a question of the Prime Minister concerning the generation of power by hydrogen fusion induced by laser excitation. I advised that I would take the question on notice.
The Australian Research Grants Scheme of my Department has supported Professor Hora of the University of New South Wales to carry out basic theoretical research in this field. He is examining the interaction of lasers with plasmas and has received a total of $109,271 for his research over the past five years.
Fusion research falls within the responsibility of my colleague, the Minister for National Development and Energy, whose Department has provided the following statement:
The Government is aware of experiments being carried out in the USA on inertial confinement fusion methods which include laser induced fusion. The complexity of both these and magnetic confinement systems which include tokamaks is such that they are still in the phase of proving technical feasibility. It is evident, however, that both will be complex systems, physically large and with large power output per unit.

Commercially viable systems will necessarily require development over a long-span of years, making it difficult at this time to predict what ot her energy sources they might replace.
The Government is supporting some research in Australia on both the inertial and the magnetic confinement methods for producing nuclear fusion. In addition, Australian membership of the International Fusion Research Council provides the opportunity to keep up to date with overseas developments.

Medical Practitioners: Prosecutions
(Question No. 2033)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 5. May 1981:

(I) How may prosecutions were commenced against medical practitioners for alleged irregular practices involving (a)
Medibank and (b) the operation of the National Health Scheme in each year since 1975.

(2) How many prosecutions (a) were successful, (b) were
unsuccessful, (c) were not proceeded with and (d) are still under consideration.

(3) What fines or gaol sentences were imposed in each successful prosecution.

(4) For each successful prosecution, (a) what was the maximum penalty or gaol sentence that could have been
imposed and (b) what sums have been lost to revenue because of the breaches.

Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(1)-

Year

(a) Health Insurance
SchemeProsecu tions Commenced
(includes
Medibank)

(b)
National
Health Scheme-
Prosecutions Commenced

1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

2

6

4

3

9

6

5

16

2

Total

41

19

(2)-

(a) Prosecutions successful
(b) Prosecutions unsuccessful
(c) Prosecutions not proceeded with
(d) Prosecutions under consideration

Health Insurance
Scheme
33
8

National Health Scheme
18

14

2

3164 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(3) Health Insurance Scheme

Case No.
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 II

Charges 13 12 49 11
3
59 71 10 12 5 2

12

35

13

27

14

32

12

15

10

16

18

17

40

18

19

19

11

20

16

21

4

22

3

23

27

24

2

25

26

7

27

3

28

Conspiracy

29

30

31

31

19

Legislation
Health Insurance Act (s.129) Health Insurance Act (S. 129) Health Insurance Act (S.129) Health Insurance Act (S.129) Health Insurance Act (S.I29) Health InsuranceAct (S.129) Health Insurance Act (S.129) Crimes Act (S. 29A)
Health Insurance Act (S.129) Health Insurance Act (S.129) Health Insurance Act (S.129)
Health Insurance Act (S.129)
Health Insurance Act (S.129) Health Insurance Act (S.129) Crimes Act (S. 67B andS.29A) Crimes Act (S. 29A)
Crimes Act (S. 29B) (Crimes Act S. 29B)
Health Insurance Act (S.129) Health Insurance Act (S.129) Health Insurance Act (S.129) Health Insurance Act (S.129) Health Insurance Act (S.129)
Health Insurance Act (S.129) Health Insurance Act (S.129) Health Insurance Act (S.129) Health Insurance Act (S.129) Health Insurance Act (S.129) Crimes Act S. 86 (I) (E)
Health Insurance Act (S.129) Health Insurance Act (S.I29) Health Insurance Act (S.129)

Fines and Gaol Sentences
Fined $100 on 5 charges; $50 on 7 charges; $150 on 1 charge; total $1 ,000 Fines $100 on 6 charges; $50 on 6 charges; Total $900 $500 Good Behaviour Bond for 2 years
Fined $825
Good Behaviour Bond for I year
Fined $14,750; Reparation $8,759
Fined $14,200
3 years' imprisonment (minimum 9 months) $100 Good Behaviour Bond for I year; Reparation $657 Fined $500
Fined $1 ,000 plus $1 ,000 Good Behaviour Bond for 3 years; Reparation $93 Fined $2,000 plus $5,000 Good Behaviour Bond for 3 years; Reparation $1,205 Fined $1,350; Reparation $624
Fined $500; Reparation $670
Fined $1 ,050; Reparation $209
3 years' imprisonment (minimum 9 months) Fined $3,600; Reparation $17,526 8 months' imprisonment; Reparation $478 Fined $1,900
$200 Good Behaviour Bond for I year; Poor Box $150; Reparation $616 Fined $2,000
Fined $2,000
Offences proven but conviction not recorded under provisions of Crimes Act (S. 19B) Fined $250 on 3 charges; $100 on 24 charges; Total $3,150 Fined $200
Discharges on $500 Good Behaviour Bond for 2 years Fined $700
Fined $300
1year's imprisonment (minimum I month) conditional on bond being entered for $5,000 Fined $50; Reparation $276
Fined $200 on 13 charges; $100 on 18 charges; Total $4,400 Fined $950; Reparation $189

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3165

Case No. 32
33

Charges
151
32 48

Legislation
Health [nsurance Act (S.129) Crimes Act (S. 29B) Health Insurance Act (S.129)

(3) National Health Scheme

Case No.

Charges 2

2

4

Legislation
National Health Act S. 103 (5) (A)
National Health Act S. 103 (5) (A)

3

8

4

5

4

6

2

2

7

251

8

8

2

9

10

94

II

56

16

31

12

7

13

21

14

3

15

3

16

8

17

29

2

18

6

16

National Health Act S. 103 (5) (A)
National Health Act S. 88 (3) National Health Act S. 88 (2) National Health Act S.103 (5) (B) National Health Act S.103 (5) (E) National Health Act S. 88 (3)
National Health Act S. 88 (2) National Health Act S.103 (5) (B) National Health Act S. 88 2) National Health Act S.103 (5) (B) National Health Act S. 88 (3) National Health Act S.103 (5) (H) National Health Act S.134 National Health Act S. 88 (3) National Health Act S. 88 (3)
National Health Act S. 88 (3)
National Health Act S. 88 (3) National Health Act S. 88 (3) National Health Act S.103 (5) (H) National Health Act S. 88 (3) Crimes Act S. 29A (2) National Health Act S. 88 (3) National Health Act S. 88 (2)

Fines and Gaol Sentences
Fined $27,800 or 6 days' hard labour; Reparation $2,059
Fined $200 on I charge; $200 on 13 charges; $100 on 34 charges; Total $6,200
Fines and gaol sente,nces
Fined $400 gr 119 days' hard labour on 1st charge and 92 days' hard labour on 2nd charge Fined $200 on 3 charges; $100 on I charge or total 45 days' hard labour on Ist three charges and 25 days' hard labour on remaining charge; Total $600 Dismissal with $200 costs or 5 days' hard labour; $1,000 reparation or 25 days' hard labour Offences proven but conviction not recorded $1,306 reparation Dismissal on 3 charges; $250 Good Behaviour Bond Convicted on I charge; No penalty imposed Remaining 3 charges dismissed
Fined $200 on I charge; $40 on 250 charges; Reparation $1,218; Total fine $10,200 Fined $500
Fined $500
Fined $500
Fined $2,350; Reparation $815
Fined $20 on 103 charges; $2,060 or 206 days' imprisonment
Fined $350
$100 Good Behaviour Bond on I charge; Remaining 20 charges dismissed Fined $50 on 2 charges $100; Convicted without penalty on remaining charge Dismissed; $(0 costs or 7 days' imprisonment Fined $320; Reparation $23
Fined $300 or 69 days' imprisonment on 6 charges; Dismissed on remaining 25 charges
Dismissed Dismissed
Reparation $39

3166 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

4 (a) Maximum penalties that could have been imposedHealth Insurance Act 1973Section 129: Penalty $10,000 or imprisonment for 5 years National Health Act 1953Section 88: Penalty $200 or imprisonment for 6 months Section 103: Penalty $200 or imprisonment for 6 months Section 134: Penalty $200 or imprisonment for 6 months Crimes Act 1914Section 19B: Where a person fails to observe the conditions of his recognizance (good behaviour bond), the court may convict him of and sentence him for the offence with which he was originally charged. Section 29A: Imprisonment for 5 years Section 29B: Imprisonment for 2 years Section 67B: Imprisonment for 10 years
(4) (b) While I appreciate the need to provide as far as possible information sought by honourable members, I do not consider it would be appropriate in this instance for there to be the extensive redeployment of resources away from other functions that would be necessary in order to provide the information requested.
Information for the preparation of this reply was made available by my colleague, the Minister for Health, from records held within that Department.
MANDATA System: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 2221)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 12 May 1981:
(I) Has the MANDATA System been introduced in the Department of Social Security and Government instrumentalities under the Minister's control; ifso, what was the:
(a) cost of (i) the equipment, (ii) installation, (iii) site preparation, (iv) acquiring or renting sites and (v) other additional factors associated with the introduction of the system and
(b) total cosi of introducing the system.
(2) Were any reductions in the staff of personneljestablishment units achieved as a result of introducing this system; ifso, what:
(a) reductions in staff and (b) cost savings were achieved in each year since its
introduction.
(3) What staff:
(a) saving or (b) increase is expected with the termination of the
MANDATA System.
(4) What is the anticipated:
(a) extra cost or (b) saving resulting from the termination of the MAN-
DATA System.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) Yes, in the Department of Social Security in the Australian Capital Territory, New South Wales and Victoria.

(a) and (b) The cost of the purchase and installation of the central computer was outlined in the answer provided to Parliamentary Question 2209 by the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister.
The total direct cost to the Department of Social Security of introducing MANDATA was approximately $42,000, comprising $3,000 for the preparation of sites for remote visual display units and $39,000 in salaries for staff involved in the planning for data ,pickUp, the actual data pickup and file purification.
(2) No.
(3) The decision to terminate MANDATA is not expected to have any impact on the Department's staffing.
(4) The Department of Social Security is replacing MANDATA with its own personnel information system. This system is not expected to cost staff resources and has been made possible by the Department's recent move to improved computing facilities. Because of network improvements and the on-line nature of the personnel information system, it has been necessary to purchase some new items of equipment. The cost of this equipment is expected to be in the vicinity of $100,000. Not all of the items purchased are for the ex<;iusive use of the new personnel information system.
Invalid Pension
(Question No. 2490)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 5 June 1901:
(I) Do applications for an invalid pension now take an average of 10 weeks to process,
(2) Is the delay even greater when a medical report from a specialist is required.
(3) If so, is the Minister able to say whether this is due to delays experienced within the Department of Health.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) On average, over all States, applications for the invalid pension take about seven weeks to process.
(2) The average processing time of those applications requiring a specialist report is longer. This is due largely to the length of time it takes to secure specialist appointments, However, new claims requiring specialist examination are infrequent; and where delays are experienced, other forms of income support are available.
(3) When all necessary information is available there is little delay in the Department of Health providing a report to the Department of Social Security, When further information is required from general practitioners, hospitals or specialists there are delays in obtaining the necessary information on which to make a report. Such delays are outside the control of the Department of Health.
VIP Aircraft: Transport of Wines
(Question No. 2625)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Defence, upon notice, on 10 June 1981:
(I) Further to his answer to question No. 425 (Hansard, 18 May 1976, page 2160) is he now able to say whether the answer provided listed all wines transported on the VIP aircraft concerned and listed on the aircraft's manifests.
(2) Was the information provided prepared from a partial manifest or part of a manifest.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3167

(3) [s he now able to provide any additional information on the quantities of wines transported on the aircraft from Mt Gambier, South Australia, to Canberra on II March 1976.
Mr KiIIen-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) Cargo manifests are not made out for 34 Squadron aircraft.
(3) No further information has come to hand which necessitates any change to the answer [ provided to Parliamentary Question on Notice No. 425.
Advertising and Promotion: Department of Social Security
(Question No. 2663)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) What sum was spent by the Minister's Department on advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services during the period (a) I January 1980 to 18 October 1980 and (b) 19 October 1980 to 17 August 1981.
(2) What was the cost of each campaign undertaken.
(3) Under which item of expenditure were funds allocated for each campaign.
(4) Which advertising agencies or consultants were used for each campaign.
(5) What was the total sum paid to each agency or consultant for each campaign.
(6) How was each agency or consultant selected.
(7) By what percentage has the departmental cost of advertising increased or decreased each year from 1975 to 1980 and during the period I January 1981 to [7 August 1981.
(8) What is the estimated cost of advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services for 1981-82.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question.
(I) The Department of Social Security spent the following amounts on paid advertising of its programs and services during the specified periods:
(a) $13,459.30 (b) $552,032.08
(2) The campaigns conducted between I January 1980 and 17 August 1981 and the total cost involved for each are set out below:
Ethnic Advertising-$17,566.87 General Pension [nformation-$I,373.09 Child Care School Holiday Activities-$I 00.00 [YDP-$546,451.42
(3) 590-2-10 Publicity.
(4) The following master placing/charging agencies were used for Media Placement:
Doyle Dane Bernbach/Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd (DDB/BC)
Fortune (Aust.) Pty Ltd Neville Jeffres Advertising Pty Ltd.
Creative Services were supplied by:
Murray Evans Advertising for Ethnic Advertising Monahan Dayman Adams for the [YDP campaign.
The other items listed were routine.

(5)- DDB/BC-$5I,602.31
Fortune-$512,515.98
Neville Jeffres-$I,373.09
(6) [n the case of the master placing/charging agencies the Minister for Administrative Services selected the agency. The Australian Government Advertising Service, in consultation with my Department, selected agencies to provide technical services to plan, create and produce advertisements.
(7) Total expenditure for all types of paid advertising by my Department between 1974-75 and 1980-81 and the percentage change each year since 1974-75 are set out in the following table:

Percentage increase

1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80 1980-81

$'000 1,008
928
17-9 130
77
91
645

-7.9 -80.7 -27.4 -40.6 +17.2 +613.0

Note: The larger expenditures in 1974-75 and 1975-76 rellect expenses incurred on Medibank publicity which ceased to be a function of this Department after 1975-76. 1980-81 expenditure includes $540,000 for [YDP Publicity.
Expenditure for paid advertising by my Department in the two months to 31 August 1981 was $18,000.
(8) $\01,000.

Advertising and Promotion: Department of Education
(Question No. 2664)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 18 August 1981:
(I) What sum was spent by the Minister's Department on advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services during the period (a) I January 1980 to 18 October 1980 and (b) 19 October 1980 to 17 August 1981.
(2) What was the cost of each campaign undertaken.
(3) Under which item of expenditure were funds allocated for each campaign.
(4) Which advertising agencies or consultants were used for each campaign.
(5) What was the total sum paid to each agency or consultant for each campaign.
(6) How was each agency or consultant selected.
(7) By what percentage has the departmental cost of advertising increased or decreased each year from 1975 to 1980 and during the period'l January 1981 to 17 August 1981.
(8) What is the estimated cost of advertising and the promotion of Government programs and services for 1981-82.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) (a) $65,834, (b) $76,005

3168 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(2)(i) ACT TAFE publicity. (new courses, enrolment dates, EPUY and Transition Courses, Link Courses, Canberra School of Music concerts) . . . . . . . . . . .
(ii) ACT Apprenticeship Board promotion (iii) Education Research and Development
Centre-grants, fellowships, internships
(iv) International Education-various schemes
(v) Galbally report . . . . . . . . . (vi) National Aboriginal Education Committee (vii) Student assistance schemes
(viii) Education Program for Unemployed Youth (NSW)

$
71,620 831
12,186 26,829
1,422 3,662 15,623
9,668

It is not correct to describe all the activities listed above as 'campaigns': Most expenditures relate to the routine public
advertisement of scholarships, grants, etc.

(3) Various relevant appropriation items.

(4) and (5) See2above.

(i) Neville Jeffress Pty Ltd Gordon & Gotch Pty Ltd Country Press Pty Ltd Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd
(ii) Neville Jeffress Pty Ltd Gordon & Gotch Pty Ltd
(iii) Neville Jeffress Pty Ltd Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd
(iv) Neville Jeffress Pty Ltd Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd
(v) Neville Jeffress Pty Ltd (vi) Neville Jeffress Pty Ltd
Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd (vii) Neville Jeffress Pty Ltd
Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd Consolidated Publications (viii) Neville Jeffress Pty Ltd Berry Currie Advertising Pty Ltd

Balance
$ 67,893
1,213 288
2,226 242 588
11,802 383
23,599 3,230 1,422 3,536 126 13,916 1,622 -85 3,903 5,765

(6) Through the Department of Administrative Services.

(7)-
1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981

$ 242,191 144,155 165,301 188,318 168,313 188,056 192,527

% -40.5
+ 14.7 + 13.9
-10.6
+ I J.7
+2.4

(8) $66,728.
Note-Comparison of the amounts in (7) and (8) may be misleading since they have not been converted to constant price levels.

Teacher Education
(Question No. 2746)
Mr Milton asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) Have any major inquiries into teacher education recommended the provision of four years pre-service preparation for primary school teachers as an educational priority; if so, which ones, and when was each published.

(2) Is such a course an educational priority of the Commonwealth Government.
(3) Has the Commonwealth Government provided any funding for four year pre-service preparation of primary teachers in the Australian Capital Territory.
(4) What is the current provision of funding for these courses to the States.
(5) What is the formula for the transfer of costs between the States and the Commonwealth for these programs.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) A major Commonwealth inquiry, the Natioanallnquiry into Teacher Education (NITE), presented its Report in August 1980. The Committee was generally agreed that four years' training was a target to be achieved during the 1980's for all teachers. Some members of the Committee, while not opposing a fOllr-year preparation, were of the opinion that the final year should be undertaken in association with in-service training.
Prior to the establishment of NlTE, a policy of four-year training existed in Tasmania. During 1979 and 1980, inquiries were conducted in the other States which canvassed various aspects of teacher education, including the question of a minimum period of pre-service preparation. Four of these inquiries supported a four-year period of initial training; the conclusion of the fifth (WA) was that any mandatory extension of the present three year course was not warranted.
(2) Following receipt of the NlTE Report, it was decided that as the issues raised were of significant concern to the States, there was a need for a collective discussion by Ministers for Education of the various recommendations. This discussion took place at the 43rd Meeting of the Australian Education Council in February 1981. Council did not endorse the recommendation concerning four years' initial preparation, but did support the general principle of extending the length of teacher preparation. Ministers agreed that this might include further development of a variety of approaches.
(3) Courses at the Canberra College of Advanced Educ cation, are funded by the Commonwealth Government. All under-graduate pre-service teacher education students are enrolled in the four-year Bachelor of Education course. Students may terminate their training at the end of three years when they are eligible to take out a Diploma of Teaching, a basic qualification for entry into primary teaching.
(4) and (5) the financial arrangements for the provision of funds to universities and colleges of advanced education have been agreed between the States and the Commonwealth. The arrangements for the funding of four-year pre-service courses for primary school teachers in these institutions are the same as those made for other higher education programs. The agreed arrangements provide that teacher education programs, proposed by the State and acceptable to the Commonwealth, are fully funded by the Commonwealth under States Grants legislation.
Unemployment Benefit: Means Test
(Question No. 2790)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 19 August 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that the Victorian State Liberal Minister for Youth, Sport and Recreation has urged the Commonwealth Government to lift the ceiling on all allowable extra earnings, that is, the means test, for those receiving unemployment benefits, and has called on the Government to increase unemployment benefits in line with consumer price index increases.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3169

(2) If so, is he able to say whether the Victorian Minister's suggestions were made following a Victorian State Government report on youth homelessness.
(3) Has he seen the report.
(4) If so, did the report indicate that by increasing unemployment benefit and easing the means test, the social and psychological consequences of long term unemployment would be relieved, and young .people could be provided with vital work experience as well as promoting individual initiative.
(5) Will the Minister consider these proposals of his Liberal colleague in the Victorian Parliament.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) to (3) In releasing a report prepared by five Victorian Government Departments for the Senate Standing Committee on Social Welfare, the Victorian Minister for Youth, Sport and Recreation did urge the Commonwealth to review unemployment benefits and bring them into line with movements in the Consumer Price Index. He also recommended an easing in the income test on these benefits.
(4) The report identifies many factors as contributing to the homeless status of young people in Victoria, and states that the causes can be expected to be complex, inter-related and mutually compounding. Inadequate finance was identified as the only one of a set of contributing factors. Other factors included the state of the housing market and youth access to it, family breakdown and social problems affecting young people.
(5) Unemployment benefit rates are 'currently automatically indexed for price movements except for the single people aged 16 years to 17 years and aged 18 and over without dependants, although the latter rate was increased in November 1981 in line with the increases in indexed rates over the last year.
Factors that need to be taken into account about proposals to index all unemployment benefit rates and to further relax the income test include the extent to which they might reduce incentives to undertake full-time work or further education, or increase incentives to leave the parental home.
The Government has a continuing concern with the problems of youth homelessness, and gives careful consideration to proposals aimed at alleviating such problems that are put before it.
All proposals must be considered in the light of the Government's overall economic objectives and with regard to competing priorities in the welfare field.
Disadvantaged Persons Health Care Cards
(Question No. 2892)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notic~, on 27 August 1981:
(I) How many claims have been received by the Department of Social Security in each State for disadvantaged persons health care cards, as at 24 August 1981.
(2) How many of these claims have been approved.
(3) What is the Department's estimate of the number of persons eligible for the cards in each State.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) As at 24 August 1981 the number of claims for disadvantaged persons health care cards received in each State was
as follows:

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory

4,700 3,900
800 1,750 1,700
500 200 250

13,800

These figures relate to applications received from persons ap-
plying on the basis of low income and from recent migrants. Unemployment and special beneficiaries do not have to apply. Eligible unemployment and special beneficiaries current at I
September 1981 would have qualified for the health care card automatically.

Applications for health care cards may also be lodged retrospectively. As a result, many people who are eligible on
the basis of low income or as migrants may be expected to defer applying for the card until they seek medical treatment.

(2) Information about the number of claims approved at
the time is not readily available but the general experience has been that between 10 per cent and 15 per cent require further inquiry or rejection.

(3) A rough estimate of the number of families or single people eligible for a Health Care card in each State is:

New South Wales
Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory Australian Capital Territory

180,000 135,000 70,000 75,000 50,000 20,000
5,000 5,000

Total

540,000

say 500,000
It should be noted that precise estimates cannot be calculated. See also the Answer to Senate Question No. 1134.

Pensioner's Non-interest Bearing Accounts
(Question No. 2893)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 27 August 1981:
(I) Further to the Minister's Statement in relation to Pensioners' non-interest bearing accounts, and the relation to the pension means test, what is regarded by the Government as (a) a reasonable amount of money in non-interest bearing accounts, which would be exempt from the application of the means test and (b) the reasonable purposes referred to, for which pensioners may liquidate income producing assets.
(2) Will it be possible for a pensioner to sell a house which he or she has been renting out, for the purpose of using the balance remaining from the sale for an overseas trip.
(3) If so, will the pensioner be required to seek approval for such a transaction before proceeding.
(4) Will the Department's view of assessable extra income conflict in any way with that of the Australian Taxation Office

3170 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

as to what constitutes income on which taxation might be payable, for example, the Taxation Office does not require payment of taxation on the amount of savings in non-interest bearing accounts because it does not regard this as income.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) When the legislation concerning these matters has been introduced further announcements will be made on the operational aspects of the new provisions. However, as indicated in my second reading speech on the Social Services Amendment Bill 1981, it will be considered reasonable for a single person to hold an amount to the order of $2,000 in a nonincome producing form. The corresponding figure for a married couple will be to the order of $3,000. Again, as was made clear in my statement on 18 August 1981, the provisions will not operate to penalise people who liquidate income producing assets for reasonable purposes such as the purchase of a home, or a car or to finance a holiday.
(2) Yes.
(3) No.
(4) Where a person maintains a large sum of money in a non-income producing form in order to qualify for a pension or fringe benefits, it is the intention of the proposed legislation to deem income to have been received for pension purposes. Such deemed income will not be treated as assessable income for .income tax purposes. The difference in treatment relates to the different functions of the social security system and the personal income tax system. The definition of income used in the assessment of pension entitlement is intended to provide a basis on which to establish a pensioner's need for income support. This can be a different matter to assessing a person's liability to pay income tax.
Drugs: Suneillance of Australia's Coastline
(Question No. 2985)
Mr Les Johnson asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 9 September 1981:
(I) Which of the specific recommendations in the report of the Australian Royal Commission of Inquiry into Drugs relating to the Surveillance of Australia's coastline (Book B, page 8441) (a) have been accepted, (b) have been rejected and (c) are still under consideration.
(2) What is the cost of implementing the recommendations which have been accepted.
(3) What new equipment has been purchased for surveillance purposes since January 1981.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The honourable member has referred to those recommendations of the Royal Commission listed on page B441 of Book B. Page B441 in fact represents only the beginning of a list of some sixteen recommendations relating to coastal surveillance, which appear on pages B441-443. Accordingly, I have addressed my answer to all sixteen recommendations; these were more specifically identified in Book D of the report of the Royal Commission as recommendations Nos 102 to 117.
( I) (a) Recommendations 102, 104, 107, 108, 111-114 and 116 have been accepted. The following recommendations have been accepted subject to qualification.
No. 103: Accepted, insofar that the emphasis in relation to areas adjacent to major centres of population is best represented by a capacity to assist Customs and the Australian Federal Police in responding to intelligence that they receive.

No. 105: Accepted on the basis that in this instance the term Australian Coastal Surveillance Centre referred in fact to the Australian Coastal Surveillance Standing Interdepartmental Committee, which is the Commonwealth body responsible for the management of coastal surveillance. The Review of Coastal Surveillance, now in progress, will report on the Committee's role in the light of this recommendation. .
No. 106: Accepted, subject to the realisation that in the case of aircraft intrusions, a high level of successful monitoring is unlikely to be achieved given the extreme difficulty of tracking aircraft in Hight in remote areas. Other methods of obtaining intelligence on suspect aircraft activities are being examined.
No. 109: Accepted on the understanding that familiarisation and liaison visits are preferable to lengthy periods of secondment. We are currently in touch with the States and the Northern Territory on this matter.
(I) (b) None of the recommendations have been rejected outright.
(I) (c) Recommendations Nos 110, 115 and 117 are still under consideration.
(2) A number of the recommendations are related to Civil Coastal Surveillance Policy and do not give rise to direct costs. The costs of others depend either on the outcome of the Coastal Surveillance -review or the result of discussions between the Commonwealth and the States and Northern Territory.
I have been advised that the cost of implementing No. 116 is estimated to be $3.027m based on current prices.
(3) None.
Disadvantaged Persons Health Care Card
(Question No. 2988)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 8 September 1981:
(I) What was the Department of Social Security estimate of the number of applications which could be expected for the disadvantaged persons health care card for-
(a) the Brisbane metropolitan area, and
(b) Queensland.
(2) How many applications had been received as at 4 September 1981.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) (a) No estimate was made. (b) A rough estimate of the number of families or single people eligible for a Health Care card in Queensland is 70,000. See also the answers to Senate Question No. 1134 and House of Representatives Question No. 2892.
(2) The number of applications received as at 4 September 1981 was:
(a) The Brisbane metropolitan area: 1,903 (b) Queensland: 3,613.
Public Service Superannuation
(Question No. 3070)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 10 September 1981:

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3171

(I) Do the same provisions of the Superannuation Act apply to Public Service officers over and under 60 years of age?
(2) Are officers over 60 years entitled to a lump sum payment?
(3) Are officers under 60 years entitled to a choice of either a lump sum or pension payments regardless of the number of years of service; if so, will the anomaly which discriminates against officers over 60 years be removed?
(4) Does Public Service Board circular (Ref: 81/3210) indicate that officers 60 years and over are entitled to a lump sum?
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) No. The level of Government-financed pension and any contributor-financed pension payable on age retirement under the Superannuation Act 1976 depends, inter alia, on the contributor's age at retirement. Contributors below age 60 with contributory service of at least one year are entitled, on involuntary early retirement, to the option of a lump sum in lieu of a Government-financed pension; contributors over age 60 do not have this option. However, contributors who were members of thesup.erseded Provident Account under the Superannuation Act 1922 are entitled to an option of a lump sum in lieu of a Government-financed pension on voluntary or involuntary retirement after age 60 (this option was provided on a no detriment basis as benefits for Provident Account contributors were in the form of a lump sum only).
(2) All persons who cease to contribute to the scheme (except those on leave without pay) are.eligible to receive a lump sum benefit of their contributions plus interest, in addition to any Government-financed benefits payable. Government-financed benefits for contributors who are over age 60 on retirement may be in the form of a lump sum if retirement is on the ground of invalidity after a short period of service or if the contributors were members of the superseded Provident Account.
(3) Benefits for contributors retiring on the ground of invalidity before age 60 may be in the form of a lump sum if their period of service is short or they were members of the superseded Provident Account. Contributors below age 60 with contributory service of at least one year have the choice, on involuntary retirement, of taking their Governmentfinanced benefits in the form of a pension (which reduces to nil where age at retirement is below 36) or a lump sum payment.
The lump sum option on involuntary retirement below age 60 is intended to give staff who are required to retire before a normal age for retirement a greater degree of flexibility in that they might pay the amount into a superannuation schem~ of a new employer or otherwise use it to provide for their ultimate retirement from the work force. On the other hand, contributors who have attained the age 60 are regarded as having reached a normal age for retirement and their Governmentfinanced benefits on involuntary retirement after that age take the form of the primary benefit available under the scheme, that is, a pension.
Consequently, it is not considered appropriate to amend the Superannuation Act 1976 to provide the option of a lump sum in lieu of a Government-financed pension to contributors retiring involuntarily after age 60.
(4) Paragraph 20 of PSB Circular 1981/17 as originally printed implied that all superannuation contributors who are retrenched had the option of taking their full superannuation benefits as a lump sum payment. In fact this is not the case and when the error was discovered in June the circular was reprinted and the paragraph now reads:

'Superannuation contributors who are compulsorily retired as a result of an excess staff situation will be eligible to receive a normal age retirement benefit if they have attained 60 years of age. Those compulsorily retired at an earlier age have the following involuntary retirement benefit options:
(a) a standard early retirement pension based on the pension that would have been payable if the date of retirement had been the contributor's 60th birthday, reduced by 4% for each year or part of a year that retirement occurs before age 60, plus additional pension based on accumulated contributions;
(b) standard early retirement pension as described above with a lump sum of accumulated contributions in lieu of additional pension; or
(c) a lump sum equivalent to three and a half times accumulated basic contributions plus any accumulated supplementary contributions.
Note: Standard early retirement pension in (a) and (b) above cuts out at retirement ages below 36.'
Social Welfare Division, Department of Social Security
(Question No, 3071)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 10 September 1981:
(I) Did the Prime Minister state on 30 April 1981 in relation to the review of the Social Welfare Division of the Department of Social Security that in the wider perspective the aim of the review is to establish the conditions under which there can be increased opportunities for all and better care for those in need.
(2) If so, how will the scaling down of the Social Welfare Division (Hansard, 30 April 1981, page 1848) allow increased opportunities for all and better care for those in need.
(3) Will the functions of the Social Welfare Division be transferred; if so, to where.
(4) What evidence was given of the need to scale down the Social Welfare Division.
(5) Will this evidence be made available to the pUblic.
(6) Who is conducting the review of the Social Welfare Division.
(7) Are outside consultants being employed on the Review.
(8) What are the qualifications of these consultants in social work.
(9)What fees have been or will be paid-to the consultants.
(10) What period will be spent on the Review.
(11) How many public service officers have been working on the review and for how many hours.
(12) Have extra staff been engaged to continue delivery of social welfare services.
(13) What backlog of work existed in the Social Welfare Division as at 9 September 1981.
(14) How many requests for childcare have not been processed.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) No. The particular reference in the Prime Minister's speech of 30 April 1981, mentioned by the honourable member, did not relate specifically to a review of the Social Welfare Division of the Department of Sodal Security but

3172 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

was made in the context of the aim of the Review of Commonwealth Functions generally.
(3) and (4) The review of the Social Welfare Division was conducted in the context of the decision of the Review of Commonwealth Functions that social work activity by departmental social worl<:ers and welfare officers be confined to that directly related to the delivery of Social Security benefits or Commonwealth programs and rehabilitation services.
(5) No. Conclusions are being considered by the Public Service Board and my department initially and will be considered by the Government if necessary.
(6) to (9) The Public Service Board's Office was responsible for the review in consultation with the Department of Social Security.
(10) The review commenced in mid-August and was completed by the end of September.
(II) Two officers from my department were seconded to assist the Public Service Board with the review, which was conducted over the period 10 August to 4 September 1981. Several officers from the Board were involved with various aspects of the review but in conjunction with other tasks and projects. An accurate estimate of the man-hours devoted specifically to the review is not available.
(12) While there is a close link with welfare staff, the Social Welfare Division is not directly involved in the delivery of welfare services. However, during the course of and subsequent to the concurrent review into the Department's social work activity, normal recruitment, subject of course to ceiling restraints, has continued in respect of:
(a) Social Worker positions in Rehabilitation and Work Preparation Centres;
(b) all vacant Social Worker Class 2 positions in the Department's Regional Offices;
(c) other vacant positions, e.g. Social Worker Class I and Welfare Officer, where these represent the sole 'welfare position' in a particular Regional Office.
(13) The work of the Social Welfare Division largely consists of major ongoing projects. As these projects are not always undertaken against strict timetables it is not possible to assess a tangible level of backlogs or arrears at any given time.
(14) Requests for child care are exillllined by the Office of Child Care in the Department and no disruption to processing has resulted from the review of the Social Welfare Division.
Aboriginals Employed In Australian Public Service
(Question No. 3072)
Mrs Kelly asked the Minister Assisting the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 10 September 1981:
(I) How many Aboriginals have been employed in the Australian Public Service in each year from 1973 to date.
(2) Is the Government committed to a policy of providing improved employment opportunities for Aboriginals in the Public Service; if so, why has there been a real decline in the number of Aboriginals employed in the Public Service.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The number of Aboriginals employed in the Australian Public Service is assessed by a survey conducted in October of each year. Results of theSe surveys indicate that Aboriginal employment in the Australian Public Service for the years 1973 to 1980 was as follows:

Survey date

Public

Public

Service

Service

Act Act Staff

Aboriginal

(at 30

Staff September)

Proportion
of Public Service
Act Staff who are
Aboriginal

I October 1973
I October 1974 I October 1975 I October 1976 I October 1977 I October 1978 I October 199 I October 1980

584 1,757 1,591 1,625 1,381 1,183
566 624

139,611 147,160 159,769 156,\34 155,159 152,546
150,010 151,256

(per cent) 0.42 1.19 1.00 1.04 0.89 0.78
0.38 0.42

(2) Yes, through implementation of the National Employment Strategy for Aboriginals (NESA). Implementation of NESA in the Public Service has so far resulted in:

provision of some 1800 vocational training opportunities for unemployed Aboriginals

the identification of some 740 positions which require a

knowledge and understanding of Aboriginals and an ability

to communicate with them

.

development of a special intake program called the Clerks (Aboriginal Services) Program

the taking of special measures to bring employment opportunities in the Public Service to the attention of Aboriginal people.

Aboriginal employment in the Public Service -has declined
since 1974 as a result of the transfer of many functions and the
associated staff from the Service in the Northern Territory to bodies such as Aboriginal Councilsand the Northern Terri-
tory Public Service. Staff of these bodies are not employed under the Public Service Act and are therefore not included in the Public Service Board annual surveys of Aboriginal staff
employed in the Public Service. While the numbers of Abor-
iginal staff transferred from Public Service Act employment in this manner is not readily available, an indication of the impact of these transfers upon total Aboriginal employment in
the Service is provided in the table below.

For example, as will be seen' from the table, in 1974 some
1488 out of a total of 1757 Aboriginal staff employed under the Public Service Act were employed in the Northern Terri-
tory. The majority of these staff were employed as exempt staff in departments such as Aboriginal Affairs, Education, Health, Housing and Construction and the then Department
of the Northern Territory. With the bulk of the functions of these departments in the Northern Territory having been subsequently transferred to the above-mentioned bodies, the
number of Aboriginal staff employed in the Service in the Territory has been reduced from 1488 in 1974 to 114 in 1980. On the other hand, the number of Aboriginal Staff employed else-
where in the Service has increased from 269 in 1974 to 510 in 1980. This latter growth can be attributed in part to implementation in the Australian Public Service of the Govern-
ment's national Employment Strategy for Aboriginals.

Survey date
I October 1973 I October 1974 I October 1975

Public Service
Act Northern Territory

Aboriginal
staff elsewhere

453

131

1,488

269

1,233

358

Total
584 1,757 1,591

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3173

Survey date
I October 1976 I October 1977 I October 1978 I October 1979 I October 1980

Public Service
Act Northern Territory

Aboriginal stalf
elsewhere

1,274

351

1,032

349

855

328

140

426

114

510

Total
1,625 1,381 1,183
566 624

Canberra Airport
(Question No. 3160)
Mr Scholes asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 17 September 1981:
(I) What is the estimated cost of upgrading Canberra Airport to anternational standards.
(2) What is the estimated recurring cost of providing international terminal facilities, customs and quarantine, at the airport.
(3) What is the projected passenger traffic from international sources.
(4) Will he make available to the Parliament detailed financial studies which justify the proposal to upgrade Canberra Airport to international standards.
Mr Hunt-The answers to the honourable. member's questions are as follows:
(I) (2) (3) and (4), The Government has not considered any proposal to upgrade Canberra Airport to cater for regular international services, nor am I aware of any such proposal from any airline to operate such a service. Therefore, I am unable to provide any detailed costs for any firm proposal.
Companies Act: Proposals for Amendments
(Question No. 3213)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs, upon notice, on 23 September 1981:
(I) Further to the answers which I sought to a number of matters during the debate on the Companies Bill 1981, and despite his detailed response of 26 May 1981, will he consider each of the undermentioned proposals as a basis for appropriate amendments to the Companies Act.
(2) In section 5 of the Act, Interpretation, is it a fact that, because of the Government's failure to simplify companies legislation, there are at least 6 confusingly similar but technically distinct modes of referring to the corporate entities to which the Act is in various ways applicable, namely, company, body corporate, corporation, foreign company, recognised company and recognised foreign company.
(3) Does the Government agree that exempt proprietary companies and the privileges associated with them should be abolished and all limited companies should be compelled to prepare and file audited reports; if not, why not.
(4) Under section 7 of the Act, Subsidiaries, holding companies and related corporations, will he initiate a fundamental reform of the company law, including the provision of statutory powers to the courts, to enable the lifting of the corporate veil in appropriate circumstances, including that whereby a holding and subsidiary company elfectively operates as a unit and where a private company acts as a trustee for a trading trust; if not, why not.

(5) Under section 12 of the Act, Power of Commission to require production of books, will he ensure that the powers of inspection given to the NCSC should be extended to ensure the fullest possible access of the Commission to books; if not, why not.
(6) Under section 16 of the Act, Privilege, will he ensure that any provision which enables questionable practices to be hidden. by means of legal professional privilege will be amended; if not, why not.
(7) With respect to sections 33 to 37 of the Act, does the Government agree that the Act should include a requirement for all companies to raise and maintain a prescribed minimum nominal and paid-up capital; if not, why not.
(8) With respect to sections 40 to 64 concerning names provisions, do the cumbersome provisions in respect of company names need to be rationalised, and is a good deal of the complexity attributable to the numerous related but technically distinct names applicable to the corporate entity.
(9) Has the opportunity been lost in the Act to simplify the company names procedure by enabling companies to make an available search on a national basis; if so, will he undertake to rationalise these sections as quickly as possible.
(10) Under section 67, Powers, does the Government agree that ii should have power to require disclosure of donations made by companies for political purposes; if not, why not.
(II) Under sections 94 to 109 dealing wit' prospectus provisions, is there a need for a full review of the provisions relating to fund-raising and prospectuses so as to ensure maximum disclosure and to require independent valuation of assets exchanged for sh1\re issues; if so, when will the Ministerial Council undertake such a review; if not, why not.
(12) Will he seek to amend section 117, Power to make certain payments, so that the discount allowed therein applies only to commissions paid to under-writers and the brokerage fees paid to registered sharebrokers in connection with an issue of company shares.
(13) Did the Explanatory Memorandum to the Bill, at paragraph 302, suggest that section 117 deals, in elfect, with the payment of commissions and brokerage and is based on section 58 except that it has been amended to cover all payments-cr. Fifth Interim Report of Eggleston Committee, paragraph 87; if so, did the Eggleston Committee recommend that the section should cover all payments or did it recommend that the section should make it clear that both underwriting and brokerage commissions at current commercial rates could be paid without contemplating that other payments or discounts should be permissible.
(14) Does section 117 as presently worded appear to permit a company to make a payment or provide a discount of up to 10 per cent of the issue price of the shares to any person or persons who undertakes to subscribe for, or to procure subscriptions for, the shares so that an ordinary subscriber could be given a discount of up to 10 per cent, and is it only if the company's memorandum or articles prohibit (cf. 'authorise' in section 58) the making of such a payment that it may not be made.
(15) Is it a fact that section 5 of Table A of Schedule 3 permits the company to exercise the power to pay commissions conferred by the Act, while the Act does not specifically mention commissions, and the power to pay such brokerage as is lawful.
(16) Is it also a fact that section 117 seems to permit more than one payment of up to 10 per cent of the issue price to be made in connection with the one share' issue, thus permitting an underwriter, a broker and subscriber to each receive a payment or discount equivalent to 10 per cent of this issue price, making a total payment of 30 per cent; if so, would such a result be considered scandalous.

3174 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(17) In section 125, Rights of holders of classes of shares, and in view of sub-sections 72 (I) and 73 (5) of the Act, does sub-section 125 (2) permit the alteration of a class rights clause which is contained in a company's memorandum of association, where there is no existing variation procedure or prohibition contained therein; if so, could this doubt be resolved by amending sub-section 125 (2) to read: 'Where rights are attached to shares included in a class of shares whether in the memorandum or articles of association of the company or otherwise',
(IS) Bearing in mind sub-section 72 (I) of the Act, can a class rights provision in a company memorandum be altered under sub-sections 125 (2),126 (2) or 127 (2).
(19) Does anything in these sections expressly say that the memorandum may be altered, although a variation may be added.
(20) If a company can alter a class rights clause in a memorandum, how can this be done, that is, by special or ordinary resolution.
(21) Is it a fact that the new paragraph 125 (2) (a) negates sub-section 73 (2) which indicates that a special resolution would be required (except for sub-section 73 (5, and sub-section 73 (5) should be amended to permit such alterations provided that section 125, 126 or 127 is complied.
(22) Will he give an assurance that the matters referred to in parts (17) to (21) will be clarified as quickly as possible.
(23) With respect to sections 129 and 130, Company fjnancing dealings in its shares, etc.; and Consequences of company financing dealings in its shares, etc, is a reform needed of the provisions relating to companies financing dealings in their own shares and, in particular, (a) should the exemption for financial assistance given to salaried directors in paragraphs 129 (I) (a) and 129 (I) (b) be removed and be a reference to paragraph 129 (9) (b), (b) should sub-section 129 (4) be clarified so that it is apparent which of a company's officers or employees must be aware of relevant facts for the company to be held to be aware of the same facts, and (c) should possibilities for abuse of sections 129 and 130 be further,considered; if not, why not.
(24) In section 229, Duty and liability of officers, will'he take take steps to insert a new sub-section based on section 3 of the Swedish Companies Act 1975 which deals with the protection of shareholders; if not, why not.
(25) In section 229, Duty and liability of officers, should provision be made for a higher standard of competence, care and diligence for directors and officers of companies and, in particular, should the standard of skill which is appropriate to directors and other officers be made explicitly objective.
(26) In relation to share transfers made to avoid liability for future calls, should a provision be inserted in the Act similar to section 391 of the South Australian Companies Act 1962-1979 to provide that any transfer of shares made within a period of 2 years before the commencement of the winding up of the company to any person known to the transferor to be unable to pay the liability on those shares shall not relieve the transferor of that liability.
(27) Does he still contend that a provision similar in effect to section 391 of the South Australian Companies Act was included in the April 19S0 exposure draft of the Companies Bill' at section 21SA with the only substantive difference between the 2 provisions being that, for the purposes ofsection 391, the relevant period is 2 years, whereas for clause 21SA, it was one year.
(2S) Was section 21SA deleted from subsequent drafts of the Companies Bill on the basis that it did not add anything to what is now section 360 of the Act (section 21S in the ICAC Companies Act) which provides that, subject to certain qualifications, every past and present member of a company

will be liable to contribute to the company's assets as it is being wound up.
(29) Will he undertake to reconsider the proposal to include section 391 of the South Australian Companies Act in the context of the overall review of the winding up provisions, and, in particular, those provisions dealing with the liabilities of contributories.
(30) Does he still contend that the only substantive difference between section 391 of the old South Australian Act and section 360 of the Commonwealth Act is that the relevant period is 2 years under section 391 whereas it is one year under section 360,
(31) Is the answer to part (30) well illustrated by transfers of shares in an unlimited liability company to a $2 limited liability company during the one or 2 years prior to winding up, and are shareholders in an unlimited liability company at the time the company commences to be wound up jointly and severally liable, without limit, for the debts of the company.
(32) Is it a fact that (a) it is only if those members are unable to contribute enough funds to satisfy those debts that past members may be liable under section 360 whereas under the old section 391 if the transfer was made to avoid liability on the shares the transferor remained liable, jointly and severally, (b) if section 391 had applied in Victoria when the Garrety Group of unlimited liability investment companies collapsed, the Garrettys could not have avoided personal liability for the companies' debts merely by setting up $2 companies and transferring their shares to those companies and (c) section 391 clearly served a useful purpose and should have been retained,
(33) In section 237, Provisions indemnifying officers or auditors, should 'officer' have the same meaning that it has in section 229 so that its provisions apply to privately appointed receivers andcourt appointed receivers, receivers and managers, and liquidators.
(34) Does the definition of 'officer' in sub-section 5 (I) apply to section 237 unless the contrary intention appears and is there nothing in section 237 itself to suggest a contrary intention, whereas the extended definition of 'officer' in section 229 is expressed by that section to apply only to that section; if so, will he take steps to clarify this matter as quickly as possible.
(35) With respect to section 247, Circulation of members' resolutions, etc. should individual members be able to insist on the company forwarding details of any resolution of the members at the same time as the notice of meeting is sent to all members with the expense of this being borne by the company.
(36) Should it also be possible for an individual shareholder to cause the company to circulate on his behalf a statement with respect to any business to be dealt with at the meeting with the cost of this circulation being at the shareholders' expense unless the company otherwise agrees.
(37) Does he still contend that section 247 is similar in effect to section 143 of the ICAC Companies Acts and also to clause 130 of the National Companies Bill.
(3S) If an individual member feels that the company is unreasonably preventing him from bringing the attention of members to a resolution he is proposing, may he then utilise the provisions of section 320 of the Act to seek a remedy; if so, how could directors, consistent with their duty, do less than explain in the notice of a meeting the effect of any resolutions to be proposed by members, and disclose any material interests of their own (Jenkins Committee paragraph 467).
(39) What is the justification for making the company rather than the relevant member/s pay for copies of resolutions circulated.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3175

(40) Could this lead to individual members proposing meaningless resolutions in the knowledge that it is the company as a whole, and not themselves, which has to bear the expense of circulating such resolutions.
(41) Could the suggested problems with the proposal be readily overcome by a section which allowed the company to obtain relief from the obligation, if the procedure was being used for frivolous, vexatious or illegal purposes.
(42) Has his attention been drawn to the Swedish experience which suggests that in reality shareholders are unlikely to abuse the procedure.
(43) Has his attention also been drawn to the fact that section 7 of Chapter 9 of the Swedish Companies Act 1975 states that a shareholder is entitled to have a matter dealt with at a general meeting of shareholders provided that the board of directors has received a request there for early enough to include the matter in the notice convening the meeting so that the company bears the expense of complying with such requests; if so, will he reconsider this matter and undertake to have it re-examined by the Ministerial Council.
(44) With respect to section 261, Power of company to obtain information as to beneficial ownership of its shares, will he seek to amend the Companies Act to provide for full .disclosure to the public of the beneficial ownership of all shares in companies; if not, why not.
(45) With respect to section 270, Directors' reports, will he seek to amend section 170 to provide (a) for directors' reports to state the details of the emoluments of directors which are included in the aggregate amount of emoluments shown in the accounts and (b) that the fixed salary of directors who are also full time employees must be disclosed; if not, why not.
(46) Will he seek to amend section 277, Qualifications of auditors, so that in sub-sections 277 (2) and 277 (12) the word 'unlimited' is inserted before 'exempt proprietary company'; if not, why not.
(47) Will he undertake to omit section 279, Exempt proprietary company need not appoint auditor in certain circumstances, from the Companies Act; if not, why not.
(48) Will he seek to amend section 320, Remedy in cases of oppression or injustice, to provide adequate remedies for shareholders where the affairs of the company are being conducted in an oppressive manner, and, in particular, make provision for (a) extending the concept of oppression to single and anticipated acts unfairly prejudicial to a shareholder and (b) a body such as a 'Shareholders Tribunal' to protect the interests of minority shareholders; if not, why not.
(49) In section 320, Remedy in cases of oppression or injustice, does sub-paragraph 320 (I) (a) (ii) merely restate the provisions of paragraph 364 (I) (f) which allows a shareholder to apply for a company to be wound up, if directors of the company are acting in their own interests rather than in the interests of the company as a whole; if so, what action will he take in this matter.
(50) With respect to section 324, Liability of receiver, will he seek to have included in the Act a provision in similar terms to section 345B of the New Zealand Companies Act, which provides that a receiver or manager of the property of a company who sells any of that property shall exercise all reasonable care to obtain the best price reasonably obtainable as at time of sale, the concept being that this duty is one that is owed by the receiver to the company, and it is not to be a defence to any action or proceeding brought by the company against the receiver or manager in respect of a breach of that duty that the receiver or manager was acting as the agent of the company, or under a power of attorney given by the company, nor is the receiver or manager entitled to be indemnified or compensated by the company for any liability he may incur as a result of the breach of his duty; if not, why not.

(51) With respect to section 535, Power to grant relief, will
he seek to amend sub-section 535 (4) so that it covers all persons who come within the section 229 definition of 'officer' and, in particular, so that privately appointed receivers who
are not also managers will be able to take advantage of the provisions of section 535; if not, why not.

(52) Will he take urgent steps to have a definition of profit included in section 565, Dividends payable from profits only.

(53) Would the definition of 'profit' in clause 376 of the exposure draft have entrenched most of the current unsatisfactory common law rules relating to profits available for dividend purposes.

(54) As the point was made during the debates that no distribution of dividends should be possible unless after the distribution the company's paid-up share capital would be represented by net assets, which is the basic EEC position as evidenced by the 1980 UK. Companies Act, will he ensure that an appropriate amendment on this matter will be included when dealing with forthcoming amendments.

(55) With respect to section 245, Proxies, will he seek to
amend the Act so that a shareholder will have the right not only to appoint a proxy but also to instruct a proxy in certain
specific and important matters, such as the appointment or dismissal of a director or an auditor.

(56) Will he reconsider the implementation of the mandatory use of two-way proxies which would encourage shareholders to exercise the right particularly where the chairman of the meeting is appointed as proxy.

(57) Will he ensure that such rights are provided for in the forthcoming amendments particularly as they relate to such important matters.

(58) Will he seek to amend the section of the Act dealing
with trading trusts so that, in order to protect creditors and to assist the prevention of tax avoidance, stringent disclosure re-
quirements will be imposed upon companies acting as trustees of trading trusts, or at the very least, the provisions of Parlia-
ment IV AA in the April 1980 exposure draft of the Companies Bill be reinstated; if not, why not.

(59) In PART VI, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT, Division 2, Accounts, will he undertake to have included in any
Companies Bill a requirement that listed companies prepare more frequent accounts; if not, why not.

(60) With respect to PART XII, WINDING UP, will he consider a complete reform of the winding up provisions in
the Act and, in particular, will he refer the whole question of
insolvency to the Australian Law Reform Commission for their examination; if not, why not.

(61) Will he give a guarantee that in any review of
company law he will undertake to consult with the National Institute of Criminology as to the appropriate amendments
needed to minimise corporation and white collar crime so rampant throughout society in Australia.

Mr MOORE-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) I have noted the matters raised by the honourable member in his question and will bear them in mind, to the
extent that they remain relevant, in the consideration by the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities of possible
amendments to the co-operative companies and securities scheme legislation. I have set out, below, a number of comments on some of the individual matters raised.

(2) The following points should be noted so far as the use of

these terms is concerned:

.

(a) The Companies Act 1981 would be considerably longer and more complicated if it were decided to re-
place the terms referred to with descriptive references

3176 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

within the body of each substantive provision indicating the circumstances in which a particular provision applied. The use of these different terms simply reflect differences in the way in which the Companies Act 1981 will apply to entitles having a different nexus with the relevant jurisdiction.
(b) The concept of a 'recognized foreign company' is new to the Companies Act only because it was thought that, consistent with the 'one place of registration' concept embodies in the scheme legislation, overseas corporations should have to register in only one of the jurisdictions covered by the scheme. The term is accordingly used to describe an overseas foreign company registered in a participating jurisdiction other than the A.C.T.
(c) A 'body corporate' is not separately defined in s. 5.11 is the terms used to encompass any corporate body however formed.
(3) This proposal would represent a major departure from existing Australian companies legislation. However, see my answer to question (I).
(4) There are a number of provisions in the Companies Act 1981 which already give recognition to the principle that in certain circumstances the 'corporate veil' should be lifted to impose personal liability on defaulting officers. An example of such a provision is s. 556 which provides that if a debt is incurred by a company when there were no reasonable grounds to expect that it could be repaid, then any defaulting officer will be guilty of an offence and jointly and severally liable with the company for the payment of the debt to the creditor.
The Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities has set up a working party to formulate proposals in relation to trading trusts for consideration by the Ministerial Council.
(5) The NCSC already has extensive powers, subject to certain safeguards, for the inspection of company books where criminal activity is suspected and represent a significant strengthening of the powers in the existing State and Territory companies legislation. However, see my answer to question (I).
(6) Section 16 of the Companies Act 1981 represents an attempt, on the one hand, to balance the policy objective that the NCSC should have adequate powers to obtain information for the purposes of exercising its functions with, on the other hand, the consideration that privileged communications between solicitor and client should be protected. The Honourable Member will be aware that section 16 has been amended by the Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981 to impose further disclosure requirements on legal practitioners who make a claim of legal professional privilege. These practitioners will not now be able to claim privilege in respect of:
(a) the name and address of the person on whose behalf the privilege is claimed; and
(b) the particulars required to identify the book, or the part of the book, containing the privileged communication.
(7) See my answer to question (I), When this question is considered, the following issues (among others) will need to be settled before any final decision could be made:
(a) An appropriate level for paid-up capital (The present United Kingdom Pounds Sterling is 50,000 for a public company).
(b) Whether proprietary companies should be required to have a minimum paid-up capital and what effect this would have on small business. (There is no minimum paid-up capital requirement for private companies in the UK Company Law Act 1980).

(c) The transitional provisions that are to apply to existing companies whose paid-up capital is less than the prescribed minimum.
(d) Whether the National Companies and Securities Commission should have a discretion to register companies with less than the statutory minimum capital.
(8) and (9) Division IV of Part III of the Companies Act is an attempt to deal as simply as possible with the procedures that are provided for in the Formal Agreement. See, however, my answer to question (I).
(10) II was not considered that a major new disclosure requirement of this nature was appropriate for inclusion in the initial companies legislation to be enacted under the cooperative scheme. See, however, my answer to question (I).
(II) The National Companies and Securities Commission is currently considering the fund-raising provisions of the Companies Act.
(12) to (16) I have asked my Department to undertake further work on these questions so that I can discuss the matter at an appropriate time in the Ministerial Council for
Companies and Securities. Among other things i have asked
my Department to have regard to para 87 of the fifth interim report of the Company Law Advisory Committee (Eggleston Committee) which is in the following terms:
'87 Section 58 deals with the questions of payment of brokerage or commission for subscribing or agreeing to subscribe for shares, or procuring or agreeing to procure subscriptions. Sub-sections (I), (2) and (4) refer only to commissions, and allow a commission of up to 10 per centum, subject to certain conditions. Sub-section (3) provides that nothing in the section is to affect the power of the company to pay such brokerage 'as it has hitherto been lawful for a company to pay' subject to certain requirements as to disclosure. Such a provision is obviously unsatisfactory, since it is extremely difficult to advise anyone with certainty as to what rate of brokerage was lawful in the early years of this century, when the provision was first introduced. Prior to the introduction of section 58, it was held in Metropolitan Coal Consumers Association v. Scrimgeour (1895) 2 Q.B. 604, that payment to brokers of a reasonable commission for their services in procuring SUbscriptions was lawful, and it seems that the United Kingdom equivalent to sub-section (3) was proposed by Lord Halsbury to preserve the effect of that decision. The brokerage paid in that case was in fact 2.5 per cent. The General Revision Bill proposed the repeal of sub-section (3) and the inclusion of a reference to brokerage where reference is made to commission elsewhere in the section. The form of the amendment would in our view leave room for doubt as to whether in some cases both brokerage and commission at the rate of 10 per cent each might not be allowable, and we would regard this as excessive in view of the rates of brokerage provided for in respect of share issues of which we have knowledge. In the draft in Appendix 'A' we have limited the total allowable for brokerage and commission to 10 per cent but we do not feel that the subject is one of which our views are entitled to any special weight '.
(17) to (22) The honourable member will be aware ofs. 35 to s. 37 of the Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981. See also my answer to question (I).
(23) See my answer to question (I).
(24) The issues raised by section 3 of the Swedish Companies act 1975 are complex and require careful consideration since that section impinges on the right of shareholders to use their voting power. II has been an implicit principle in our company law that a vote attached to a share is a property right and that a shareholder is entitled to deal with

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3177

that property right as he sees fit. There is, however, the safeguard that a shareholder may not use his voting rights to perpetrate a fraud on the minority (see e.g. s. 320 of the Companies Act).
(25) Section 229 of the Companies Act 1981 is wider than the corresponding provisions in s. 124 of the existing ICAC Companies Act.
(26) to (31) See my answer to question (I). The following differences between s. 391 of the Companies Act and clause 218A of the April 1980 exposure draft are noted:
(a) Sub-section 391 (2) only applies if the transfer was made with the purpose of avoiding or evading liability in relation to the shares in question. There was no such limitation in clause 218A.
(b) Para 218A (3) (d) contained'the new stipulation that the transfer would be void if consideration in relation to the transfer was paid to a relative of or a person associated with, the transferee.
(c) Sub-clause 218A (4) made it clear that nothing in clause 218A affected the liability of persons registered as the holder of the relevant shares at the time of the commencement of the winding up. There is no equivalent provision in s, 391.
The following additional differences between s. 391 of the South Australian Companies Act and s. 360 of the Companies Act 1981 are noted:
(a) s. 360 applies to make past members liable irrespective of the fact that the transfer of shares may have been made in good faith and for full consideration. In this sense, therefore, s. 360 is wider in scope than s. 391.
(b) s. 360 does not, with one exception, apply to past members unless existing members are unable to satisfy the company's liabilities. (Para 360 (I) (c. The applicability of s. 391 does not, however depend on this factor.
(c) The liability of past members pursuant to s. 360 for the company's debts does not apply in respect of debts contracted after they ceased to be members, (para 360 (I) (c whereas ifs. 391 applies then the liability of the transferor will continue without any restriction.
(d) s. 360 has special rules to cover the situation where the company in question has changed its status from a unlimited liability company to a limited liability company within 3 years of the commencement of the widing up.
(33) and (34) See now s. 49 of the Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981.
(35) to (42) Section 247 of Companies Act 1981 is similar in effect to section 143 of he ICAC Companies Acts and also to clause 130 of the National Companies Bill. See also para 467 of the Jenkis Committee Report, the terms of which are as follows:
'It appears to us that the language of section 207 (I) (a) to which reference is made above, is really little more than declaratory of the existing law as applied to the case with which the section deals. It is difficult to see how directors could consistently with their duty do less than explain the effect of the resolution to be proposed, and disclose any material interests of their own, and the effect thereon of the resolutions so far as different from their effect on the like interests of others. It may no doubt be said that if this is already the law there is no need of any statutory provision about it. There is force in this argument. On the other hand, the fact that section 207 (I) (a) makes specific provision for a particular case coupled with the fact that there is no general provision in the Act prescribing the duties of directors in relation to circulars dealing with matters to be discussed at meetings may mislead directors and other officers of a company into thinking that they need do no more than comply with the specific provisions of the Act. On the

whole, therefore, we think the inclusion in the Act of a general provision declaratory of the existing law on this matter may serve as a reminder to directors and other officers of duties of which they may not be fully aware. The provision we have in mind would require directors who issue a notice or other circular relating to a meeting of a company or of any class of its shareholders, to state with reasonable precsion the nature of the business to be transacted, giving such explanations and additional information as may be necessary, and in particular, where such information as may be necessary, and in particular, where such information is material, disclosing any interests of the directors in the proposed transactIons and the effect thereon of those transactions so far as it is different from their effect on the like interests of other members. As to the position of a member who issues circulars in his private capacity we do not think that his present position is so strong that the directors or his fellow members need to be protected against him by special legislation. '
(43) See my answer to question (1).
(44) The Eggleston Committee considered (para. II of the Second Interim Report) whether all nominee shareholders should be required to notify the company of the names of their principals. The Committee concluded that any general requirement applicable to all nominees would impose a heavy burden and would for the most part serve no useful purpose. The substantial shareholding provisions in the Companies Act (Division 4 of Part IV) have the effect of requiring full disclosure of any interests (be they beneficial or otherwise) a person or company has in a company where that interest is in more than 10 per cent of the voting shares of that company. The information given to a company in compliance with these provisions is required to be maintained on a public register (s. 143). The notification period for acquisition of, or changes in, substantial shareholdings has been reduced from 14 days to 2 days.
(45) I have directed my Department to examine these issues so that I can raise them in the Ministerial Council at an appropriate time. In so far as inspection of director's service contracts is concerned, it can be argued that this is a matter that should be regulated by the company's articles.
(46) and (47) See my answer to question (1).
(48) and (49) This Ministerial Council has asked the National Companies and Securities commission to prepare a report on the desirability of proposals that an alternative statutory remedy for shareholders should be provided to protect them against abuse of power by directors and other officers and persons. I am also considering the reforms that have been made in this area of the law by the United Kingdom Companies Act 1980 and the New Zealand Companies Amendment Act 1980.
(50) The Companies Act 1981 does not at present purport to provide a complete code of conduct regulating the behaviour of receivers. See however, my answer to question (I). In relation to the New Zealand provision itself, it should be noted that the position in New Zealand following the amendment is that although a receiver could be liable in certain circumstances for negligence, such circumstances could not relate to his decision to sell, but only to his subsequent conduct of the sale. His obligation under the section is to 'obtain the best price reasonably obtainable as at the time of sale'. The section does not state that he must exercise reasonable care in actually selecting the date of the sale.
(51) See s. 80 of the Companies and Securities Legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Act 1981.
(52) to (59) See my answer to question (1). The accounts of all companies are required to be prepared once every financial year (see s. 269 of the Companies Act 1981). In addition,
if a company is listed on the Stock Exchange, th,en the AASE

3178 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

listing requirements on the preparation of accounts will apply. The relevant requirements are as follows:
listed companies must prepare reports on a half yearly basis.
additional requirements are placed on mining companies.
listing rules also require explanations and disclosure of information affecting a listed company or the market for its securities.
(60) See my answer to question (I).
(61) Consistently with practices it has adopted in the past, I would expect that the Ministerial Council would normally agree that any Bills containing substantive amendments to the co-operative scheme legislation will be exposed for public comment in order that all interested persons and organizations may express their views.
Porta printer
(Question No, 3267)
Mr McLean asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the existence of the telephonic aid for the deaf called Portaprinter.
(2) If so, is he able to say what is the cost of this equipment.
(3) How many of these machines are in use by deaf people in each State and Territory.
(4) Have any Commonwealth Government departments and authorities installed these machines; if so, which departments and authorities.
(5) Has Telecom Australia offered, or does it intend to offer, any concessions, subsidies, or other assistance, in order to make this equipment more accessible to deaf people.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. The Portaprinter is available direct from Intercept Communications Pty Ltd or through Telecom.
(2) The sale price of a Porta printer Plus is $996 to Government departments and Commercial Organisations, and $846 if sold to disabled persons and their respective institutions.
(3) Telecom understands that a total of 122 Portaprinters have been sold in Australia, of which 69 have been purchased for use by deaf people. Of the latter, there are 30 in New South Wales, 25 i.n Yictoda, nine in South Australia, four in Tasmania and one in Queensland.
(4) Telecom has purchased 21 units, the Department of Social Security three and the National Acoustic Laboratories five.
(5) No. Subsidies and assistance of this nature are considered within the overall framework of the Government's Social Security programs.
Postage Rates for Service Organisations
(Question No, 3275)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice,.on 13 October 1981:
(I) With reference to the excellent work carried out by service organisations such as Apex, Lions and Rotary Clubs throughout Australia, has it been drawn to his attention that these organisations annually raise and contribute millions of dollars to community development and overseas aid and that thousands of dollars are spent annually by these service clubs on postage.

(2) Does he recognise that the costs of postage which is essential to these organisations as a form of communication to their members, limits the funds that would otherwise be available for worthwhile community projects.
(3) If so, will the Government consider re-c1assifying the postage rate for regular newsletters, dinner notices, et cetera, for these service organisations from category B to category A, if utilised by the service clubs in community projects.
Mr SincIair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) Yes.
(3) No. Eligibility requiremenfs for registration of publications are set out in the Australian Postal Commission Postal By-laws. Unless publications satisfy the special conditions prescribed in the Postal By-laws for inclusion in Category A, publications eligible for registration are classified as Category B publications.
Classification as a Category A publication is restricted to four types of organisations and registration is determined according to the dominant aims, intention or conduct of the person or organisation involved. Moreover, the dominant intention of the organisation in publishing the publication. is significant.
Category A registration is restricted to publications which are:
published by an organisation, the dominant purpose of which is the investigation or relief of particular disabilities of individual persons. Additionally, the publication must consist mainly of articles relating to that dominant purpose.
published by a religious organisation and contain articles which relate to the interests of members of that organisation. (Publications reflecting social, recreational and scholastic activities are excluded);
a 'returned serviceman's' publication; or
a 'country interest' publication.
(Note: Specially excluded from registration as Category A publications are the publications of the following types of organisations: social, recreational, motorists, employerjemployee, business (other than primary production) and professional.)
Australia Post has examined the constituent documents and activities of the Apex, Lions and Rotary organisations. Whilst it is recognised that these organisations are interested in and carry out worthwhile work in respect of the relief of disabilities of individual persons, activities of this nature do not rank as the dominant purpose and function of these organisations. Furthermore, their publications generally reflect the widerbased interests of the organisation and are concerned largely with administrative and social matters. Accordingly, the publications of Lions, Apex and Rotary are not eligible for Category A registration.
Pensioner Concession Cards
(Question No. 3285)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:
Has any State branch of the Department of Social Security experienced delays in sending out pensioner concession cards; if so, what has been the cause of the delay.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3179

The ad hoc issue of pensioner concession cards was interrupted in Brisbane between 16 and 25 September 1981 owing to supply problems. In Sydney, staffing difficulties have delayed some card issues by up to twelve days.
Other States have experienced no delays in issuing concession cards.
South Australia and Victoria Boundary
(Question No. 3291)
Mr Jacobi asked the Minister representing the Attorney-General, upon notice, on 13 October 1981:
(I) Has the Attorney-General's attention been drawn to the answer to Question No. 2704 given by the Minister for National Development and Energy (Hansard, 9 September 1981, page 1141), wherein the Minister indicated that the question of the exact location of part of the boundary (that is about 11.1 kms) between the States of South Australia and Victoria have never been clearly resolved nor has it been seriously challenged and that the question is one for resolution by the 2 states.
(2) If so and in view of the fact that this Il.l km distance is undefined, is it possible to reach a tentative conclusion from the judgments of Griffith C. J. in South Australia v, Victoria (1911) 12C.L.R. 667 and Stephen J. in Wardv. R. (1980) 29 A.L.R. 175 and the material they cite.
(3) Was the South Australia/New South Wales border before 1850, when Victoria was established, assumed to follow the 141 E longitude.
(4) Was the border delimited on the ground from a point near the Glenelg River on the south coast of Australia to the 36S latitude by an arrangement between New South Wales and South Australia which the High Court held in 1912 became binding upon its proclamation in 1847 and which was not subsequently varied.
(5) Was the line some 3 km west of where it should have been.
(6) When Victoria was separated from New South Wales in 1850 and its northern boundary was stated to follow the Murray River to the eastern boundary of the Colony of South Australia, is it now clear that this actual line followed the Murray bank on the south side, leaving the whole watercourse of the MurrllY in New South Wales.
(7) Was the original attempt to delimit the South Australian boundary south of the Murray intended to extend only to the Murray.
(8) Was the erroneous line then established continued to the Murray in 1850, but after Victoria was estabished.
(9) As no attempt was made to extend that line over the Murray, does it therefore follow thllt the Victorian boundary was established at the intersection of that line with the northern boundary of Victoria extending along the southern bank of the Murray.
(10) At that time anf for some time later was no attempt made to delimit the New South Wales/South Australia boundary north of the Murray; is so, does it folow that that boundary still followed the actual line of 141E longitude until the Victoria border.
(II) Was a proposal made simply to extend the actual South Australian/Victorian boundary north to the 'northern boundary of South Australia, but because it had then become apparent that the South Australian/Victorian boundary was inaccurate, the present New South Wales/South Australia boundary was delimited in 1868 following much more closely the true line of 141  E longitude.

(12) Although its line seems to have started physically on the north bank of the Murray (see Griffith C. J.'s judgment at page 696), does it seem clear that it must be taken to have extended from the actual Victorian border whatever that was (and at the time that was disputed).
(13) Does it follow that the New South Wales/South Australia border begins on the South bank of the Murray and that the whole watercourse of the Murray to the west of the border is within South Australia.
(14) In view of the fact that this portion of the boundary has not been delimited, presenting the possibility either of a legal vacuum or of jurisdictional conflict and difficulties, such as occurred in Ward's Case, what steps will be taken in an effort to resolve this problem' and to enable the question between the 2 States to be resolved in the public interest as quickly as possible.
Mr Viner-The Attorney-General has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
It is not proposed to comment on the legal and other matters raised by the question. They are primarily the concern of the States involved.
Trade Development Centre, Melbourne
(Question No. 3311)
Mr Holding asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 14 October 1981:
(I) Did he issue a Press release on I October 1981 confirming the Government's decision to establish a Trade Development Centre in Melbourne for use by developing countries; if so, what is the expected cost of this proposal.
(2) What developing countries made representations to him requesting the development of this centre and what was the nature of those representations.
(3) Does the cost of this project represent additional funds in the overseas aid program or does it represent a reduction in the existing level of funding; if so, what particular programs will be cut or terminated.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes. The estimated cost for 1981-82 is $150,000.
(2) A number of informal approaches were made after successful establishment of a similar Centre in Sydney.
(3) No. Funding for the project was part of the 1981-82 aid vote.
Video Access Centres
(Question No, 3312)
Mr Holding asked the Minister for Home Affairs and Environment, upon notice, on 14 October 1981:
(1) When were the Video Access Centres in Carlton, Footscray and Williamstown, Vic., opened, and by whom were they opened.
(2) How many staff were employed at that time in each centre.
(3) When was each centre closed and what was the reason for the closure in each case.
(4) How many staff were employed at each centre at the time of clsure.

3180 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(5) Was any attempt made to provide alternative employment for staff with technical expertise; if so, what are the details.
Mr Wilson-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am informed by the Australian Film Commission that:
(I) The video centres at Carlton and Footscray were opened in the first half of 1974 by the Australian Film Institute, acting on behalf of the Film, Radio, and Television Board of the Australia Council. By August 1976 the centres had become autonomous incorporated bodies funded by grants from the Australian Film Commission. Carlton Video Centre became the Melbourne Access Video and Media Cooperative and subsequently moved to premises in Fitzroy. The Footscray centre merged with a centre in Altona into the Western Communications Co-operative and the premises .moved to Williamstown and subsequently to Newport.
(2) At the time of opening, the video centres at Carlton, Footscray and Altona each employed two full-time staff, as well as part-time paid assistants.
(3) Western Communications at Newport closed in July 1981 as a result of a decision by the Film Commission to discontinue funding to small video access centres. The centre at Fitzroy is still in operation, with support from the Film Commission.
(4) At the time of closure the Western Communications Co-operative had a staff of two full-time employees.
(5) The Commission has received advice that the two full time employees of the Western Communications Cooperative have obtained employment with a Television Station in Melbourne.
Drugs: Raids by Australian Federal Police
(Question No. 3323)
Dr Cass asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 14 October 1981:
(I) How many raids have been conducted by the Australian Federal Police in Victoria in the course of investigations of possible criminal activity in relation to drugs in each of the last 4 years.
(2) How many of these raids were carried out in the Melton, Deer Park, Laverton and Werribee areas in each year.
(3) How many (a) raids were carried out in the same areas on 31 May 1980 and I June 1980, and (b) premises were raided and on how many premises were drugs found.
(4) Were any of the raids conducted on the wrong premises due to incorrect addresses being given to the officers concern; if so, have apologies been provided to the occupants and if no apologies have been made, what is the reason.

Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Australian Federal Police has been responsible for drug invcstigations at the Federal level since 6 November 1979. Information relating to drug investigations prior to that date has been obtained from the records of the former Federal Bureau of Narcotics which then came within the portfolio of the Minister for Business and Consumer Affairs.
(I) 1978222; 1979167; 1980 158; 198158 (to 30 October).
(2) 1978 Nil; 1979 2; 1980 Nil; 1981 Nil.
(3)(a) Nil; (b) Nil.
(4) No.
Education: Expenditure
(Question No. 3325)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 15 October 1981:
(I) What sum was spent on (a) primary and (b) secondary education from funds provided by (i) the Commonwealth Government, (ii) each State government and (iii) other sources, specifying the major ones, for each year since 1970.
(2) Can he provide a breakdown of the figures sought in part (1) for (a) government, (b) catholic and (c) other private schools.
(3) What were the total enrolments for each of the categories referred to in part (2) for each of the same years.
(4) What was the expenditure per student (a) according to each source of funds and (b) in total, for each of the categories referred to in part (2) for each year.
(5) Will he provide these figures in both current expenditure and real terms.
(6) What was the retention rate for the matriculation year of secondary education for (a) males and (b) females in each of the categories referred to in part (2) for each year.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I )-(5) Tables I to 3 provide the information sought from 1973-74 to 1979-80. These details were derived chiefly from data provided by the Commonwealth Schools Commission and comparable figures are not available prior to 1973-74, nor is it possible to produce information by State. Some information on individual State expenditure is available from other sources and is provided in the answer to Question No. 3326. Further information on the expenditure trends within the non-government sector are provided within the answer to Question No. 3327.
(6) Table 4 shows apparent retention rates from 1970 to 1980. These rates are measures of the tendencies of members of student cohorts to remain in school from the first secondary year to the final year of secondary schooling.

TABLE I: COMMONWEALTH AND STATE GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE ON SCHOOLS IN THE SIX STATES 1973-74 TO 1979-80 $m

Government SchoolsState (a)

1973-74 1269.5

1974-75 1975-76 (Actual prices) 1668.8 2102.0

1976-77 2412.0

1977-78 2741.7

1978-79 2974.0

1979-80 3335.3 (est)

Commonwealth

102.2 1371.7

316.7 1985.5

334.7 2436.7

379.3 2791.3

416.6 3158.3

413.3 3387.3

407.6 3742.9

Answers to Questions

18 ~overnber 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3181

Non-government SchoolsState (b)
Commonwealth

1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

46.1

58.9

84.4

107.5

129.6

146.2

153.1 (c)

74.4

138.5

162.9

200.1

232.6

269.0

301.5

Government SchoolsState (a) . . Commonwealth

120.5

197.4

247.3

(est. Dec. 1980 prices)

2734.5 233.3

2903.8 570.7

3158.9 512.8

307.6
3262.4 521.8

362.2
3426.3 530.1

415.2
3501.4 494.0

454.6
3611.0 (est) 444.5

Non-government SchoolsState (b) Commonwealth

2967.8
97.2 161.1

3474.5
100.7 241.8

3671.7
125.3 246.0

3784.2
144.2 270.6

3956.4 160.6 291.3

3995.4
171.0 318.0

4055.5
165.2 (c) 326.9

258.3

342.5

371.3

414.8

451.9

489.0

492.1

Notes: (a) Excludes expenditure on scholarships, preservice teacher education, transport and repayment of Commonwealth loans. (b) Excludes expenditure on scholarships, preservice teacher education, and transport. (c) Figure is atypical since a change in accounting procedures in Victoria has led to approximately 25% of Victoria's expendi-
ture which would have normally been incurred in 1979-80 being carried forward to 1980-81. Source: Commonwealth Schools Commission and Commonwealth Department of Education.
TABLE 2: SCHOOL ENROLMENTS-SIX STATES

1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79 1979-80

Government Schools Non-government Schools

2,194,335 2,220,210 2,252,576 2,278,312 2,291,852 2,284,752 2,266,231 599,646 603,775 606,558 610,587 616,731 625,676 638,457

2,793,981 2,823,985 2,859,134 2,888,899 2,908,583 2,910,428 2,904,688

Source: Derived from Schools. Australia ABS Cat. No. 4202.0.
TABLE 3: COMMONWEALTH AND STATE GOVERNMENT PER PUPIL EXPENDITURE ON SCHOOLS IN THE SIX STATES 1973-74 to 1979-80

1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79

Government Schools-
State (a) Commonwealth

$

$

$

$

$

$

(Actual Prices)

579

752

933

1,059

1,196

1,302

47

143

149

166

182

181

Non-government SchoolsState (b)
Commonwealth

625

894

1,082

1,225

1,378

1,483

77

98

139

176

210

234

124

229

269

328

377

430

Government SchoolsState (a)
Commonwealth

201

327

408

(est. Dec. 1980 prices)

1,246 106

1,308 257

1,402 228

504
1,432 229

587
1,495 231

664
1,533 216

Non-government Schools-
Slate (b) Commonwealth

1,352
162 269

1,565
167 400

1,630
207 406

1,661
236 443

1,726
260 472

1,749
273 508

431

567

612

679

733

782

Notes: (a), (b) and (c)-see Notes to Table I. Any discrepancies between totals and sums of components are due to rounding.

1979-80 $
1,472 (est) 180
1,652 240 (c) 472 712
1,593 (est) 196
1,790 259 (c) 512 770

3182 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

TABLE 4: APPARENT RETENTION RATES AUSTRALIA

1st to Final Year

Males Females Persons

1st to Final Year

Males Females

1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980
1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980
1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980
1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980
1970 1971 1972 1973

Government

27.3

22.0

28.4

23.1

30.2

24.8

29.2

26.6

27.6

26.9

28.4

28.8

28.6

30.7

27.8

31.9

27.0

32.3

26.1

31.9

25.2

31.9

Non-government

53.4

35.8

55.3

38.0

56.1

41.5

58.0

44.2

58.3

47.0

57.9

49.1

57.5

50.7

57.5

52.5

55.5

53.6

56.0

54.8

56.9

55.4

Catholic

39.3

24.9

41.7

27.1

41.7

29.3

44.1

32.0

44.6

34.1

45.9

36.4

44.9

38.5

46.0

40.7

44.4

42.0

44.7

43.6

45.6

44.1

Other Non-government

94.0

68.4

93.3

70.9

94.6

78.3

95.1

80.9

94.4 ,

86.1

89.6

86.7

90,5

87.1

87.6

87.5

83.8

87.4

85.8

88.5

86.4

89.5

AIl Schools

33.0

25.5

34.1

26.9

35.7

28.9

35.2

30.8

Persons
24.8 25.9 27.6 27.9 27.3 28.6 29.6 29.7 29.6 28.9 28.4
44.1 46.1 48.5 50.8 52.5 53.4 54.0 54.9 54.5 55.4 56.1
31.6 33.9 35.2 37.7 39.1 40.9 41.5 43.2 43.1 44.1 44.8
80.6 81.7 86.5 88.0 90.3 88.2 88.9 87.6 85.5 87.1 87.9
29.3 30:6 32.4 33.1

1974
1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980

34.1

31.6

32.9

34.6

33.6

34.1

34.6

35.3

34.9

34.0

36.6

35.3

33.1

37.3

35.1

32.4

37.2

34.7

31.9

37.3

34.5

Source: Statistical Monograph No.3: Apparelll Grade Retelllion Rates and Age Participation Rates, Commonwealth Department of Education Statistics Unit, July 1981
Education: Expenditure
(Question No. 3326)
Mr Hayden asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 15 October 1981:
(I) What was the total expenditure on education in Australia by (a) the Commonwealth Government, (b) each State government and (c) other sources, specifying the major sources, for each year since 1970.
(2) Can be provide a breakdown of the figures sought in part (I) between the major areas of (a) universities, (b) colleges of advanced education, (c) technical and further education and other technical education institutions, (d) secondary schools, (e) primary schools and (f) pre-schools.
(3) What proportion of gross domestic product was the total expenditure for each year specified.
(4) Will he provide the financial statistics requested in both current expenditure and real terms.
(5) Is he able to say what proportion of GOP expenditure was spent on education in OECD member countries for each of the same years.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable, member's question is as follows:
(I) to (3) Tables I to 6 show expenditure in each State from 1973-74 to 1978-79 of Commonwealth specific purpose payments and expenditure from State government resources. Table 7 shows expenditure by both Commonwealth and State Governments in Australia from 1973-74 to 1978-79. Commonwealth expenditure in Table 7 includes specific purpose payments to the States, expenditure in the Territories and expenditure on programs not distributed to the States. As Commonwealth expenditure in Tables I to.6 is limited to specific purpose payments to the States, Table 7 is not a summary table. Different sources have been utilised in these tables from those used in Tables I and 2 in answer to Question No. 3325 in an endeavour to have information comparable across all sectors of education, but at the expense of'data provided for schools in Question No. 3325 not being strictly comparable with Table 7 here.
(4) The statistics requested have only been provided in current expenditure terms, as information is not readily available at this stage to convert these data to real terms.

Commonwealth specific purpose payments for education purposesPrimary and secondary education
University education
Other higher education Vocational training Other
Total

1973-74
60.7 96.5 36.6 12.7
2.1 208.5

1974-75
160.8 172.5 103.3
16.2 10.8 463.7

1975-76
174.4 190.6 92.8
26.6 13.4 497.8

1976-77
199.9 217.2 118.0
29.0 15.7 579.8

1977-78
229.7 240.8 110.2
34.3 12.8 627.8

1978-79
240.4 252.0 125.2
40.3 8.0
665.9

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3183

1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79

State and local authorities outlay on education exclusive of Commonwealth specific purpose paymentsTransportation of students Primary and secondary education
University education Other higher education Vocational training Other
Total
State and local authorities outlay on education inclusive of Commonwealth specific purpose paymentsTransportation of students Primary and secondary education
University education Other higher education Vocational training
Other education programs Unallocated (including general administration)
Total

30.0 424.5
28.8 35.7
40.2 16.4 575.7

40.4 555.4
1.3 30.8
56.9 17.2 701.9

50.1 701.7
0.6 44.8 70.3 28.7 896.3

56.3 746.4
1.0 39.9
83.8 36.3 963.7

76.2 870.2
0.5 37.0 104.9 38.3 1,127.0

84.3 946.5
9.1 33.7
117.0 48.5 1,239.1

30.0 485.2 125.3
72.3 52.9
2.5 16.0 784.2

40.4 716.2
173.8 134.1 73.1
11.0 17.0 1,165.6

50.1 876.1 191.2
137.6 96.9 19.7 22.4
1,394.1

56.3
946.3 218.2 157.9 112.8
27.0 25.0 1,543.5

76.2 1,099.9
241.3 147.2 139.2
24.9 26.2 1,754.8

84.3 1,186.9
261.1 158.9 157.3
26.9 29.6 1,905.0

TABLE 2-STATE AND LOCAL AUTHORITIES: OUTLAY ON EDUCATION-VICTORIA ($m)

1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79

Commonwealth specific purpose payments for education purposesPrimary and secondary education
University education Other higher education
Vocational training Other
Total State and local authorities outlay on education exclusive
of Commonwealth specific purpose paymentsTransportation of students Primary and secondary education
University education Other higher education
Vocational trainiflg Other
Total State and local authorities outlay on education inclusive
of Commonwealth specific purpose paymentsTransportation of students
Primary and secondary education
University education Other higher education Vocational training Other education programs Unallocated (including general administration)
Total

50.4 67.6 60.4 7.3
1.9 187.6
15.1 371.8
180 53.0 16.1 24.0 498.1
15.1 422.2
85.6 113.4 23.4
19.2 6.7 685.7

136.0 117.1 118.6
13.4 9.7 394.7

154.1
120.2 145.6
17.0 13.0 450.0

180.0 145.2 161.9
23.2 16.8 527.2

189.6 164.7 160.5
23.9 16.6 555.2

201.7 169.7 169.6
33.1 10.0 584.0

18.9 474.0
1.2 48.6 15.9
41.1 599.7

23.0 606.9
0.1
40.1 17.1
46.2 733.3

27.0
684.9 1.9
35.4 32.5
62.1 843.7

29.7 8\3.9
1.2 31.5 28.1 78.0 982.4

32.8 875.9
1.2 21.1 47.4
89.8 1,068.4

18.9 6\0.0 118.3 167.2
29.3 36.0 14.8 994.4

23.0 761.0 120.3 185.7
34.1 41.2 18.0 1,183.3

27.0 864.9 147.1 197.3
55.7 57.1 21.8 1,370.9

29.7 1,003.5
165.9 192.0
52.0 64.8 29.8 1,537.6

32.8 1,077.6
170.9
190.7 80.5 70.1 29.7
1,652.4

TABLE 3-STATE AND LOCAL AUTHORITIES: OUTLAY ON EDUCATION-QUEENSLAND ($m)

1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79

Commonwealth specific purpose payments for education purposesPrimary and secondary education
University education Other higher education Vocational training Other
Total

22.8

63.9

68.7

84.2

94.1

96.5

31.8

59.7

63.6

81.1

85.5

87.0

19.5

40.7

43.2

63.6

64.5

71.2

2.7

6.3

8.0

9.0

\3.6

20.3

2.7

6.4

9.7

7.8

7.5

7.7

79.5

177.0

193.2

245.6

265.2

282.7

3184 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79

State and local authorities outlay on education exclusive of Commonwealth specific purpose paymentsTransportation of students Primary and secondary education
University education Other higher education Vocational training Other
Total State and local authorities outlay on education inclusive
orCommonwealth specific purpose paymentsTransportation of students Primary and secondary education University education Other higher education Vocational training Other education programs Unallocated (including general administration) Total

6.2 154.3 10.8
16.4 11.7 16.4 215.9
6.2 177.1 42.6 35.9
14.4 15.4 3.7 295.4

7.7 200,4
0.4 13.8 14.6 29.1 266.0
7.7 264.3 60.1 54.5 20.9 30.0
5.5 443.0

9.8 257.4
0.6 14.3 20.5 37.4 340.0
9.8 326.1 64.2 57.5
28.5 38.7 8.4 533.2

12.0 307.0
0.9 14.9 24.2 44.2 403.2
12.0 391.2 82.0 78.5
33.2 43.0
9.0 648.8

14.1 353.2 *-0.4
13.1 31.4 48.4 459.8
14.1 447.3
85.1 77.6 45.0 47.0
8.9 725.0

16.1 365.5
0.9 9.6 34.3 51.8 478.1
16.1 462.0
87.9 80.8 54.6 50.4
9.1 760.8

- Commonwealth specific purpose payments relate to the Commonwealth's allocation to the States in anyone year and this may not fully correspond with the reported expenditure of these payments by the States. Hence, a negative net expenditure can occur.
Table4-STATE AND LOCAL AUTHORITIES: OUTLAY ON EDUCATION-SOUTH AUSTRALIA
($m)

1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79

Commonwealth specific purpose payments For education
purposesPrimary and secondary education
University education
Other higher education
Vocational training
Other Total
State and local authorities outlay on education exclusive
of Commonwealth specific purpose paymentsTransportation of students Primary and secondary education
University education
Other higher education Vocational training
Other Total
State and local authorities outlay on education inclusive or Commonwealth specific purpose payments-
Transportation of students Primary and secondary education
University education Other higher education Vocational training
Other education programs Unallocated (including general administration)
Total

16.6 26.9 19.7
3.0 2.3 68.5
3.0 135.6
8.4 10.3 7.0 9.3 173.6
3.0 152.2 35.3 30.0 10.0
7.8 3.8 242.1

39.1 45.4 37.1
5.4 6.7 133.7
4.4 174.5
0.4 13.6 11.8 15.7 220.4
4.4 213.6
45.8 50.7 17.2 13.3 9.1 354.0

39.3 46.5 35.7
5.0 7.8 134.3
6.1 221.7
0.1 13.4 17.8 23.1 282.2
6.1 261.0 46.6 49.1
22.8 19.3 11.6 416.4

49.8 57.4 42.5 6.8 6.9 163.4
7.0 253.3
0.1 11.8 19.7 33.1 325.0
7.0 303.1
57.5 54.3 26.5 24.0 16.0 488.4

55.7 63.5 50.2 9.6 7.1 186.0
7.9 286.9 -*0.4
9.0 21.8 45.3 370.5
7.9 342.6
63.1 59.2 31.4 33.2 19.2 556.6

56.1 64.4 47.7 12.0 5.6 185.7
8.9 302.9
0.6 8.2 23.6 58.3 402.5
8.9 359.0
65.0 55.9 35.6 34.7 29.2 588.2

- Commonwealth specific purpose payments relate to the Commonwealth's allocation to the States in anyone year and this may not fully correspond with the reported expenditure of these payments by the States. Hence, a negative net expenditure can occur.
Table5-STATE AND LOCAL AUTHORITIES: OUTLAY ON EDUCATION-WESTERN AUSTRALIA
($m)

1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79

Commonwealth specific purpose payments For education

purposes-

Primary and secondary education

.'

13.5

33.3

34.0

40.5

52.0

59.9

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3185

University education Other higher education Vocational training Other
Total State and local authorities outlay on education exclusive
of Commonwealth specific purpose p'aymentsTransportation of students Primary and secondary education
University education Other higher education Vocational training
Other Total
State and local authorities outlay on education inclusive of Commonwealth specific purpose paymentsTransportation of students Primary and secondary education
University education Other higher education Vocational training
Other education programs Unallocated (including general administration)
Total

1973-74
19.2 24.5
2.3 1.8 61.2
5.2 98.3
4.7 10.1 12.8 6.1 137.2
5.2 111.8 23.9 34.6
15.1 3.2 4.7 198.4

1974-75
35.7 39.6 2.8 6.6 118.0
6.6 132.8
1.2 13.1 16.6 9.2 179.5
6.6 166.1
36.9 52.7 19.4 8.3
7.5 297.5

1975-76
38.0 43.9
6.2 7.7 129.7
8.1 172.9
1.1 16.0 21.2 14.3 233.5
8.1 206.9
39.1 59.9 27.4 13.5
8.5 363.2

1976-77
50.6 51.3 7.3 6.9 156.7
9.7 200.2
1.4 17.2 25.3 11.9 265.5
9.7 240.7
52.0 68.5 32.6 11.9
6.9 422.2

1977-78
54.2 53.3 7.5 7.4 174.4
11.0 229.3
1.7 17.2 30.6 14.1 303.9
11.0 281.3
55.9 70.5 38.1 9.5 12.0 478.3

1978-79
53.5 55.4 8.9 7.1 184.8
11.9 246.5
2.0 20.6 39.1 13.4 333.6
11.9 306.4
55.5 76.0 48.0 6.1 14.4 518.4

TABLE 6-STATE AND LOCAL AUTHORITIES: OUTLAY ON EDUCATION-TASMANIA ($m)
1973-74 1974-75 1975-76 1976-77 1977-78 1978-79

Commonwealth specific purpose payments for education purposes-
Primary and secondary education University education Other higher education Vocational training Other
Total State and local authorities outlay on education exclusive of Commonwealth specific purpose payments-
Transportation of students Primary and secondary education University education Other higher education Vocational training Other
Total State and local authorities outlay on education inclusive of Commonwealth specific purpose payments-
Transportation of students Primary and secondary education University education Other higher education Vocational training Other education programs Unallocated (including general administration)
Total

4.7

12.2

14.0

15.3

18.3

17.7

7.1

13.6

16.2

17.0

18.2

19.1

4.3

9.9

12.3

9.1

10.9

12.7

0.8

0.9

2.0

2.6

3.1

2.1

0.4

2.2

3.4

1.9

1.8

1.4

17.2

38.7

48.0

45.9

52.3

53.0

2.8

3.3

3.9

4.4

4.9

5.3

43.4

58.7

75.2

83.2

90.9

95.0

9.5

14.0

16.4

17.3

18.7

19.8

4.7

4.8

5.0

6.4

7.4

7.4

3.2

4.1

5:5

9.5

9.7

12.9

6.8

9.5

9.5

15.9

18.0

21.3

63.4

81.0

99.2

119.7

131.4

142.6

2.8

3.3

3.9

4.4

4.9

5.3

48.1

70.9

89.2

98.5

109.2

112.7

2.4

0.4

0.2

0.3

0.5

0.7

9.0

14.7

17.3

15.5

18.3

20.1

4.0

5.0

7.5

12.1

12.8

15.0

1.9

4.7

3.1

2.9

3.3

3.5

5.3

7.0

9.8

14.9

16.5

19.2

80.6

119.7

147.2

165.6

183.7

195.6

-w
00 0\

::0 tTl
'"C
::0 etTnl

TABLE 7: GOVERNMENT OUTLAY ON EDUCATION IN AUSTRALIA 1973-74 TO 1978-79

.tZT..l,

($m)

>...,

1973-74

1974-75

1975-76

1976-77

1977-78

1978-79

<etTnl

Com-

Com-

Com-

Com-

Com-

Com-

University education Other higher education

mon-

mon-

mon-

mon-

mon-

mon-

. wealth State Total wealth State Total wealth State Total wealth State Total wealth State Total wealth State Total

(a)

(a)

(a)

(a)

(a)

(a)

00
zo-o<

329.4 73.2 402.6 552.4 5.0 557.4 597.9 2.5 600.4 719.2 5.4 724.6 781.0 3.1 784.1 810:0 14.4 824.4 193.4 130.4 323.8 393.4 124.7 . 518.1 436.0 133.6 569.6 519.5 125.6 645.1 526.3 115.3 641.6 562.2 100.7 662.9

3c.o..:.r

Vocational training

43.1 91.2 134.3 70.1 119.9 190.0 101.5 152.5 254.0 123.2 195.0 318.2 143.4 226.5 369.9 173.7 274.4 448.1

Primary and secondary education 239.5 1,228.1 1,467.6 543.5 1,595.9 2,139.4 615.7 2,035.7 2,651.4 708.7 2,275.0 2,983.7 787.7 2,644.3 3,432.0 829.6 2,832.4 3,662.0

Other

52.8 141.3 194.1 106.0 202.9 308.9 138.0 260.0 398;0 141.7 319.9 461.6 149.3 385.9 535.2 147.0 442.5 589.5

\D 00

Total

858.2 1,663.8 2,522.0 1,665.4 2,048.4 3,713.8 1,889.22,584.24,473.4 2,212.3 2,920.9 5,133.22,387.7 3,375.1 5,762.8 2,522.43,664.46,186.8

Total as percentage of gross

domestic product

4.9

6.0

6.2

6.2

6.4

6.1

(a) State Governments and Local Government Authorities.

Notes to Tables I to 7:

(i) 'Other higher education' is mainly expenditure on coIleges ofadvanced education, but expenditure by State Governments includes expenditure on teacher trainee allowances and

expenditure on agricultural colleges and institutions of a similar nature.

(ii) 'Vocational training' is mainly expenditure on colleges of technical and Further education.

(iii) 'Other' includes Aboriginal education, migrant and adult education and pre-school programs; disaggregated State-level expenditure on these items are not available.

(iv) See source (below) For inFormation on private sector expenditure on education.

Source: Derived from Expenditure on Education, Australia, 1978-79 ABS Cat. No. 5510.0.

InFormation for earlier years can also be obtained from this source.

A

i.:l
~
~
o

t:;o:::

~

~.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3187

(5) The following data compares public expenditure on Education as a percentage of Gross National Product in OECD member countries. Any comparisons of countries using this data should take into consideration differences between countries in such factors as national accounting practices, the structure of education and demographic patterns. The figures for Australia in this table are not directly comparable with the information on Government outlay on education in Australia as a percentage of Gross Domestic Product in Table 7.
PUBLIC EXPENDITURE ON EDUCAnON AS A PERCENTAGE OF GNP

1973 1974 1975 1976 1977

Australia

5.0 6.4 6.5 6.3 n.a.

Austria

5.1 5.2 5.7 5.7 5.5

Belgium

n.a. n.a. 6.2 6.2 6.5

Canada

7.8 7.4 7.9 7.8 8.0

Denmark

7.4 7.8 8.2 n.a. n.a.

Finland

6.3 6.1 6.7 7.1 n.a.

France

5.3 n.a. 5.6 5.8 n.a.

Germany (Federal

Republic of)

4.1 4.5 5.2 n.a. n.a.

Greece

1.5 1.8 n.a. n.a. n.a.

Iceland

4.5 4.4 4.2 n.a. n.a.

Ireland

5.3 5.4 6.5 6.2 n.a.

Italy

5.4 5.2 5.0 5.1 n.a.

Japan

4.4 5.1 5.5 5.3 n.a.

Luxembourg

5.2 n.a. 5.0 5.2 5.2

Netherlands

7.9 8.2 8.7 8.5 n.a.

New Zealand

5.1 5.6 5.8 5.5 n.a.

Norway

7.3 7.0 7.1 7.7 7.6

Portugal

2.0 2.4 3.7 3.9 n.a.

Spain

1.8 1.7 n.a. 2.2 n.a.

Sweden

7.7 7.4 7.4 7.7 8.7

Switzerland

4.7 4.8 5.1 5.2 5.2

Turkey

n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a.

United Kingdom

5.7 6.2 6.4 6.2 n.a.

United States

6.6 6.3 6.2 6.0 6.4

Yugoslavia

4.5 4.9 5.1 5.4 n.a.

Source: UNESCO Statistical Year Book 1978-79, UNESCO, 1980, France Information for earlier years can also
be obtained from this source.

Australian National Railways

(Question No. 3342)

Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 15 October 1981:

(I) What sum has the Australian National Railways Commission borrowed from (a) the domestic capital market and
(b) overseas capital markets for each year from 1976-77 to 1980-81 and what sum does it propose to borrow for 1981-82.

(2) What repayments of (a) principal and (b) interest are repayable to each of the 2 sources for each' year of 1976-77 until full repayment is completed, including proposed borow-
ings in 1981-82.

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) (a) ANRC Borrowings from Domestic Capital Market: 1976-77 to 1981-82:

$m

1976-77-1979-80

1980-81

20

1981-82 . . .

26

The 1981-82 figure includes Public Loan No.4 of $I4m floated on 5 November, and private loan of $2m to make up shortfall in 1180-81 approved Loan Council borrowing program.
(b) No funds have been borrowed from overseas capital markets.
(2) Repayment of principal and payment of interest in respect Qf domestic capital market borrowings: 1976-77 to full repayment.

Financial year

Principal Interest

$'000

$'000

1976-77-1979-80 1980-81 1981-82 1982-83 1984-84 1984-85 1985-86 1986-87 1987-88 1988-89 1989-90 1990-91 1991-92 1992-93 1993-94 1994-95 1995-96 1996-97

nil nil 49 108 124 9,581 13,740 2,889 4,381 1,401 278 1,738 5,747
3,593 2,371

nil 705 3,526 6,489 6,542 6,163 4,891 3,015 2,771 2,102 1,977 1,937 1,266 816 816 816 602 187

It should be noted that figures shown for repayment of principal (1985-86-1996-97) and payment of interest (1982-82-1966-97) are estimates only, depending on the response to PublicLoan No.4.
Electorate Offices
(Question No. 3358)
Mr Wallis asked the minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 20 October 1981:
(1) Has the Government adopted the strong recommendation of the Remuneration Tribunal that, in electoral divisions of over 400,000 square kilometres, a second electorate office should be provided for the servicing of those large electorates.
(2) If so, when can it be anticipated that an announcement will be made regarding the details of facilities, staffing, et cetera, to be provided in those large electoral divisions.
Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) I have written to the members concerned to inform them of the approved arrangements.

CHOGM-Security
(Question No. 3385)
Mr Robert Brown asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 21 October 1981:

3188 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

(I) Did the Government ask Commonwealth Heads of Government to send security advisers to Melbourne prior to CHOGM so that they could assess the adequacy of security measures.
(2) If so, which countries participated and over what dates did the officers concerned visit Australia.
(3) What was the overall cost of this operation.
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Commonwealth Member Governments were informed that if they wished to send advance security survey teams to inspect the planned security arrangements for CHOGM, as applicable to them, such visits could be made during September 1981.
(2) The Governments which availed themselves of this opportunity were Britain, Canada, Grenada, Guyana, India, Kenya, Malawi, New Zealand, Nigeria, Singapore, Sri Lanka, Tanzania and Zambia.
(3) Costs of these surveys were borne by the participating member governments.
Telecom: Country Residents
(Question No. 3388)
Mr Campbell asked the Minister for Communications, upon notice, on 21 October 1981:
(1) Has Telecom Australia recently introduced a new telephone instrument called Gondola to Western Australia.
(2) Does this telephone instrument provide a facility whereby the telephone can remember numbers and re-dial them.
(3) Is it a fact that Gondola will not be available in the Perth metropolitan area until November 1981.
(4) Is there a further 6-months delay for non-metropolitan subscribers who wish to obtain this particular telephone; if so why.
(5) If a delay for non-metropolitan subscribers exists, does it constitute discrimination against country residents.
Mr Sinclair-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The Gondola has a facility known at last number redial which permits the last number dialled to be recalled at the push of a button. It does not have the facility to store and recall other numbers.
(3) The Gondola telephone was introduced in Perth and Sydney on a trial basis on I September 1981.
(4) and (5) Subject to satisfactory market trials and adequate stock levels, it is intended to launch the Gondola on an Australia-wide basis in March 1982.
Imperial Honours to Members of Parliament
(Question No. 3463)
Mr Scholes asked the Prime Minister, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
How many persons granted Imperial Honours upon his recommendations as set out in his answer to question No.' 3186 in each of the orders of Imperial awards, KCMG., K.B.E., Knight Bachelor, C.B., C.M.G., CBE., OBE., I.S.0., M.B.E., and B.E.M., were, at the time of recommendation;
(a) a member of parliament.
(b) a former member of parliament.

(c) an official of a political party (including a member of a State or National Councilor Executive member of a political party) or
(d) formerly held any of the positions set out in part (c).
Mr Malcolm Fraser-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
Recommendations and grants of honours and awards are made on the basis of contributions by members of the Australian community. Often an individual will have given invaluable service in a number o( capacities. Citations concerned with individual grants are given wide publicity. It would be inappropriate and I would not be willing to agree to the unnecessary work required to prepare what are additional artificial statistical tables sought by the honourable member.
Overseas Travel by the Minister for Education or Ministeral Staff
(Question No. 3480)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(1) On what occasions has the Minister or members of the Minister's staff travelled abroad since I January 1981 to the date of preparation of the answer to this question?
(2) What places and organisations were visited during the travel abroad and on what dates did the Minister depart from Australia and arrive and depart at each of the places visited during travel abroad, and on what date did the Minister and associated staff return to Australia?
(3) What were the names and classifications of persons associated with the Minister's travel abroad referred to in parts (I) and (2)?
(4) What sum was spent for each individual in respect of each visit abroad for (a) travel; (b) accommodation; (c) other associated and incidental expenditure and (d) total expenditure?
Mr FifeThe answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(1) On no occasions.
(2) Not applicable~there was no travel.
(3) Not applicable.
(4) Nil.
Missing Aircraft: Searches
(Question No. 3511)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, up on notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) How many searches for missing aircraft have beem conducted by his Department in each of the years 1976-77 to 1980-81 and during the period I July 1981 to the date of preparation of the answer to this question.
(2) What were the dates and circumstances associated with the disappearance of the aircraft in each case and in which cases were the searches unsuccessful.
(3) What was the duration of the search for each missing aircraft before the (a) aircraft was located and (b) search was abandoned.
(4) In each of the successful searches what casualties were involved and is he able to say in what cases the delay before the aircraft was located had a bearing upon the condition of the survivors or those who may have survived if the aircraft had been located earlier.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3189

(5) What changes have occurred in the method ofconducting searches for missing aircraft since I July 1976 and in the equipment utilised in search procedures.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) The information requested from 1976-77 to 1980-81 is not readily available and I am not prepared to authorise the use of scarce resources to answer all of this question. From I July 1981 there have been seven searches for missing aircraft, three of which were major searches.
(2) (a) 17.7.81-search for VH-DSA Cessna 177, Tangalooma Qld. Aircraft operating in training area. Reported by ground observer to have disappeared behind hill. No contact with aircraft. Air search conducted. Aircraft located Tangalooma Airstrip.
(b) 2.8.81-search for YH-ICC Piper PA32, Mornington Island Qld. Aircraft enroute Urapunga to Normanton. Failed to arrive at destination and nil contact. Search instigated. Aircraft located at Mornington Island.
(c) 9.8.8 I-major search for YH-MDX Cessna 210, Barrington Tops NSW. Aircraft enroute Coolangatta to Bankstown. At a position 50 N-M north of Singleton following a pilot report of instrument failure/icing and turbulence, all contact was lost. Search unsuccessful.
(d) 29.8.81-major search for YH-PON Piper PA 32, Finke N.T. Aircraft enroute from Leigh Creek to Alice Springs. Advised was unsure of position. Communications lost. Wreckage found.
(e) 22.9.81-search for YH-MYG Beech 24R. Aircraft inbound to Roma Qld. Failed to arrive. YSB signal heard. Found at first light.
(f) 22.10.81-major search for YH-CGL Piper PA 32R. Aircraft enroute from Canberra to Moorabbin. Last reported in Eildon Weir area. Search unsuccessful.
(g) II.I 1.8 I-search for YH-BYY Cessna 185. Aircraft force landed west of Pine Dam Qld due to engine problems. Aircraft diverted to area to search. Wreckage found.
(3) The duration of the searches was:
(a) 60 minutes-located (b) 58 minutes-located (c) 9 days-not located (d) I day II hours-located (e) 9 hours 38 minutes-located (f) 9 days-not located (g) 64 minutes-located
(4) Successful searches were:
(a) I person on board-nil injuries (b) 4 persons on board-nil injuries (d) 4 persons on board-4 fatal (e) 4 persons on board-4 fatal (g) 3 persons on board-3 injured
In cases (d) and (e) fatalities were instantaneous.
In case (g) search time had no bearing on survivors condition.
(5) There has been no fundamental changes in search methods since I July 1976.
Since I July 1976 there has been an increase in the use of direction finding equipment and airborne search meters. Additionally, increasing use is being made of photos reconnaissance and satellite derived information.

Bureau of Transport Economics

(Question No. 3513)

Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:

(I) In relation to the operations of the Bureau of Transport Econo!11ics, what is the establishment of the Bureau and how many positions remained unfilled at the date of preparation of
the answer to this question.

(2) What specific vacant positions within the Bureau are proposed not to be filled during 1981-82.

(3) What are the principal reviews or studies to be under-,

taken by the Bureau in 1981-82 and what duties, studies and

reviews previously performed by the Bureau are not proposed

for continuance arising from the report of the Review of Com-

monwealth Functions.

.

Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

(I) The Bureau of Transport Economics (BTE) has an establishment of 135 positions. At present, 35 positions are unfilled.

(2) A review of the Bureau's establishment requirements
for 1981-82 is in course. At this stage seven vacant positions
have been identified for withdrawal from establishment. They are one of Clerk Class II, three of Principal research Officer and three of Research Officer Grade I. Other positions are
under review or are to be reviewed as they become vacant, with the object of setting an appropriate relationship between
the establishment and the staff ceiling.

(3) Some of the principal reviews or studies to be undertaken by the Bureau in 1981-82 are:

Air Transport Demand Forecasting System
Assessment of the Australian Roads SystemCo-ordination
Assessment of the Australian Roads System-Economic
Evaluation Assessment of the Australian Roads System-Financing
Assessment of the Australian Roads System-Physical and Financial Parameters
Assessment of the Australian Roads System-Social
Aspects Assessment of the Australian Roads System-System
Performance
Factors Determining the Freight Rates Charged Between Tasmania and the Mainland and the Potential for Cost
Reductions Funding Arrangements. for Transport Research and
Development
History of Commonwealth Assistance to the States for
Roads National Aerodrome Plan-Evaluation of Options
Road Financing in Selected Countries
Statistical Analysis of Marine Oil Spill Risk in Australia Tasmanian Freight Equalisation Scheme-Recalculation
of 1981 Subsidy Rates Using Alternative Methods
Transport Outlook Conference 1981 (Organisation)

Additional projects are under active consideration as a re-
sult of recent reviews of research program development. These projects are in the general areas of intergovernmental
fiflancial relations, forecasting, statistics and transport parameter evaluation.

Several decisions arising from the report of the Review of
Commonwealth Functions had implications for the Bureau's research program. Projects discontinued as a result of these decisions, (including associated decisions on the Bureau's staff
ceiling) were:

Analysis of Road Accidents in Australia

3190 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Assessment of the Australian transport Statistics Situation
Australian International Air Transport-Assessment of Welfare Aspects
Demand for Passenger Motor Vehicles Energy Systems Modelling Impact of Aircraft Diversions at Kingsford-Smith (Sydney) Airport Corporate Communications Study Motor Vehicle Emissions Studies Rail Track Design Study Rail Track Maintenance Cost Study Survey of Inter-Island Travel-Ovalau-Viti Levu (Fiji) Third-Party Insurance Arrangements in AustraliaEconomic Implications Time Series System Development Miscellaneous Minor Studies
In addition, several other projects were reduced in scope or depth of coverage and were accelerated to completion.
Department of Transport: Computer System
(Question No. 35]8)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) In relation to Division 655, Sub-Division2, Item 15, Computer Services, of the estimates of expenditure for his Department for 1981-82 explanatory notes, what specific information is he able to provide on progress made on the accommodation of the pilot supply ADP system.
(2) Can he provide additional information to that shown'in the explanatory notes of his Department on page 47 on that nature of the ADP pilot supply system.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows.
(I) & (2) The system is concerned with the application of ADP techniques to the ledger keeping activity in Regional warehouses and to the Department's overall inventory control activity. The Department proposes to minimise the in-house design and development work associated with the ADP supply system by utilising one of the commercially available 'packaged' systems. A detailed functional description of the pilot system has been prepared.
Age Pensions: Income Test
(Question No. 357])
Mr Young asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) What proportion of the 1,377,000 recipients of age pensions were not subject to an income test as at 30 June 1981.
(2) Of the pensions not subject to an income test, what proportion were paid at the (a) standard rate of $51.45 and (b) married rate of $42.90.
(3) What proportion of the pensions subject to an income test were paid according to the (a) standard rate, (b) married rate and (c) wife's rate.
(4) Of the payments to pensioners subject to an income test what proportions received pensions ranging between (a) $0.01 and $6.66, (b) $6.67 and $13.33, (c) $13.34 and $19.99, (d) $20.00 and $26.66, (e) $26.67 and $33.32, (I) $33.33 and $39.99, (g) $40.00 and $46.65, (h) $46.66 and $53.32, (i) $53.33 and $59.98, and (j) $59.99 and $66.65.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:

(I) Of the 1,377,000 age (and wife) pensioners at 30 June 1981, 61.5 per cent were age pensioners aged 70 years or more and were therefore in receipt of the income test-free component of the basic pension.
(2) Of the age pensioners aged 70 years or more 16.2 per cent were paid the standard rate of $51.45 and 8.2 per cent were paid the married rate of$42.90 at 30 June 1981.
(3) Of age and wife's pensions paid to persons aged less than 70 years at 30 June 1981, the proportions paid at the following rates were:
(a) standard rate-43.8 per cent (b) married rate-50.7 per cent (c) wives' pensions-5.5 per cent.
(4) Of age and wife's pensions paid to persons aged less than 70 years at 30 June 1981, the proportions receiving basic weekly pensions in the following ranges were estimated to be:
(a) $0.01 to $6.66-0.3 per cent (b) $6.67 to $13.33-0.8 per cent (c) $13.34to$19.99-1.5percent (d) $20.00 to $26.66-2.0 per cent (e) $26.67 to $33.32-2.5 per cent (I) $33.33 to $39.99-3.1 per cent (g) $40.00 to $46.65-2.7 per cent (h) $46.66 to $53.32-7.6 per cent (i) $53.33 to $59.98-44.5 per cent
U) $59.99 to $66.65-35.0 per cent
Deportations
(Question No. 3583)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) How many persons were deported in each year since 1974.
(2) What was the country of birth of the persons deported in each year and what was the crime of each deportee.
(3) Which countries accepted the persons deported from Australia each year.
(4) Is there a 129 per cent increase in expenditure over that of 1980-81 on deportation proposed for 1981-82.
(5) Is the sum allocated for deportations in 1981-82 $700,000 more than the sum allocated for 1979-80 which was a year in which there were no amnesties or regularisation of status programs.
(6) On what basis is it estimated there will be 800 deportations in 1981-82.
(7) What are the fees charged to deportees in detention centres and prisons and what sums were raised from deportees since the introduction ofthose fees.
(8) Is he able to state what countries punish a person twice for the same crime.
Mr Macphee-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) 1974-497(a); 1975-642; 1976-481(b); 1977-861; 1978-964; 1979-1015; 1980-383(c).
The figures above reRect:
(a) Dispensation extended to Prohibited Immigrants.
(b) Amnesty for Prohibited Immigrants.
(c) Regularisation of Status Program.
(2) Statistics are not kept on the country of birth of deportees nor of type of crime committed by them, if any, for

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3191

which they were deported. However, I have provided separately to the honourable member statistics relating to the citizenship of each deportee and the relevant provisions of the Migration Act 1958 under which the persons were deported.
(3) Statistics are not kept on which countries accept deportees from Australia. However persons are deported in most cases to the country of their citizenship.
(4) Yes. Expenditure on deportations in 1980-81 was $738,179 in the appropriation of $750,000. The low level of expenditure was due to the Government's Regularisation of Status Program for prohibited immigrants from 19 June 1980 to 31 December 1980.
(5) No. The appropriation for deportations in 1979-80 was $1,270,000 (expenditure $1,077,167), compared to an appropriation of $1,691,000 for 1981-82 an increase of $421,000 over the 1979-80 appropriation.
(6) The estimate of 800 deportations in 1980-81 is based on the resumption of normal activities following the cessation of the Regularisation of Status Program on 31 December 1980. It represents a modest increase of 48 over the deportation level (752) in 1979-80 a year in which there were no amnesties or regularisation of status programs.
(7)-

Custody in

Custody detention

in prison

centres

New South Wales Victoria Queensland South Australia Western Australia Tasmania Northern Territory

$ per day 45 36 30
36 38 30 63

$ per day 34 34
* *
36
* *

- No detention centre.
Since the introduction of costs on I November 1979 to 31 October 1981 a total of $154,348.20 has been recovered from deportees.
(8) No.

Major Roads Assessment Study
(Question No. 3585)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) What were the specific reasons for the deferment of the proposed Major Roads Assessment Study for which proposed expenditure was underspent by the Bureau of Transport Economics in 1980-81.
(2) What progress has been made in the conduct of the Roads Assessment Study.
(3) What organisations, firms and individuals are to be consulted during the study and will public hearings be conducted.
(4) When is the study expected to be completed and will he undertake to provide copies of the report of the study to the Parliament as soon as they become available.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Two elements of the Bureau of Transport Economics (BTE) Roads Study were deferred, and this led to underspending relative to proposed expenditure by the Bureau in 1980-81. The elements deferred were:

(a) A proposed program of meetings with selected local government authorities throughout Australia was deferred owing to the slow response by local government to an initial formal survey by the BTE. I am advised that some of these visits have since taken place. They are part of the Bureau's efforts to ensure that local government views are properly reflected in its roads studies.
(b) The Director of the Bureau determined that parts of the study would be based on current data on road condition and use being collected and verified by the various State Road Authorities. These data were not available in 1980-81, and hence relevant aspects of the study were deferred pending data availability.
(2) The Bureau of Transport Economics is presently engaged on a number of studies related to its general responsibility for providing advice to me on roads issues. The Director of the Bureau advises me that progress has been made in developing a wider analytical base than that which had been used in the past for studies of this nature. Study procedures using this analytical base have been set up, but further technical investigations are required and additional data will be needed before the full analysis can be carried out and reported.
(3) I am advised that the Bureau is at present consulting a wide range of organisations, including industry, State road authorities, local government, chambers of commerce, residents, associations and community groups. However, the Bureau has no plans to conduct formal public hearings.
(4) The Bureau regards its program of roads studies as a continuing series of investigations. The present series of studies will be reported progressively, with the first reports expected to be available in mid-1982. The present outline program of studies extends to about 1984. As relevant reports are produced, I will give consideration to their release in the usual-way.
Walter Ultra-large Fire Tenders
(Question No. 3586)
Mr Morris asked the Minister for Transport, upon Notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) What were the dates of receipt by his Department of each of the 9,100 litre Walter Ultra-Large Fire Tenders.
(2) Which of those tenders has been placed on fire line duty.
(3) Which of the 9,100.litre Walter Ultra-Large Fire Tenders has not been brought into use yet, what are the reasons for the delay in bringing each into use and when isit expected that each of them will be available for fire line duty.
(4) What costs in relation to (a) overall running costs and (b) labour have been incurred in respect of each unit following its delivery to his Department.
Mr Hunt-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Only two have been received-both on 9 June 1981.
(2) None.
(3) Both; due to a ban by the Federal Firefighters Union over manning principles.
(4) The answers to this part of the question are not readily available and I am not prepared to authorise the use of scarce resources to obtain the information sought.

3192 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Education: Capital Grants to Government Schools
(Question No. 3601)
Dr Theophanous asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) What were the Government's reasons for rejecting the recommendation of the Commonwealth Schools Commission made in June 1981 that the level of Commonwealth capital grants for government schools be determined and maintained on a triennial basis.
(2) What were the Government's reasons for rejecting the Commission's proposal relating to changes in the basis of funding for recurrent grants to government schools.
(3) Will the Government reconsider its decision on these mailers; if not, will he qualify the extent of his control over planning decisions which powers would appear to be invested in the Commonwealth Schools Commission.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) In its report for the 1982-84 triennium the Commonwealth Schools Commission recommend that the levels of both Commonwealth and State capital programs be determined and maintained on a triennial basis. The Government has decided that it would be appropriate to retain the Hexibility of determining the level of capital grants on an annual basis in the overall budgetary framework. Unlike the grants for universities and colleges of advanced education the government schools capital program is a shared program. In 1979-80 (the latest available figures for State Governments expenditure) the Commonwealth contributed about 30 per cent of the total expenditure in the States on capital programs for government schools. The States likewise determine their capital spending on an annual basis.
(2) Again in the interests of budgetary Hexibility it was decided not to adopt a funding mechanism which tied Commonwealth recurrent grants for government schools to a per capita formula. There is no requirement on the States to either accept the resource standards proposed by the Commission or to determine resource provision on the basis of a fixed standard. Against this background and given that the Commonwealth contributes only about 9 per cent of funds for recurrent costs of government schools the Commonwealth determines its allocations on an annual basis.
(3) The decisions made by the Government on Commonwealth programs for schools in 1982 will stand. The Commonwealth Schools Commission is the Government's chief advisory body on the needs of schools and on policy development relating to those needs. In the final analysis, however, it is the Government which makes decisions on funding policy for Commonwealth programs.
Teacher Shortage
(Question No. 3602)
Dr Theophanous asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 29 October 1981:
(I) Has his attention been drawn to the survey by the Council of Academic Staff Associations which suggests that the Commonwealth Tertiary Education Commission has over-estimated the supply of new graduates available for teaching by approximately 12 per cent for 1982 and that combined with under-estimates of the demand for teachers due to errors in estimated total loss rates, birth rates and migration levels, this over-estimate of total supply by the Commission will serve to create a substantital teacher shortage in several years time.

(2) What steps does he intend to take to rectify this serious prospect of teacher shortages.
Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) and (2) My attention has been drawn to Bulletin No. 15/81 published by the Council of Academic Staff Associations of Victorian Colleges of Advanced Education. The conclusions expressed, do, however, appear to be based on doubtful assumptions, for example that teacher resignation rates would increase more than have been allowed for. Even if these assumptions proved correct-and on balance this seemed unlikely-the approach adopted by both the Commonwealth and the States left room for short term adjustments to the numbers of teachers being trained. This could be done by adjusting intakes to one year diploma of education courses. It should also be noted that new graduates were not the only source of teacher recruitment-there were numbers of teachers available with previous experience who wished to reenter the teaching profession.
Recent decisions taken by the Commonwealth Government to consolidate colleges of advanced education should help to create more Hexible institutions that could respond more readily to changes in demand for various types of courses. Any necessary adjustments to intakes to particular courses can be made within the overall level of resources available in each State over the 1982-84 triennium.
Child Care Services for Migrants Learning English
(Question No. 3636)
Mr Young asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 17 November 1981 :
In line with Commonwealth Government policies to make services accessible to potential users will the Government accept its responsibilities for funding child care services in conjunction with English classes so that all migrant parents have access to English language learning.
Mr Macphee-The following answer is provided to the honourable member's question:
The Adult Migrant Education Program provides a choice of English language learning opportunities that allows parents to select arrangements to minimise any problems associated with the care of young children.
The Commonwealth funds quite extensive child care arrangements in association with the Adult Migrant Education Program. In 1980-81 $424,000 was expended from AMEP funds on child care services. In addition, funds totalling some $26,600 in 1980-81 were provided through the Children's Services Program, admininstered by the Department of Social Security, for child care services associated with English classes.
The most extensive child care arrangements are provided at migrant residential centres. Some community migrant education centres have sufficient and suitable accommodation for the provision of child care. A number of community day classes in NSW and Victoria, which are largely attended by women, are supported by volunteer arrangements.
People attending courses can, of course, also make use of general community child care services.
The provision of child care arrangements under the AMEP is currently being examined by my Department.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3193

Funding for Handicapped Persons' Welfare
(Question No. 3646)
Mr Milton asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon -notice, on 17 November, 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that the 198 I-82 Budget allocation for Handicapped Persons' Welfare represents a massive reduction in the total funds for these services.
(2) Is it also a fact that inflation will absorb the Budget increase of $1 00,000 for the salaries component by 7 times.
(3) Will this reduction in real terms mean a cut-back in anticipated new staff appointments for Handicapped Persons' Centres.
(4) Will present staff .levels at Handicapped Persons' Centres need to be cut back as a result of this Budget allocation.
(5) Will the Minister undertake to review this allocation and provide a more positive financial undertaking, especially in this International Year of the Disabled Persons.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
( I ) No. The total 1981-82 Budget appropriation of $57.333m for the funding of eligible organisations for the provision of prescribed services under the Handicapped Persons Assistance Act represents an increase of $4.433m over last year's expenditure for these purposes of $52.9m.
(2) No. The overall provision in (I) includes an allocation of $38.323m for salaries of approved officers for both new and existing services, compared with an actual expenditure in 1980-81 of $34.03m-an increase of $4.3m or 12.6 per cent.
(3) See (2). Funds provided for salaries in respect of existing services will permit staffing at last year's levels, plus some allowance for subsidising new approved officers. In addition, $1.32m has been allocated for salaries for approved officers in new services-an increase of $0.9m over last year. Only approved officers, employed in connection with the provision of approved prescribed services, may be subsidised. Organisations should not anticipate subsidy without such approvals having been given.
(4) No, in case of approved staff.
(5) See (I) to (4).
Vacation Care Programs: Funding
(Question No. 3658)
Dr Klugman asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 17 November 1981:
(I) Has the Minister received representations regarding the reduction of funding for vacation care centres.
(2) Has the Minister's attention been drawn to the particular difficulties caused in the City of Fairfield, New South Wales, leading to a 100 per cent increase in fees and the inability to pay staff all their entitlements.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) and (2) I have received representations expressing concern that the funds provided by the Commonwealth in 1981-82 towards vacation care programs remained at the previous year's level. I have replied to such representations, including those in respect of services in the Fairfield (New

South Wales) area, advising that the Commonwealth provides funds to all State Governments in the form of an annual block grant as a contribution towards the costs of providing vacation care services. Each State Government is responsible for determining priorities and for the allocation of the Commonwealth and State funds available for this purpose to individual projects, based on the State's assessment of competing areas of need.
Social Welfare Policy Secretaria t's Report on Poverty Measurement
(Question No. 3716)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 18 November 1981:
(I) Did the report from the inquiry by the Social Welfare Policy Secretariat dealing with poverty find that on 1978-79 statistics, more than one million people live below the Henderson poverty line, and that in addition, 130,000 single persons under 21 years and independent of their families were estimated to be below the poverty line.
(2) Is it also a fact that an estimate of the Secretariat, which was not included in the report, also put between 100,000 and 200,000 self-employed persons below the Henderson line; if so, why was this estimate not included in the report.
(3) Is it a fact that the report found that the proportion of the Australian population living below the Henderson poverty line had not fallen, but was substantially higher.
(4) Did the report cast doubts about the viability of the Henderson poverty line.
(5) Have the Minister and the Minister's predecessor stated repeatedly over the last two years that the Government had commissioned the report in order to determine a new basis for assessment of poverty.
(6) Has the report established an assessment formula; if not, why not.
(7) In the absence of a measurement of this kind will Australia be deemed as having no officially poor or impoverished citizens.
(8) Without establishing a means of assessment of the number of Australia's poor how will the Department of Social Security be able to effectively assess the social security needs of the poor and eradicate poverty in Australia.
Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has provided the following answer to the honourable member's question:
(I) The Social Welfare Policy Secretariat's Report on Pov-. erty Measurement included an estimate that, excluding the self-employed, some 9.3 per cent of adult income units comprising over a million people had incomes below the Henderson poverty line in 1978-79. The exclusions of juveniles (unmarried persons aged under 21 who were not responsible for a dependent child) and the self-employed were made to achieve consistency with the Poverty Inquiry figures and because for these groups annual income (as collected in the ABS Survey) may be a most inaccurate measure of their economic well-being. However, the SWPS report suggests that a further 130,000 juveniles may have had incomes in 1978-79 which were below the Henderson poverty line.
(2) No.
(3) The SWPS report concluded that 9.5 per cent of people (9.3 per cent of families) had incomes below the Henderson poverty line in 1978-79, compared with the Poverty Inquiry's estimate for 1972-73 of 8.2 per cent of people (10.2 per cent of

3194 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

families). The SWPS estimates may be more closely comparable with those in an International Labour Organisation publication by Professor Wilfred Beckerman of Oxford University. These estimates indicated that in 1973-74 about 10 per cent of people (about II per cent of families) were in poverty as measured by the Henderson line. Thus it cannot be concluded that the proportion of the Australian population living below the Henderson poverty line was 'substantially higher'in 1978-79 than it had been in the early 1970's.
(4) The SWPS report concluded that the Henderson poverty lines could not be considered as an objective or unambiguous measure of poverty in Australia. The Henderson lines were not based on a study of needs in Australia. The lines were based on an arbitrarily chosen 'poverty line' (a rounded total of the Melbourne basic wage in 1966 plus child endowment) for a standard family of a working husband, a nonworking wife and two children. The equivalence scales used to derive poverty lines for other than standard families were based on relativities between expenditures of different families in New York in 1954. They are at best of doubtful relevance to A~stralia in the 1980's. The SWPS report includes indicative equivalence scales which show important differences from the scales incorporated in the Henderson poverty line.
(5) Senator Guilfoyle stated in the Senate on 28 February 1980 that she had recently asked the Social Welfare Policy Secretariat, in consultation with her own Department, to examine the whole issue of alernative approaches to measure a poverty line that would be relevant to Australia in the 1980's.
(6) The report has not established a new poverty line although, as suggested above, a number of equivalence scales which may have indicative usefulness have been calculated. The Secretariat concluded that there was no objective method of establishing which level of income was adequate or appropriate: that was a matter of personal or political judgment.
(7) and (8) The Government will have a number of sources of information for deciding where such additional funds as become available for social security purposes may best be spent. The SWPS report contains a good deal of information about the groups in the community with the lowest relative incomes. The Government will naturally pay attention to the views expressed by consultative committees, welfare organisations and individuals.

Poverty Guideline
(Question No. 3717)
Mrs Darling asked the Minister representing the Minister for Social Security, upon notice, on 18 November 1981:

(I) Did the Minister's predecessor state on 25 October
1979, that her main objective would be to see what, in then terms and conditions, ought to be the poverty line by which
families in need in Australia could be judged and that she would certainly welcome any.work that could be done to de-
vise a poverty line suited to Australian conditions in the late 1970's.

(2) As it is 2 years since that statement was made, does the Government now have a line by which families can be judged
in need; if not, when does the Minister expect a guide will be established.

Mr Hunt-The Minister for Social Security has

provided the following answer to the honourable

member's question:

.

(I) Yes.

(2) In its recently released Report on Poverty Measurement the Social Welfare Policy Secretariat concluded that there was no objective method of deciding whether a particular amount of income was adequate or appropriate. It did, however, include information on the characteristics of individuals and families with low relative incomes.
Retrenchment Compensation
(Question No. 3721)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Industrial Relations, upon notice, on 18 November 1981:
(I) Is it a fact that the Committee of Inquiry into Technological Change in Australia (the Myers Report) recommended a 2-part retrenchment compensation scheme that would include temporary income-maintenance to be funded by the Government.
(2) Following the tabling of the Report in Parliament, did he undertake to engage in consultations with employers and the trade union movement concerning improved redundancy arrangements; if so, what has been the outcome of these consultations.
Mr Viner-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
(I) Yes.
(2) The Prime Minister tabled the Committee's Report in the House on 19 August 1980. The Minister for Industry and Commerce provided details of the Government response to the Report in a Ministerial Statement to the House on 18 September 1980. In response to the Committee's recommendation (No. 14) on retrenchment compensation, the Minister stated inter alia that before final decisions were taken the Government would seek full consultation with employers and the union movement.
The relevant recommendations of the Committee were referred to the National Labour Consultative Council (NLCC) for consideration. In the meantime, metal industry unionssupported by the Australian Council of Trade Unionslodged job security claims with the Australian Conciliation and Arbitration Commission and further NLCC consideration have been deferred pending the outcome of those claims.
Academic Salary Increases: Effect on Finances of Tertiary Institutions
(Question No. 3722)
Mr Humphreys asked the Minister for Education, upon notice, on 18 November 1981:
(I) Further to his answer to Question No. 3125 (Hansard, 21 October 1981, page 2338) and in the light of the Academic Salaries Tribunal recommendation to grant a 6 per cent pay rise to 40,000 academics retrospective to 7 November 1980, was the Government's prospective assessment of 1982 tertiary grant out-turn moneys a correct estimate of academic salary increases and of the operative date of such increases.
(2) If so, will he explain (a) why the Conference Secretary of the Australian Vice Chancellors Committee has stated that the Government has made insufficient provision for the salary increase and (b) why the General Secretary of the Federation of College Academics has stated that a number of institutions will go to the wall and extensive staff retrenchments will result if the 1982 tertiary grant funds are not supplemented.
(3) Will he, in the light of these statements, reassess the need for tertiary grant supplementation.

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3195

Mr Fife-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
The Government is considering the issues-raised by the determinations and recommendations of the Tribunal's report for the funding of universities and colleges of advanced education and will announce its decisions as soon as possible.

Electoral Division Statistics

(Question No, 3743)

Mr Free asked the Minister for Administrative Services, upon notice, on 18 November 1981:

How many electors are currently enrolled in each Commonwealth electoral division in each State and Territory.

Mr Newman-The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:

The Australian Electoral Office has provided the following
Divisional enrolment statistics by State and Territory as at end of October 1981.

Banks
Barton Bennelong
Berowra
Blaxland
Bradfield Calare Chi Hey
Cook Cowper Cunningham
Dundas Eden-Monaro Farrer Grayndler Gwydir Hughes
Hume Hunter Kingsford-Smith
Lowe Lyne Macarthur Mackellar
Macquarie Mitchell Newcastle New England North Sydney
Parramatta Paterson Phillip
Prospect Reid Richmond Riverina Robertson St George Shortland SydneyWarringah
Wentworth Werriwa

New South Wales

73,639 68,913
72,642
71,403 72,944
73,122 73,633 79,987
74,880 81,802 79,938 73,006 77,061
73,806 67,422 73,634 78,563
70,807 82,964 71,051 71,057 81,969 83,448
71,722 90,465 87,108 70,658 70,877 69,050 73,657
72,387 68,838 79,050
69,649 83,107
71,765 88,583 70,507 82,266 69,692 68,737 66,475 88,930

State Total

3,241,214

Balaclava

Victoria

67,594

Ballarat Batman Bendigo Bruce Burke Casey Chisholm Corangamite Corio Deakin Diamond Valley Flinders Gellibrand Gippsland Henty Higgins Holt Hotham Indi Isaacs Kooyong Lalor La Trobe McMillan Mallee Maribyrnong Melbourne Melbourne Ports Murray Scullin Wannon Wills
State Total
Bowman Brisbane Capricornia Darling Downs Dawson Fadden Fisher Griffith Herbert Kennedy Leichhardt Lilley McPherson Maranoa Moreton Oxley Petrie Ryan Wide Bay
State Total
Adelaide Barker Bonython Boothby Grey Hawker Hindmarsh Kingston Port Adelaide Sturt

Queensland South Australia

69,987 72,473 71,437 76,788 77,531 75,147 72,501 71,369 74,496 82,180 78,646 79,356 72,485 71,566 69,504 68,967 82,901 78,818 70,202 73,978 71,057 83,545 76,965 71,747 67,968 75,930 66,124 67,437 70,819 78,635 68,127 72,875
2,429,155
76,196 66,308 68,154 70,155 72,617 89,860 88,219 63,007 71,611 61,838 69,769 65,015 88,701 65,735 65,229 76,761 73,662 72,073 71,918
1,376,828
74,274 75;946 82,425 78,759 73,312 74,217 77,760 81,216 75,992 78,391

3196 REPRESENTATIVES 18 November 1981

Answers to Questions

Wakefield

76,138

State Total

848,430

Canning
Curtin Forrest Fremantle Kalgoorlie Moore O'Connor Perth Stirling Swan Tangney

Western Australia

74,454
62,497 66,797 69,741
u8,217 76,854 64,721 67,155 67,144 65,960 71,331

State Total

754,871

Bass Braddon Denison Franklin Wilmot

Tasmania.

55,485 53,856 54,717 56,408 55,017

State Total

275,483

Total All States

8,925,981

Canberra Fraser

Australian Capital Territory

67,181 68,512

Territory Total

135,693

Northern Territory

55,526

Total Australia

9,117,200

'Includes Lord Howe Island.

Lost Investment
Mr Moore-On 10 September 1981 (Hansard, page 1156) Mr Hayden asked the Acting Prime Minister the following question without notice:
I ask the Acting Prime Minister whether he has seen reports on the case Daly v. Sydney Stock Exchange, in which a claim involving the failed stockbrokers Patrick Partners was discllssed. Is he aware that Mr Justice Powell said he reached his decision with 'considerable regret' because the plaintiffs lost considerable amounts of money by investing in Patrick Partners 'in circumstances which cast not the slightest credit upon the integrity and commercial morality of the former members of the firm'. Is he aware that MrJustice Powell suggested that Parliament might, therefore, look again at the Securities Industry Act to see 'whether some greater or other form of protection is now called for'? Will the Government pursue Mr Justice Powell's recommendation and not be deflected by any pressure which might become immediately apparent to discourage it from doing so?
As the responsible Minister, I have been asked to answer the honourable member's question to the Acting Prime Minister. The answer to the honourable member's question is as follows:
I am aware of the case of Daly v. Sydney Stock Exchange (no. 1740 of 1978) and the judgment of Mr Justice Powell on 9 September 1981.

This case concerned an application for compensation out of the fidelity fund of the Sydney Stock Exchange under s. 58 of the New South Wales Securities Industry Act 1970. This Act was subsequently replaced by the Securities Industry Act 1975 which, in turn, has been replaced by the Securities Industry (New South Wales) Code under the co-operative companies and securities scheme. While the provision of the securities industry code (s. III) that corresponds to s. 58 of the New South Wales Securities Industry Act 1970 has not been changed in any way that would appear to be material for the purpose of the judgment given by Mr Justice Powell, there have been other changes since 1970 that are relevant to this matter. For example, the securities industry code (s. 67) contains a new provision which requires a dealer in securities to deposit moneys lent by a client in a separate bank account within one business day of their receipt and to retain the moneys in the account until the client indicates how the moneys are to be used. Failure to use the moneys in a manner agreed to by the client is an offence.
Section 67 of the present securities industry code was one of a number of amendments to the ICAC securities industry legislation that was agreed to by the Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities following its consideration of the recommendations contained in the report dated 21 December 1976 by Mr G. G. Masterman under the New South Wales Securities Industry Act.
The Ministerial Council for Companies and Securities keeps all aspects of the co-operative scheee legislataon under continual review an the light of developments. It is expected that the first series of substantive amendments to this legislation will be included in the proposed Companies and Securities legislation (Miscellaneous Amendments) Bill 1983. Current planning within the Ministerial Council is that a draft of this BiIl will be exposed for public comment for about three months during the second half of 1982.
I would expect that among the matters that may be considered by the Ministerial Council when deciding what amendments should be included in the exposure draft of the 1983 Bill would be the comments made by Mr Justice Powell in Daly v. Sydney Stock Exchange and any relevant recommendations in the Masterman report referred to above.
Migrant Home Tutor Service
(Question No, 3649)
Mr Les McLeay asked the Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs, upon notice, on 17 November 1981:
(I) What sum has been spent on the Migrant Home Tutor Service in each year since 1978-79 and what sum is proposed for 1981-82.
(2) How many (a) tutors and (b) migrants are.involved in the Scheme (i) in total and (ii) by language group.
(3) How many persons referred to in parts (2) (a) and (2) (b) are enrolled in the Ele.ctoral Division of Grayndler.
Mr Macphee-The following answer is provided to the honourable member's question:
(I) Expenditure on the Home Tutor Service, which is a component of the Adult Migrant Education Program, for the years 1978-79 to 1980-81 is as follows:
Australia
1978-79 $223,804 1979-80 $287,914 1980-81 $327,499
The estimated expenditure for 1981-82 is $420,000, including provision for the scheme co-ordinators who are now employed by the State Adult Migrant Education Services in

Answers to Questions

18 November 1981 REPRESENTATIVES 3197

South Australia and Queensland rather than by the Department of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs as previously.
(2) (a) (i) 4943 tutors (b) (i) 6560 family units enrolled at present, involving at least one member of the family (if more than one member is involved he/she is not counted separately).

The total number of migrants who benefitted from the scheme in the full year 1980/81 is estimated at over 13,000.
(ii) This information is not collected.
(3) (a) Tutors-l06 (b) Family units-l06


